

1.1.0
1
Ἡροδότου Ἁλικαρνησσέος ἱστορίης ἀπόδεξις ἥδε , ὡς μήτε τὰ γενόμενα ἐξ ἀνθρώπων τῷ χρόνῳ ἐξίτηλα γένηται , μήτε ἔργα μεγάλα τε καὶ θωμαστά , τὰ μὲν Ἕλλησι τὰ δὲ βαρβάροισι ἀποδεχθέντα , ἀκλεᾶ γένηται , τά τε ἄλλα καὶ δι’ ἣν αἰτίην ἐπολέμησαν ἀλλήλοισι .
This is the display of the inquiry of Herodotus of  Bodrum Halicarnassus   , so that things done by man not be forgotten in time, and that great and marvelous deeds, some displayed by the Hellenes, some by the barbarians, not lose their glory, including among others what was the cause of their waging war on each other.


1.1.1
2
Περσέων μέν νυν οἱ λόγιοι Φοίνικας αἰτίους φασὶ γενέσθαι τῆς διαφορῆς .
The Persian learned men say that the Phoenicians were the cause of the dispute.


1.1.1
3
τούτους γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς Ἐρυθρῆς καλεομένης θαλάσσης ἀπικομένους ἐπὶ τήνδε τὴν θάλασσαν , καὶ οἰκήσαντας τοῦτον τὸν χῶρον τὸν καὶ νῦν οἰκέουσι , αὐτίκα ναυτιλίῃσι μακρῇσι ἐπιθέσθαι , ἀπαγινέοντας δὲ φορτία Αἰγύπτιά τε καὶ Ἀσσύρια τῇ τε ἄλλῃ ἐσαπικνέεσθαι καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐς Ἄργος .
These (they say) came to our seas from the sea which is called Red, and having settled in the country which they still occupy, at once began to make long voyages.


1.1.2
4
τὸ δὲ Ἄργος τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον προεῖχε ἅπασι τῶν ἐν τῇ νῦν Ἑλλάδι καλεομένῃ χωρῇ .
Among other places to which they carried Egyptian and Assyrian merchandise, they came to Argos.


1.1.2
5
ἀπικομένους δὲ τούς Φοίνικας ἐς δὴ τὸ Ἄργος τοῦτο διατίθεσθαι τὸν φόρτον .
which was at that time preeminent in every way among the people of what is now called Greece. The Phoenicians came to Argos, and set out their cargo.


1.1.3
6
πέμπτῃ δὲ ἢ ἕκτῃ ἡμέρῃ ἀπ’ ἧς ἀπίκοντο , ἐξεμπολημένων σφι σχεδόν πάντων , ἐλθεῖν ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν γυναῖκας ἄλλας τε πολλάς καὶ δὴ καὶ τοῦ βασιλέος θυγατέρα ·
On the fifth or sixth day after their arrival, when their wares were almost all sold, many women came to the shore and among them especially the daughter of the king,


1.1.3
7
τὸ δέ οἱ οὔνομα εἶναι , κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ τὸ καὶ Ἕλληνές λέγουσι , Ἰοῦν τὴν Ἰνάχου ·
whose name was Io (according to Persians and Greeks alike), the daughter of Inachus.


1.1.4
8
ταύτας στάσας κατά πρύμνην τῆς νεὸς ὠνέεσθαι τῶν φορτίων τῶν σφι ἦν θυμός μάλιστα ·
As these stood about the stern of the ship bargaining for the wares they liked,


1.1.4
9
καὶ τοὺς Φοίνικας διακελευσαμένους ὁρμῆσαι ἐπ’ αὐτάς .
the Phoenicians incited one another to set upon them.


1.1.4
10
τὰς μὲν δὴ πλεῦνας τῶν γυναικῶν ἀποφυγεῖν , τὴν δὲ Ἰοῦν σὺν ἄλλῃσι ἁρπασθῆναι .
Most of the women escaped: Io and others were seized.


1.1.4
11
ἐσβαλομένους δὲ ἐς τὴν νέα οἴχεσθαι ἀποπλέοντας ἐπ’ Αἰγύπτου .
Having thrown them into the ship, they then sailed away for Egypt.


1.2.1
12
οὕτω μὲν Ἰοῦν ἐς Αἴγυπτον ἀπικέσθαι λέγουσι Πέρσαι , οὐκ ὡς Ἕλληνές , καὶ τῶν ἀδικημάτων πρῶτον τοῦτο ἄρξαι .
In this way, the Persians say (and not as the Greeks), was how Io came to Egypt,


1.2.1
13
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Ἑλλήνων τινάς ( οὐ γὰρ ἔχουσι τ- ὄνομα ἀπηγήσασθαι ) φασὶ τῆς Φοινίκης ἐς Τύρον προσσχόντας ἁρπάσαι τοῦ βασιλέος τὴν θυγατέρα Εὐρώπην .
and this, according to them, was the first wrong that was done.


1.2.1
14
εἴησαν δ’ ἄν οὗτοι Κρῆτες .
Next, according to their story, some Greeks (they cannot say who) landed at Tyre in Phoenicia and carried off the king's daughter Europa.


1.2.1
15
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ ἴσα πρὸς ἴσα σφι γενέσθαι , μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Ἕλληνας αἰτίους τῆς δευτέρης ἀδικίης γενέσθαι ·
These Greeks must, I suppose, have been Cretans. So far, then, the account between them was balanced. But after this (they say), it was the Greeks who were guilty of the second wrong.


1.2.2
16
καταπλώσαντας γὰρ μακρῇ νηί ἐς Αἶαν τε τὴν Κολχίδα καὶ ἐπὶ Φᾶσιν ποταμόν , ἐνθεῦτεν , διαπρηξαμένους καὶ τ- ἄλλα τῶν εἵνεκεν ἀπίκατο , ἁρπάσαι τοῦ βασιλέος τὴν θυγατέρα Μηδείην .
They sailed in a long ship to Aea, a city of the Colchians, and to the river  Poti Phasis   : and when they had done the business for which they came, they carried off the king's daughter Medea.


1.2.3
17
πέμψαντά δὲ τὸν Κόλχων βασιλέα ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα κήρυκα αἰτέειν τε δίκας τῆς ἁρπαγῆς καὶ ἀπαιτέειν τὴν θυγατέρα .
When the Colchian king sent a herald to demand reparation for the robbery and restitution of his daughter,


1.2.3
18
τοὺς δὲ ὑποκρίνασθαι ὡς οὐδὲ ἐκεῖνοι Ἰοῦς τῆς Ἀργείης ἔδοσάν σφι δίκας τῆς ἁρπαγῆς ·
the Greeks replied that, as they had been refused reparation for the abduction of the Argive Io,


1.2.3
19
οὐδὲ ὤν αὐτοὶ δώσειν ἐκείνοισι .
they would not make any to the Colchians.


1.3.1
20
δευτέρῃ δὲ λέγουσι γενεῇ μετὰ ταῦτα Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν Πριάμου , ἀκηκοότα ταῦτα , ἐθελῆσαί οἱ ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος δι’ ἁρπαγῆς γενέσθαι γυναῖκα , ἐπιστάμενον πάντως ὅτι οὐ δώσει δίκας .
Then (they say), in the second generation after this, Alexandrus, son of Priam, who had heard this tale,


1.3.1
21
οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐκείνους διδόναι .
decided to get himself a wife from Greece by capture; for he was confident that he would not suffer punishment.


1.3.2
22
οὕτω δὴ ἁρπάσαντος αὐτοῦ Ἑλένην , τοῖσι Ἕλλησι δόξαι πρῶτὸν πέμψαντας ἀγγέλους ἀπαιτέειν τε Ἑλένην καὶ δίκας τῆς ἁρπαγῆς αἰτέειν .
So he carried off Helen. The Greeks first resolved to send messengers demanding that Helen be restored and atonement made for the seizure;


1.3.2
23
τοὺς δέ , προϊσχομένων ταῦτα , προφέρειν σφι Μηδείης τὴν ἁρπαγήν , ὡς οὐ δόντες αὐτοὶ δίκας οὐδὲ ἐκδόντες ἀπαιτεόντων βουλοίατό σφι παρ’ ἄλλων δίκας γίνεσθαι .
but when this proposal was made, the Trojans pleaded the seizure of Medea, and reminded the Greeks that they asked reparation from others, yet made none themselves, nor gave up the booty when asked.


1.4.1
24
μέχρι μὲν ὤν τούτου ἁρπαγάς μούνας εἶναι παρ’ ἀλλήλων , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτου Ἕλληνας δὴ μεγάλως αἰτίους γενέσθαι ·
So far it was a matter of mere seizure on both sides. But after this (the Persians say),


1.4.1
25
προτέρους γὰρ ἄρξαι στρατεύεσθαι ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην ἢ σφέας ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην .
the Greeks were very much to blame; for they invaded Asia before the Persians attacked Europe.


1.4.2
26
τὸ μέν νυν ἁρπάζειν γυναῖκας ἀνδρῶν ἀδίκων νομίζειν ἔργον εἶναι , τὸ δὲ ἁρπασθεισέων σπουδήν ποιήσασθαι τιμωρέειν ἀνοήτων , τὸ δὲ μηδεμίαν ὤρην ἔχειν ἁρπασθεισέων σωφρόνων ·
“We think,” they say, “that it is unjust to carry women off. But to be anxious to avenge rape is foolish: wise men take no notice of such things.


1.4.2
27
δῆλα γὰρ δὴ ὅτι , εἰ μὴ αὐταὶ ἐβούλοντο , οὐκ ἂν ἡρπάζοντο .
For plainly the women would never have been carried away, had they not wanted it themselves.


1.4.3
28
σφέας μὲν δὴ τοὺς ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης λέγουσι Πέρσαι ἁρπαζομενέων τῶν γυναικῶν λόγον οὐδένα ποιήσασθαι , Ἕλληνας δὲ Λακεδαιμονίης εἵνεκεν γυναικὸς στόλον μέγαν συναγεῖραι καὶ ἔπειτα ἐλθόντας ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην τὴν Πριάμου δύναμιν κατελεῖν .
We of  Asia Asia    did not deign to notice the seizure of our women; but the Greeks, for the sake of a Lacedaemonian woman, recruited a great armada, came to  Asia Asia   , and destroyed the power of Priam.


1.4.4
29
ἀπὸ τούτου αἰεὶ ἡγήσασθαι τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν σφίσι εἶναι πολέμιον .
Ever since then we have regarded Greeks as our enemies.”


1.4.4
30
τὴν γὰρ Ἀσίην καὶ τὰ ἐνοικέοντα ἔθνεα βάρβαρα οἰκηιεῦνται οἱ Πέρσαι , τὴν δὲ Εὐρώπην καὶ τὸ Ἑλληνικόν ἥγηνται κεχωρίσθαι .
For the Persians claim Asia for their own, and the foreign peoples that inhabit it; Europe and the Greek people they consider to be separate from them.


1.5.1
31
οὕτω μὲν Πέρσαι λέγουσι γενέσθαι , καὶ διὰ τὴν Ἰλίου ἅλωσιν εὑρίσκουσι σφίσι ἐοῦσαν τὴν ἀρχήν τῆς ἔχθρης τῆς ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας .
Such is the Persian account; in their opinion, it was the taking of  Troy Troy    which began their hatred of the Greeks.


1.5.2
32
περὶ δὲ τῆς Ἰοῦς οὐκ ὁμολογέουσι Πέρσῃσι οὕτω Φοίνικες ·
But the Phoenicians do not tell the same story about Io as the Persians.


1.5.2
33
οὐ γὰρ ἁρπαγῇ σφέας χρησαμένους λέγουσι ἀγαγεῖν αὐτήν ἐς Αἴγυπτον , ἀλλ’ ὡς ἐν τῷ Ἄργεϊ ἐμίσγετο τῷ ναυκλήρῳ τῆς νέος ·
They say that they did not carry her off to Egypt by force. She had intercourse in Argos with the captain of the ship.


1.5.2
34
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἔμαθε ἔγκυος ἐοῦσα , αἰδεομένη τοὺς τοκέας οὕτω δὴ ἐθελοντήν αὐτήν τοῖσι Φοίνιξι συνεκπλῶσαι , ὡς ἂν μὴ κατάδηλος γένηται .
Then, finding herself pregnant, she was ashamed to have her parents know it, and so, lest they discover her condition, she sailed away with the Phoenicians of her own accord.


1.5.3
35
ταῦτα μέν νυν Πέρσαι τε καὶ Φοίνικες λέγουσι ·
These are the stories of the Persians and the Phoenicians.


1.5.3
36
ἐγὼ δὲ περὶ μὲν τούτων οὐκ ἔρχομαι ἐρέων ὡς οὕτω ἢ ἄλλως κως ταῦτα ἐγένετο , τὸν δὲ οἶδα αὐτὸς πρῶτον ὑπάρξαντα ἀδίκων ἔργων ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας , τοῦτον σημήνας προβήσομαι ἐς τὸ πρόσω τοῦ λόγου , ὁμοίως σμικρὰ καὶ μεγάλα ἄστεα ἀνθρώπων ἐπεξιών .
For my part, I shall not say that this or that story is true, but I shall identify the one who I myself know did the Greeks unjust deeds, and thus proceed with my history, and speak of small and great cities of men alike.


1.5.4
37
τὰ γὰρ τὸ πάλαι μεγάλα ἦν , τὰ πολλὰ σμικρὰ αὐτῶν γέγονε ·
For many states that were once great have now become small;


1.5.4
38
τὰ δὲ ἐπ’ ἐμεῦ ἦν μεγάλα , πρότερον ἦν σμικρά .
and those that were great in my time were small before.


1.5.4
39
τὴν ἀνθρωπηίην ὤν ἐπιστάμενος εὐδαιμονίην οὐδαμὰ ἐν τ- αὐτῷ μένουσαν , ἐπιμνήσομαι ἀμφοτέρων ὁμοίως .
Knowing therefore that human prosperity never continues in the same place, I shall mention both alike.


1.6.1
40
Κροῖσος ἦν Λυδὸς μὲν γένος , παῖς δὲ Ἀλυάττεω , τύραννος δὲ ἐθνέων τῶν ἐντός Ἅλυος ποταμοῦ , ὃς ῥέων ἀπὸ μεσαμβρίης μεταξὺ Συρίων τε καὶ Παφλαγόνων ἐξιεῖ πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον ἐς τὸν Εὔξεινον καλεόμενον πόντον .
Croesus was a Lydian by birth, son of Alyattes, and sovereign of all the nations west of the river  Halys Halys   , which flows from the south between  Syria Syria    and  Paphlagonia Paphlagonia    and empties into the sea called  Black Euxine   .


1.6.2
41
οὗτος ὁ Κροῖσος βαρβάρων πρῶτος τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν τοὺς μὲν κατεστρέψατο Ἑλλήνων ἐς φόρου ἀπαγωγήν , τοὺς δὲ φίλους προσεποιήσατο .
This Croesus was the first foreigner whom we know who subjugated some Greeks and took tribute from them,


1.6.2
42
κατεστρέψατο μὲν Ἴωνάς τε καὶ Αἰολέας καὶ Δωριέας τοὺς ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ , φίλους δὲ προσεποιήσατο Λακεδαιμονίους .
and won the friendship of others: the former being the Ionians, the Aeolians, and the Dorians of Asia, and the latter the Lacedaemonians.


1.6.3
43
πρὸ δὲ τῆς Κροίσου ἀρχῆς πάντες Ἕλληνες ἦσαν ἐλεύθεροι ·
Before the reign of Croesus, all Greeks were free:


1.6.3
44
τὸ γὰρ Κιμμερίων στράτευμα τὸ ἐπὶ τὴν Ἰωνίην ἀπικόμενον Κροίσου ἐὸν πρεσβύτερον οὐ καταστροφὴ ἐγένετο τῶν πολίων ἀλλ’ ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς ἁρπαγή .
for the Cimmerian host which invaded Ionia before his time did not subjugate the cities, but raided and robbed them.


1.7.1
45
ἡ δὲ ἡγεμονίη οὕτω περιῆλθε , ἐοῦσα Ἡρακλειδέων ἐς τὸ γένος τὸ Κροίσου , καλεομένους δὲ Μερμνάδας .
Now the sovereign power that belonged to the descendants of Heracles fell to the family of Croesus, called the Mermnadae, in the following way.


1.7.2
46
ἦν Κανδαύλης , τὸν οἱ Ἕλληνές Μυρσίλον ὀνομάζουσι , τύραννος Σαρδίων , ἀπόγονος δὲ Ἀλκαίου τοῦ Ἡρακλέος .
Candaules, whom the Greeks call Myrsilus, was the ruler of Sardis; he was descended from Alcaeus, son of Heracles;


1.7.2
47
Ἄγρων μὲν γὰρ ὁ Νίνου τοῦ Βήλου τοῦ Ἀλκαίου πρῶτος Ἡρακλειδέων βασιλεὺς ἐγένετο Σαρδίων , Κανδαύλης δὲ ὁ Μύρσου ὕστατος .
Agron son of Ninus, son of Belus, son of Alcaeus, was the first Heraclid king of Sardis and Candaules son of Myrsus was the last.


1.7.3
48
οἱ δὲ πρότερον Ἄγρωνος βασιλεύσαντες ταύτης τῆς χώρης ἦσαν ἀπόγονοὶ Λυδοῦ τοῦ Ἄτυος , ἀπ’ ὅτευ ὁ δῆμος Λύδιος ἐκλήθη ὁ πᾶς οὗτος , πρότερον Μηίων καλεόμενος .
The kings of this country before Agron were descendants of Lydus, son of Atys, from whom this whole Lydian district got its name; before that it was called the land of the Meii.


1.7.4
49
παρὰ τούτων Ἡρακλεῖδαι ἐπιτραφθέντες ἔσχον τὴν ἀρχήν ἐκ θεοπροπίου , ἐκ δούλης τε τῆς Ἰαρδάνου γεγονότες καὶ Ἡρακλέος , ἄρξαντες μὲν ἐπὶ δύο τε καὶ εἴκοσι γενεᾶς ἀνδρῶν ἔτεα πέντε τε καὶ πεντακόσια , παῖς παρὰ πατρὸς ἐκδεκόμενος τὴν ἀρχήν , μέχρι Κανδαύλεω τοῦ Μύρσου .
The Heraclidae, descendants of Heracles and a female slave of Iardanus, received the sovereignty from these and held it, because of an oracle; and they ruled for twenty-two generations, or five hundred and five years, son succeeding father, down to Candaules son of Myrsus.


1.8.1
50
οὗτος δὴ ὦν ὁ Κανδαύλης ἠράσθη τῆς ἑωυτοῦ γυναικός , ἐρασθεὶς δὲ ἐνόμιζέ οἱ εἶναι γυναῖκα πολλὸν πασέων καλλίστην .
This Candaules, then, fell in love with his own wife,


1.8.1
51
ὥστε δὲ ταῦτα νομίζων , ἦν γάρ οἱ τῶν αἰχμοφόρων Γύγης ὁ Δασκύλου ἀρεσκόμενος μάλιστα , τούτῳ τῷ Γύγῃ καὶ τὰ σπουδαιέστερα τῶν πρηγμάτων ὑπερετίθετο ὁ Κανδαύλης καὶ δὴ καὶ τὸ εἶδος τῆς γυναικὸς ὑπερεπαινέων .
so much so that he believed her to be by far the most beautiful woman in the world; and believing this, he praised her beauty beyond measure to Gyges son of Dascylus, who was his favorite among his bodyguard; for it was to Gyges that he entrusted all his most important secrets.


1.8.2
52
χρόνου δὲ οὐ πολλοῦ διελθόντος ( χρῆν γὰρ Κανδαύλῃ γενέσθαι κακῶς ) ἔλεγε πρὸς τὸν Γύγην τοιάδε .
After a little while, Candaules, doomed to misfortune, spoke to Gyges thus:


1.8.2
53
" Γύγη , οὐ γὰρ σε δοκέω πείθεσθαι μοι λέγοντι περὶ τοῦ εἴδεος τῆς γυναικός ( ὦτα γὰρ τυγχάνει ἀνθρώποισι ἐόντα ἀπιστότερα ὀφθαλμῶν ) , ποίεε ὅκως ἐκείνην θεήσεαι γυμνήν " .
“Gyges, I do not think that you believe what I say about the beauty of my wife; men trust their ears less than their eyes: so you must see her naked.”


1.8.3
54
ὃ δ’ ἀμβώσας εἶπε " δέσποτα , τίνα λέγεις λόγον οὐκ ὑγιέα , κελεύων με δέσποιναν τὴν ἐμὴν θεήσασθαι γυμνήν ;
“Master,” he said, “what an unsound suggestion, that I should see my mistress naked!


1.8.3
55
ἅμα δὲ κιθῶνι ἐκδυομένῳ συνεκδύεται καὶ τὴν αἰδῶ γυνή .
When a woman's clothes come off, she dispenses with her modesty, too.


1.8.4
56
πάλαι δὲ τὰ καλὰ ἀνθρώποισι ἐξεύρηται , ἐκ τῶν μανθάνειν δεῖ ·
Men have long ago made wise rules from which one ought to learn;


1.8.4
57
ἐν τοῖσι ἓν τόδε ἐστί , σκοπέειν τινὰ τὰ ἑωυτοῦ .
one of these is that one should mind one's own business.


1.8.4
58
ἐγὼ δὲ πείθομαι ἐκείνην εἶναι πασέων γυναικῶν καλλίστην , καὶ σέο δέομαι μὴ δέεσθαι ἀνόμων " .
As for me, I believe that your queen is the most beautiful of all women, and I ask you not to ask of me what is lawless.”


1.9.1
59
ὃ μὲν δὴ λέγων τοιαῦτα ἀπεμάχετο , ἀρρωδέων μὴ τί οἱ ἐξ αὐτῶν γένηται κακόν , ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
Speaking thus, Gyges resisted: for he was afraid that some evil would come of it for him.


1.9.1
60
" θάρσεε , Γύγη , καὶ μὴ φοβεῦ μήτε ἐμέ , ὡς σέο πειρώμενος λέγω λόγον τόνδε , μήτε γυναῖκα τὴν ἐμήν , μὴ τὶ τοι ἐξ αὐτῆς γένηται βλάβος .
But this was Candaules' answer: “Courage, Gyges! Do not be afraid of me, that I say this to test you, or of my wife, that you will have any harm from her.


1.9.1
61
ἀρχήν γὰρ ἐγὼ μηχανήσομαι οὕτω ὥστε μηδέ μαθεῖν μιν ὀφθεῖσαν ὑπὸ σεῦ .
I will arrange it so that she shall never know that you have seen her.


1.9.2
62
ἐγὼ γάρ σε ἐς τὸ οἴκημα ἐν τῷ κοιμώμεθα ὄπισθε τῆς ἀνοιγομένης θύρης στήσω .
I will bring you into the chamber where she and I lie and conceal you behind the open door;


1.9.2
63
μετὰ δ’ ἐμὲ ἐσελθόντα παρέσται καὶ ἡ γυνὴ ἡ ἐμὴ ἐς κοῖτον .
and after I have entered, my wife too will come to bed.


1.9.2
64
κεῖται δὲ ἀγχοῦ τῆς ἐσόδου θρόνος ·
There is a chair standing near the entrance of the room:


1.9.2
65
ἐπὶ τοῦτον τῶν ἱματίων κατὰ ἕν ἕκαστον ἐκδύνουσα θήσει , καὶ κατ’ ἡσυχίην πολλὴν παρέξει τοι θεήσασθαι .
on this she will lay each article of her clothing as she takes it off, and you will be able to look upon her at your leisure.


1.9.3
66
ἐπεὰν δέ ἀπὸ τοῦ θρόνου στείχῃ ἐπὶ τὴν εὐνήν κατὰ νώτου τε αὐτῆς γένῃ , σοὶ μελέτω τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν ὅκως μὴ σε ὄψεται ἰόντα διὰ θυρέων " .
Then, when she moves from the chair to the bed, turning her back on you, be careful she does not see you going out through the doorway.”


1.10.1
67
ὃ μὲν δὴ ὡς οὐκ ἐδύνατο διαφυγεῖν , ἦν ἕτοιμος ·
As Gyges could not escape, he consented.


1.10.1
68
ὁ δὲ Κανδαύλης , ἐπεὶ ἐδόκεε ὥρη τῆς κοίτης εἶναι , ἤγαγε τὸν Γύγεα ἐς τὸ οἴκημα .
Candaules, when he judged it to be time for bed, brought Gyges into the chamber;


1.10.1
69
καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα αὐτίκα παρῆν καὶ ἡ γυνή .
his wife followed presently,


1.10.1
70
ἐσελθοῦσαν δὲ καὶ τιθεῖσαν τὰ εἵματα ἐθηεῖτο ὁ Γύγης .
and when she had come in and was laying aside her garments, Gyges saw her;


1.10.2
71
ὡς δὲ κατὰ νώτου ἐγένετο ἰούσης τῆς γυναικός ἐς τὴν κοίτην , ὑπεκδὺς ἐχώρεε ἔξω , καὶ ἡ γυνὴ ἐπορᾷ μιν ἐξιόντα .
when she turned her back upon him to go to bed, he slipped from the room.


1.10.2
72
μαθοῦσὰ δὲ τὸ ποιηθέν ἐκ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς οὔτε ἀνέβωσε αἰσχυνθεῖσα οὔτε ἔδοξε μαθεῖν , ἐν νοῶ ἔχουσα τίσεσθαι τὸν Κανδαύλεα .
The woman glimpsed him as he went out, and perceived what her husband had done. But though shamed, she did not cry out or let it be seen that she had perceived anything, for she meant to punish Candaules;


1.10.3
73
παρὰ γὰρ τοῖσι Λυδοῖσι , σχεδὸν δὲ καὶ παρὰ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι βαρβάροισι καὶ ἄνδρα ὀφθῆναι γυμνόν ἐς αἰσχύνην μεγάλην φέρει .
since among the Lydians and most of the foreign peoples it is felt as a great shame that even a man be seen naked.


1.11.1
74
τότε μὲν δὴ οὕτω οὐδέν δηλώσασα ἡσυχίην εἶχε .
For the present she made no sign and kept quiet.


1.11.1
75
ὡς δὲ ἡμέρη τάχιστα ἐγεγόνεε , τῶν οἰκετέων τοὺς μάλιστα ὥρα πιστοὺς ἐόντας ἑωυτῇ , ἑτοίμους ποιησαμένη ἐκάλεε τὸν Γύγεα .
But as soon as it was day, she prepared those of her household whom she saw were most faithful to her, and called Gyges.


1.11.1
76
ὁ δὲ οὐδὲν δοκέων αὐτήν τῶν πρηχθέντων ἐπίστασθαι ἦλθε καλεόμενος ·
He, supposing that she knew nothing of what had been done, answered the summons;


1.11.1
77
ἐώθεε γὰρ καὶ πρόσθε , ὅκως ἡ βασίλεια καλέοι , φοιτᾶν .
for he was used to attending the queen whenever she summoned him.


1.11.2
78
ὡς δὲ ὁ Γύγης ἀπίκετο , ἔλεγε ἡ γυνὴ τάδε .
When Gyges came, the lady addressed him thus:


1.11.2
79
" νῦν τοί δυῶν ὁδῶν παρεουσέων Γύγη δίδωμί αἵρεσιν , ὁκοτέρην βούλεαι τραπέσθαι .
“Now, Gyges, you have two ways before you; decide which you will follow.


1.11.2
80
ἢ γὰρ Κανδαύλεα ἀποκτείνας ἐμέ τε καὶ τὴν βασιληίην ἔχε τὴν Λυδῶν , ἢ αὐτόν σε αὐτίκα οὕτω ἀποθνήσκειν δεῖ , ὡς ἂν μὴ πάντα πειθόμενος Κανδαύλῃ τοῦ λοιποῦ ἴδῃς τὰ μὴ σε δεῖ .
You must either kill Candaules and take me and the throne of Lydia for your own, or be killed yourself now without more ado; that will prevent you from obeying all Candaules' commands in the future and seeing what you should not see.


1.11.3
81
ἀλλ’ ἤτοι κεῖνόν γε τὸν ταῦτα βουλεύσαντα δεῖ ἀπόλλυσθαι , ἢ σε τὸν ἐμὲ γυμνήν θεησάμενον καὶ ποιήσαντα οὐ νομιζόμενα " .
One of you must die: either he, the contriver of this plot, or you, who have outraged all custom by looking on me uncovered.”


1.11.3
82
ὁ δὲ Γύγης τέως μὲν ἀπεθώμαζε τὰ λεγόμενα , μετὰ δὲ ἱκέτευε μὴ μιν ἀναγκαίῃ ἐνδέειν διακρῖναι τοιαύτην αἵρεσιν .
Gyges stood awhile astonished at this; presently, he begged her not to compel him to such a choice.


1.11.4
83
οὔκων δὴ ἔπειθε , ἀλλ’ ὥρα ἀναγκαίην ἀληθέως προκειμένην ἢ τὸν δεσπότεα ἀπολλύναι ἢ αὐτὸν ὑπ’ ἄλλων ἀπόλλυσθαι ·
But then he could not deter her, and saw that dire necessity was truly upon him either to kill his master or himself be killed by others.


1.11.4
84
αἱρέεται αὐτὸς περιεῖναι .
He chose his own life.


1.11.4
85
ἐπειρώτα δὴ λέγων τάδε .
Then he asked:


1.11.4
86
" ἐπεί με ἀναγκάζεις δεσπότεα τὸν ἐμὸν κτείνειν οὐκ ἐθέλοντα , φέρε ἀκούσω τέῳ καὶ τρόπῳ ἐπιχειρήσομεν αὐτῷ " .
“Since you force me against my will to kill my master, I would like to know how we are to lay our hands on him.”


1.11.5
87
ἣ δὲ ὑπολαβοῦσα ἔφη " ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ μὲν χωρίου ἡ ὁρμή ἔσται ὅθεν περ καὶ ἐκεῖνος ἐμέ ἐπεδέξατο γυμνήν , ὑπνωμένῳ δὲ ἡ ἐπιχείρησις ἔσται " .
She replied, “You shall come at him from the same place where he made you view me naked: attack him in his sleep.”


1.12.1
88
ὡς δὲ ἤρτυσαν τὴν ἐπιβουλήν , νυκτὸς γενομένης ( οὐ γὰρ ἐμετίετο ὁ Γύγης , οὐδέ οἱ ἦν ἀπαλλαγὴ οὐδεμία , ἀλλ’ ἔδεε ἤ αὐτὸν ἀπολωλέναι ἢ Κανδαύλεα ) εἵπετο ἐς τὸν θάλαμον τῇ γυναικί , καί μιν ἐκείνη , ἐγχειρίδιον δοῦσα , κατακρύπτει ὑπὸ τὴν αὐτὴν θύρην .
When they had prepared this plot, and night had fallen, Gyges followed the woman into the chamber (for Gyges was not released, nor was there any means of deliverance, but either he or Candaules must die). She gave him a dagger and hid him behind the same door;


1.12.2
89
καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα ἀναπαυομένου Κανδαύλεω ὑπεκδύς τε καὶ ἀποκτείνας αὐτὸν ἔσχε καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα καὶ τὴν βασιληίην Γύγης τοῦ καὶ Ἀρχίλοχος ὁ Πάριος κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον γενόμενος ἐν ἰάμβῳ τριμέτρῳ ἐπεμνήσθη .
and presently he stole out and killed Candaules as he slept. Thus he made himself master of the king's wife and sovereignty. He is mentioned in the iambic verses of Archilochus of Parus who lived about the same time.


1.13.1
90
ἔσχε δὲ τὴν βασιληίην καὶ ἐκρατύνθη ἐκ τοῦ ἐν Δελφοῖσι χρηστηρίου .
So he took possession of the sovereign power and was confirmed in it by the Delphic oracle.


1.13.1
91
ὡς γὰρ δὴ οἱ Λυδοὶ δεινόν ἐποιεῦντο τὸ Κανδαύλεω πάθος καὶ ἐν ὅπλοισι ἦσαν , συνέβησαν ἐς τ- αὐτὸ οἳ τε τοῦ Γύγεω στασιῶται καί οἱ λοιποὶ Λυδοί , ἤν μὲν τὸ χρηστήριον ἀνέλῃ μιν βασιλέα εἶναι Λυδῶν , τόν δὲ βασιλεύειν , ἤν δὲ μή , ἀποδοῦναι ὀπίσω ἐς Ἡρακλείδας τὴν ἀρχήν .
For when the Lydians took exception to what was done to Candaules, and took up arms, the faction of Gyges came to an agreement with the rest of the people that if the oracle should ordain him king of the Lydians, then he would reign; but if not, then he would return the kingship to the Heraclidae.


1.13.2
92
ἀνεῖλέ τε δὴ τὸ χρηστήριον καὶ ἐβασίλευσε οὕτω Γύγης .
The oracle did so ordain, and Gyges thus became king.


1.13.2
93
τοσόνδε μέντοι εἶπε ἡ Πυθίη , ὡς Ἡρακλείδῃσι τίσις ἥξει ἐς τὸν πέμπτον ἀπόγονον Γύγεω .
However, the Pythian priestess declared that the Heraclidae would have vengeance on Gyges' posterity in the fifth generation;


1.13.2
94
τούτου τοῦ ἔπεος Λυδοί τε καί οἱ βασιλέες αὐτῶν λόγον οὐδένα ἐποιεῦντο , πρὶν δὴ ἐπετελέσθη .
an utterance to which the Lydians and their kings paid no regard until it was fulfilled.


1.14.1
95
τὴν μὲν δὴ τυραννίδα οὕτω ἔσχον οἱ Μερμνάδαι τοὺς Ἡρακλείδας ἀπελόμενοι , Γύγης δὲ τυραννεύσας ἀπέπεμψε ἀναθήματα ἐς Δελφοὺς οὐκ ὀλίγα , ἀλλ’ ὅσα μὲν ἀργύρου ἀναθήματα , ἔστι οἱ πλεῖστα ἐν Δελφοῖσι , πάρεξ δὲ τοῦ ἀργύρου χρυσὸν ἄπλετον ἀνέθηκε ἄλλον τε καὶ τοῦ μάλιστα μνήμην ἄξιον ἔχειν ἐστί , κρητῆρες οἱ ἀριθμὸν ἓξ χρύσεοι ἀνακέαται .
Thus the Mermnadae robbed the Heraclidae of the sovereignty and took it for themselves. Having gotten it, Gyges sent many offerings to  Delphi Delphi   : there are very many silver offerings of his there; and besides the silver, he dedicated a hoard of gold, among which six golden bowls are the offerings especially worthy of mention.


1.14.2
96
ἑστᾶσι δὲ οὗτοι ἐν τῷ Κορινθίων θησαυρῷ , σταθμὸν ἔχοντες τριήκοντα τάλαντα ·
These weigh thirty talents and stand in the treasury of the Corinthians;


1.14.2
97
ἀληθέι δὲ λόγῳ χρεωμένῳ οὐ Κορινθίων τοῦ δημοσίου ἐστὶ ὁ θησαυρός , ἀλλὰ Κυψέλου τοῦ Ἠετίωνος .
although in truth it is not the treasury of the Corinthian people but of Cypselus son of Eetion.


1.14.2
98
οὗτος δὲ ὁ Γύγης πρῶτος βαρβάρων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν ἐς Δελφοὺς ἀνέθηκε ἀναθήματα μετὰ Μίδην τὸν Γορδίεω Φρυγίης βασιλέα .
This Gyges then was the first foreigner whom we know who placed offerings at Delphi after the king of Phrygia, Midas son of Gordias.


1.14.3
99
ἀνέθηκε γὰρ δὴ καὶ Μίδης τὸν βασιλήιον θρόνον ἐς τὸν προκατίζων ἐδίκαζε , ἐόντα ἀξιοθέητον ·
For Midas too made an offering: namely, the royal seat on which he sat to give judgment, and a marvellous seat it is.


1.14.3
100
κεῖται δὲ ὁ θρόνος οὗτος ἔνθα περ οἱ τοῦ Γύγεω κρητῆρες .
It is set in the same place as the bowls of Gyges.


1.14.3
101
ὁ δὲ χρυσός οὗτος καὶ ὁ ἄργυρος τὸν ὁ Γύγης ἀνέθηκε , ὑπὸ Δελφῶν καλέεται Γυγάδας ἐπὶ τοῦ ἀναθέντος ἐπωνυμίην .
This gold and the silver offered by Gyges is called by the Delphians “Gygian” after its dedicator.


1.15.1
102
ἐσέβαλε μέν νυν στρατιὴν καὶ οὗτος ἐπείτε ἦρξε ἔς τε Μίλητον καὶ ἐς Σμύρνην , καὶ Κολοφῶνος τὸ ἄστυ εἷλε ·
As soon as Gyges came to the throne, he too, like others, led an army into the lands of Miletus and Smyrna; and he took the city of Colophon.


1.15.1
103
ἀλλ’ οὐδὲν γὰρ μέγα ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ ἄλλο ἔργον ἐγένετο βασιλεύσαντος δυῶν δέοντα τεσσεράκοντα ἔτεα , τοῦτον μὲν παρήσομεν τοσαῦτα ἐπιμνησθέντες , Ἄρδυος δὲ τοῦ Γύγεω μετὰ Γύγην βασιλεύσαντος μνήμην ποιήσομαι .
But as he did nothing else great in his reign of thirty-eight years, I shall say no more of him, and shall speak instead of Ardys son of Gyges, who succeeded him.


1.15.1
104
οὗτος δὲ Πριηνέας τε εἷλε ἐς Μίλητόν τε ἐσέβαλε , ἐπὶ τούτου τε τυραννεύοντος Σαρδίων Κιμμέριοι ἐξ ἠθέων ὑπὸ Σκυθέων τῶν νομάδων ἐξαναστάντες ἀπίκοντο ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην καὶ Σάρδις πλὴν τῆς ἀκροπόλιος εἷλον .
He took Priene and invaded the country of Miletus; and it was while he was monarch of Sardis that the Cimmerians, driven from their homes by the nomad Scythians, came into Asia, and took Sardis, all but the acropolis.


1.16.1
105
Ἄρδυος δὲ βασιλεύσαντος ἑνὸς δέοντα πεντήκοντα ἔτεα ἐξεδέξατο Σαδυάττης ὁ Ἄρδυος , καὶ ἐβασίλευσε ἔτεα δυώδεκα , Σαδυάττεω δὲ Ἀλυάττης .
Ardys reigned for forty-nine years and was succeeded by his son Sadyattes, who reigned for twelve years; and after Sadyattes came Alyattes,


1.16.2
106
οὗτος δὲ Κυαξάρῃ τε τῷ Δηιόκεω ἀπογόνῳ ἐπολέμησε καὶ Μήδοισι , Κιμμερίους τε ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης ἐξήλασε , Σμύρνην τε τὴν ἀπὸ Κολοφῶνος κτισθεῖσαν εἷλε , ἐς Κλαζομενάς τε ἐσέβαλε .
who waged war against Deioces' descendant Cyaxares and the Medes, drove the Cimmerians out of Asia, took Smyrna (which was a colony from Colophon), and invaded the lands of Clazomenae.


1.16.2
107
ἀπὸ μέν νυν τούτων οὐκ ὡς ἤθελε ἀπήλλαξε , ἀλλὰ προσπταίσας μεγάλως ·
But he did not return from these as he wished, but with great disaster.


1.16.2
108
ἄλλα δὲ ἔργα ἀπεδέξατο ἐὼν ἐν τῇ ἀρχῇ ἀξιαπηγητότατα τάδε .
Of other deeds done by him in his reign, these were the most notable:


1.17.1
109
ἐπολέμησε Μιλησίοισι , παραδεξάμενος τὸν πόλεμον παρὰ τοῦ πατρός .
He continued the war against the Milesians which his father had begun.


1.17.1
110
ἐπελαύνων γὰρ ἐπολιόρκεε τὴν Μίλητον τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
This was how he attacked and besieged Miletus:


1.17.1
111
ὅκως μὲν εἴη ἐν τῇ γῇ καρπὸς ἁδρός , τηνικαῦτα ἐσέβαλλε τὴν στρατιήν ·
he sent his army to invade when the crops in the land were ripe;


1.17.1
112
ἐστρατεύετο δὲ ὑπὸ συρίγγων τε καὶ πηκτίδων καὶ αὐλοῦ γυναικηίου τε καὶ ἀνδρηίου .
he sent his army, marching to the sound of pipes and harps and bass and treble flutes.


1.17.2
113
ὡς δὲ ἐς τὴν Μιλησίην ἀπίκοιτο , οἰκήματα μὲν τὰ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀγρῶν οὔτε κατέβαλλε οὔτε ἐνεπίμπρη οὔτε θύρας ἀπέσπα , ἔα δὲ κατὰ χώρην ἑστάναι ·
and whenever he came to the Milesian territory, he neither demolished nor burnt nor tore the doors off the country dwellings, but let them stand unharmed;


1.17.2
114
ὁ δὲ τὰ τε δένδρεα καὶ τὸν καρπὸν τὸν ἐν τῇ γῇ ὅκως διαφθείρειε , ἀπαλλάσσετο ὀπίσω .
but he destroyed the trees and the crops of the land, and so returned to where he came from;


1.17.3
115
τῆς γὰρ θαλάσσης οἱ Μιλήσιοι ἐπεκράτεον , ὥστε ἐπέδρης μὴ εἶναι ἔργον τῇ στρατιῇ .
for as the Milesians had command of the sea, it was of no use for his army to besiege their city.


1.17.3
116
τὰς δὲ οἰκίας οὐ κατέβαλλε ὁ Λυδὸς τῶνδε εἵνεκα , ὅκως ἔχοιεν ἐνθεῦτεν ὁρμώμενοι τὴν γῆν σπείρειν τε καὶ ἐργάζεσθαι οἱ Μιλήσιοι , αὐτὸς δὲ ἐκείνων ἐργαζομένων ἔχοι τι καὶ σίνεσθαι ἐσβάλλων .
The reason that the Lydian did not destroy the houses was this: that the Milesians might have homes from which to plant and cultivate their land, and that there might be the fruit of their toil for his invading army to lay waste.


1.18.1
117
ταῦτα ποιέων ἐπολέμεε ἔτεα ἕνδεκα , ἐν τοῖσι τρώματα μεγάλα διφάσια Μιλησίων ἐγένετο , ἔν τε Λιμενηίῳ χώρης τῆς σφετέρης μαχεσαμένων καὶ ἐν Μαιάνδρου πεδίῳ .
He waged war in this way for eleven years, and in these years two great disasters overtook the Milesians, one at the battle of Limeneion in their own territory, and the other in the valley of the  Buyukmenderes Maeander   .


1.18.2
118
τὰ μέν νυν ἓξ ἔτεα τῶν ἕνδεκα Σαδυάττης ὁ Ἄρδυος ἔτι Λυδῶν ἦρχε , ὁ καὶ ἐσβάλλων τηνικαῦτα ἐς τὴν Μιλησίην τὴν στρατιήν ·
For six of these eleven years Sadyattes son of Ardys was still ruler of Lydia, and it was he who invaded the lands of Miletus,


1.18.2
119
Σαδυάττης οὗτος γὰρ καὶ ὁ τὸν πόλεμον ἦν συνάψας ·
for it was he who had begun the war;


1.18.2
120
τὰ δὲ πέντε τῶν ἐτέων τὰ ἑπόμενα τοῖσι ἓξ Ἀλυάττης ὁ Σαδυάττεω ἐπολέμεε , ὃς παραδεξάμενος , ὡς καὶ πρότερον μοι δεδήλωται , παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς τὸν πόλεμον προσεῖχε ἐντεταμένως .
for the following five the war was waged by Sadyattes' son Alyattes, who, as I have indicated before, inherited the war from his father and carried it on vigorously.


1.18.3
121
τοῖσι δὲ Μιλησίοισι οὐδαμοὶ Ἰώνων τὸν πόλεμον τοῦτον συνεπελάφρυνον ὅτι μὴ Χῖοι μοῦνοι .
None of the Ionians helped to lighten this war for the Milesians, except the Chians:


1.18.3
122
οὗτοι δὲ τὸ ὅμοιον ἀνταποδιδόντες ἐτιμώρεον ·
these lent their aid in return for a similar service done for them;


1.18.3
123
καὶ γὰρ δὴ πρότερον οἱ Μιλήσιοι τοῖσι Χίοισι τὸν πρὸς Ἐρυθραίους πόλεμον συνδιήνεικαν .
for the Milesians had previously helped the Chians in their war against the Erythraeans.


1.19.1
124
τῷ δὲ δυωδεκάτῳ ἔτεϊ ληίου ἐμπιπραμένου ὑπὸ τῆς στρατιῆς συνηνείχθη τι τοιόνδε γενέσθαι πρῆγμα ·
In the twelfth year, when the Lydian army was burning the crops, an event of the following type took place.


1.19.1
125
ὡς ἅφθη τάχιστα τὸ λήιον , ἀνέμῳ βιώμενον ἅψατο νηοῦ Ἀθηναίης ἐπίκλησιν Ἀσσησίης , ἁφθεὶς δὲ ὁ νηὸς κατεκαύθη .
The fire set in the crops, blown by a strong wind, caught the temple of Athena called Athena of Assesos, and the temple burned to the ground.


1.19.2
126
καὶ τὸ παραυτίκα μὲν λόγος οὐδεὶς ἐγένετο , μετὰ δὲ τῆς στρατιῆς ἀπικομένης ἐς Σάρδις ἐνόσησε ὁ Ἀλυάττης .
For the present no notice was taken of this.


1.19.2
127
μακροτέρης δέ οἱ γινομένης τῆς νούσου πέμπει ἐς Δελφοὺς θεοπρόπους , εἴτε δὴ συμβουλεύσαντός τευ , εἴτε καὶ αὐτῷ ἔδοξε πέμψαντα τὸν θεὸν ἐπειρέσθαι περὶ τῆς νούσου .
But after the army had returned to Sardis, Alyattes fell ill; and, as his sickness lasted longer than it should, he sent to Delphi to inquire of the oracle, either at someone's urging or by his own wish to question the god about his sickness.


1.19.3
128
τοῖσι δὲ ἡ Πυθίη ἀπικομένοισι ἐς Δελφοὺς οὐκ ἔφη χρήσειν πρὶν ἢ τὸν νηὸν τῆς Ἀθηναίης ἀνορθώσωσι , τὸν ἐνέπρησαν χώρης τῆς Μιλησίης ἐν Ἀσσησῷ .
But when the messengers came to  Delphi Delphi   , the Pythian priestess would not answer them before they restored the temple of Athena at Assesos in the Milesian territory, which they had burnt.


1.20.1
129
Δελφῶν οἶδα ἐγὼ οὕτω ἀκούσας γενέσθαι ·
I know this much to be so because the Delphians told me.


1.20.1
130
Μιλήσιοι δὲ τάδε προστιθεῖσι τούτοισι , Περίανδρον τὸν Κυψέλου ἐόντα Θρασυβούλῳ τῷ τότε Μιλήτου τυραννεύοντι ξεῖνον ἐς τὰ μάλιστα , πυθόμενον τὸ χρηστήριον τὸ τῷ Ἀλυάττῃ γενόμενον , πέμψαντα ἄγγελον κατειπεῖν , ὅκως ἄν τι προειδὼς πρὸς τὸ παρεὸν βουλεύηται .
The Milesians add that Periander son of Cypselus, a close friend of the Thrasybulus who then was sovereign of Miletus, learned what reply the oracle had given to Alyattes, and sent a messenger to tell Thrasybulus so that his friend, forewarned, could make his plans accordingly.


1.21.1
131
Μιλήσιοι μέν νυν οὕτω λέγουσι γενέσθαι .
The Milesians say it happened so.


1.21.1
132
Ἀλυάττης δέ , ὡς οἱ ταῦτα ἐξαγγέλθη , αὐτίκα ἔπεμπε κήρυκα ἐς Μίλητον βουλόμενος σπονδὰς ποιήσασθαι Θρασυβούλῳ τε καὶ Μιλησίοισι χρόνον ὅσον ἂν τὸν νηὸν οἰκοδομέῃ .
Then, when the Delphic reply was brought to Alyattes, he promptly sent a herald to Miletus, offering to make a truce with Thrasybulus and the Milesians during his rebuilding of the temple.


1.21.1
133
ὃ μὲν δὴ ἀπόστολος ἐς τὴν Μίλητον ἦν , Θρασύβουλος δὲ σαφέως προπεπυσμένος πάντα λόγον , καὶ εἰδὼς τὰ Ἀλυάττης μέλλοι ποιήσειν , μηχανᾶται τοιάδε ·
So the envoy went to Miletus. But Thrasybulus, forewarned of the whole matter, and knowing what Alyattes meant to do, devised the following plan:


1.21.2
134
ὅσος ἦν ἐν τῷ ἄστεϊ σῖτος καὶ ἑωυτοῦ καὶ ἰδιωτικός , τοῦτον πάντα συγκομίσας ἐς τὴν ἀγορὴν προεῖπε Μιλησίοισι , ἐπεὰν αὐτὸς σημήνῃ , τότε πίνειν τε πάντας καὶ κώμῳ χρᾶσθαι ἐς ἀλλήλους .
he brought together into the marketplace all the food in the city, from private stores and his own, and told the men of  Miletus Miletus    all to drink and celebrate together when he gave the word.


1.22.1
135
ταῦτα δὲ ἐποίεέ τε καὶ προηγόρευε Θρασύβουλος τῶνδε εἵνεκεν , ὅκως ἂν δὴ ὁ κῆρυξ ὁ Σαρδιηνὸς ἰδών τε σωρὸν μέγαν σίτου κεχυμένον καὶ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἐν εὐπαθείῃσι ἐόντας ἀγγείλῃ Ἀλυάττῃ ·
Thrasybulus did this so that when the herald from  Sardis Sardis    saw a great heap of food piled up, and the citizens celebrating, he would bring word of it to Alyattes:


1.22.2
136
τὰ δὴ καὶ ἐγένετο .
and so it happened.


1.22.2
137
ὡς γὰρ δὴ ἰδών τε ἐκεῖνα ὁ κῆρυξ καὶ εἶπας πρὸς Θρασύβουλον τοῦ Λυδοῦ τὰς ἐντολὰς ἀπῆλθε ἐς τὰς Σάρδις , ὡς ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι , δι’ οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἐγένετο ἡ διαλλαγή .
The herald saw all this, gave Thrasybulus the message he had been instructed by the Lydian to deliver, and returned to Sardis; and this, as I learn, was the sole reason for the reconciliation.


1.22.3
138
ἐλπίζων γὰρ ὁ Ἀλυάττης σιτοδείην τε εἶναι ἰσχυρὴν ἐν τῇ Μιλήτῳ καὶ τὸν λεὼν τετρῦσθαι ἐς τὸ ἔσχατον κακοῦ , ἤκουε τοῦ κήρυκος νοστήσαντος ἐκ τῆς Μιλήτου τοὺς ἐναντίους λόγους ἢ ὡς αὐτὸς κατεδόκεε .
For Alyattes had supposed that there was great scarcity in  Miletus Miletus    and that the people were reduced to the last extremity of misery; but now on his herald's return from the town he heard an account contrary to his expectations;


1.22.4
139
μετὰ δὲ ἥ τε διαλλαγή σφι ἐγένετο ἐπ’ ᾧ τε ξείνους ἀλλήλοισι εἶναι καὶ συμμάχους , καὶ δύο τε ἀντὶ ἑνὸς νηοὺς τῇ Ἀθηναίῃ οἰκοδόμησε ὁ Ἀλυάττης ἐν τῇ Ἀσσησῷ , αὐτός τε ἐκ τῆς νούσου ἀνέστη .
so presently the Lydians and Milesians ended the war and agreed to be friends and allies, and Alyattes built not one but two temples of Athena at Assesos, and recovered from his illness.


1.22.4
140
κατὰ μέν τὸν πρὸς Μιλησίους τε καὶ Θρασύβουλον πόλεμον Ἀλυάττῃ ὧδε ἔσχε .
That is the story of Alyattes' war against Thrasybulus and the Milesians.


1.23.1
141
Περίανδρος δὲ ἦν Κυψέλου παῖς οὗτος ὁ τῷ Θρασυβούλῳ τὸ χρηστήριον μηνύσας ·
Periander, who disclosed the oracle's answer to Thrasybulus, was the son of Cypselus, and sovereign of Corinth.


1.23.1
142
ἐτυράννευε δὲ ὁ Περίανδρος Κορίνθου ·
The Corinthians say (and the Lesbians agree) that the most marvellous thing that happened to him in his life was the landing on Taenarus of Arion of Methymna, brought there by a dolphin.


1.23.1
143
τῷ δὴ λέγουσι Κορίνθιοι ( ὁμολογέουσι δέ σφι Λέσβιοι ) ἐν τῷ βίῳ θῶμα μέγιστον παραστῆναι , Ἀρίονα τὸν Μηθυμναῖον ἐπὶ δελφῖνος ἐξενειχθέντα ἐπὶ Ταίναρον , ἐόντα κιθαρῳδὸν τῶν τότε ἐόντων οὐδενὸς δεύτερον , καὶ διθύραμβον πρῶτον ἀνθρώπων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν ποιήσαντά τε καὶ ὀνομάσαντα καὶ διδάξαντα ἐν Κορίνθῳ .
This Arion was a lyre-player second to none in that age; he was the first man whom we know to compose and name the dithyramb which he afterwards taught at Corinth.


1.24.1
144
τοῦτον τὸν Ἀρίονα λέγουσι , τὸν πολλὸν τοῦ χρόνου διατρίβοντα παρὰ Περιάνδρῳ ἐπιθυμῆσαι πλῶσαι ἐς Ἰταλίην τε καὶ Σικελίην , ἐργασάμενον δὲ χρήματα μεγάλα θελῆσαι ὀπίσω ἐς Κόρινθον ἀπικέσθαι .
They say that this Arion, who spent most of his time with Periander, wished to sail to  Italy Italy    and  Sicily Sicily   , and that after he had made a lot of money there he wanted to come back to  Corinth Corinth   .


1.24.2
145
ὁρμᾶσθαι μέν νυν ἐκ Τάραντος , πιστεύοντα δὲ οὐδαμοῖσι μᾶλλον ἢ Κορινθίοισι μισθώσασθαι πλοῖον ἀνδρῶν Κορινθίων .
Trusting none more than the Corinthians, he hired a Corinthian vessel to carry him from Tarentum.


1.24.2
146
τοὺς δὲ ἐν τῷ πελάγεϊ ἐπιβουλεύειν τὸν Ἀρίονα ἐκβαλόντας ἔχειν τὰ χρήματα .
But when they were out at sea, the crew plotted to take Arion's money and cast him overboard.


1.24.2
147
τὸν δὲ συνέντα τοῦτο λίσσεσθαι , χρήματα μὲν σφι προϊέντα , ψυχὴν δὲ παραιτεόμενον .
Discovering this, he earnestly entreated them, asking for his life and offering them his money.


1.24.3
148
οὔκων δὴ πείθειν αὐτὸν τούτοισι , ἀλλὰ κελεύειν τοὺς πορθμέας ἢ αὐτὸν διαχρᾶσθαί μιν , ὡς ἂν ταφῆς ἐν γῇ τύχῃ , ἢ ἐκπηδᾶν ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν τὴν ταχίστην ·
But the crew would not listen to him, and told him either to kill himself and so receive burial on land or else to jump into the sea at once.


1.24.4
149
ἀπειληθέντα δὴ τὸν Ἀρίονα ἐς ἀπορίην παραιτήσασθαι , ἐπειδή σφι οὕτω δοκέοι , περιιδεῖν αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ σκευῇ πάσῃ στάντα ἐν τοῖσι ἑδωλίοισι ἀεῖσαι ·
Abandoned to this extremity, Arion asked that, since they had made up their minds, they would let him stand on the half-deck in all his regalia and sing;


1.24.4
150
ἀείσας δὲ ὑπεδέκετο ἑωυτὸν κατεργάσασθαι .
and he promised that after he had sung he would do himself in.


1.24.5
151
καὶ τοῖσι ἐσελθεῖν γὰρ ἡδονὴν εἰ μέλλοιεν ἀκούσεσθαι τοῦ ἀρίστου ἀνθρώπων ἀοιδοῦ , ἀναχωρῆσαι ἐκ τῆς πρύμνης ἐς μέσην νέα .
The men, pleased at the thought of hearing the best singer in the world, drew away toward the waist of the vessel from the stern.


1.24.5
152
τὸν δὲ ἐνδύντα τε πᾶσαν τὴν σκευὴν καὶ λαβόντα τὴν κιθάρην , στάντα ἐν τοῖσι ἑδωλίοισι διεξελθεῖν νόμον τὸν ὄρθιον , τελευτῶντος δὲ τοῦ νόμου ῥῖψαί μιν ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν ἑωυτὸν ὡς εἶχε σὺν τῇ σκευῇ πάσῃ .
Arion, putting on all his regalia and taking his lyre, stood up on the half-deck and sang the “Stirring Song,” and when the song was finished he threw himself into the sea, as he was with all his regalia.


1.24.6
153
καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἀποπλέειν ἐς Κόρινθον , τὸν δὲ δελφῖνα λέγουσι ὑπολαβόντα ἐξενεῖκαι ἐπὶ Ταίναρον .
So the crew sailed away to Corinth;


1.24.6
154
ἀποβάντα δέ αὐτὸν χωρέειν ἐς Κόρινθον σὺν τῇ σκευῇ , καὶ ἀπικόμενον ἀπηγέεσθαι πᾶν τὸ γεγονός .
but a dolphin (so the story goes) took Arion on his back and bore him to Taenarus. Landing there, he went to Corinth in his regalia, and when he arrived, he related all that had happened.


1.24.7
155
Περίανδρον δὲ ὑπὸ ἀπιστίης Ἀρίονα μὲν ἐν φυλακῇ ἔχειν οὐδαμῇ μετιέντα , ἀνακῶς δὲ ἔχειν τῶν πορθμέων .
Periander, skeptical, kept him in confinement, letting him go nowhere, and waited for the sailors.


1.24.7
156
ὡς δὲ ἄρα παρεῖναι αὐτούς , κληθέντας ἱστορέεσθαι εἴ τι λέγοιεν περὶ Ἀρίονος .
When they arrived, they were summoned and asked what news they brought of Arion.


1.24.7
157
φαμένων δὲ ἐκείνων ὡς εἴη τε σῶς περὶ Ἰταλίην καί μιν εὖ πρήσσοντα λίποιεν ἐν Τάραντι , ἐπιφανῆναί σφι τὸν Ἀρίονα ὥσπερ ἔχων ἐξεπήδησε ·
While they were saying that he was safe in Italy and that they had left him flourishing at Tarentum, Arion appeared before them, just as he was when he jumped from the ship;


1.24.7
158
καὶ τοὺς ἐκπλαγέντας οὐκ ἔχειν ἔτι ἐλεγχομένους ἀρνέεσθαι .
astonished, they could no longer deny what was proved against them.


1.24.8
159
ταῦτα μέν νυν Κορίνθιοί τε καὶ Λέσβιοι λέγουσι , καὶ Ἀρίονος ἐστὶ ἀνάθημα χάλκεον οὐ μέγα ἐπὶ Ταινάρῳ , ἐπὶ δελφῖνος ἐπὲων ἄνθρωπος .
This is what the Corinthians and Lesbians say, and there is a little bronze memorial of Arion on Taenarus, the figure of a man riding upon a dolphin.


1.25.1
160
Ἀλυάττης δὲ ὁ Λυδὸς τὸν πρὸς Μιλησίους πόλεμον διενείκας μετέπειτα τελευτᾷ , βασιλεύσας ἔτεα ἑπτὰ καὶ πεντήκοντα .
Alyattes the Lydian, his war with the Milesians finished, died after a reign of fifty-seven years.


1.25.2
161
ἀνέθηκε δὲ ἐκφυγὼν τὴν νοῦσον δεύτερος οὗτος τῆς οἰκίης ταύτης ἐς Δελφοὺς κρητῆρά τε ἀργύρεον μέγαν καὶ ὑποκρητηρίδιον σιδήρεον κολλητόν , θέης ἄξιον διὰ πάντων τῶν ἐν Δελφοῖσι ἀναθημάτων , Γλαύκου τοῦ Χίου ποίημα , ὃς μοῦνος δὴ πάντων ἀνθρώπων σιδήρου κόλλησιν ἐξεῦρε .
He was the second of his family to make an offering to  Delphi Delphi    (after recovering from his illness) of a great silver bowl on a stand of welded iron. Among all the offerings at  Delphi Delphi   , this is the most worth seeing, and is the work of Glaucus the Chian, the only one of all men who discovered how to weld iron.


1.26.1
162
τελευτήσαντος δὲ Ἀλυάττεω ἐξεδέξατο τὴν βασιληίην Κροῖσος ὁ Ἀλυάττεω , ἐτέων ἐὼν ἡλικίην πέντε καὶ τριήκοντα ·
After the death of Alyattes, his son Croesus, then thirty-five years of age, came to the throne.


1.26.1
163
ὃς δὴ Ἑλλήνων πρώτοισι ἐπεθήκατο Ἐφεσίοισι .
The first Greeks whom he attacked were the Ephesians.


1.26.2
164
ἔνθα δὴ οἱ Ἐφέσιοι πολιορκεόμενοι ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ ἀνέθεσαν τὴν πόλιν τῇ Ἀρτέμιδι , ἐξάψαντες ἐκ τοῦ νηοῦ σχοινίον ἐς τὸ τεῖχος .
These, besieged by him, dedicated their city to Artemis;


1.26.2
165
ἔστι δὲ μεταξὺ τῆς τε παλαιῆς πόλιος , ἣ τότε ἐπολιορκέετο , καὶ τοῦ νηοῦ ἑπτὰ στάδιοι .
they did this by attaching a rope to the city wall from the temple of the goddess, which stood seven stades away from the ancient city which was then besieged.


1.26.3
166
πρώτοισι μὲν δὴ τούτοισι ἐπεχείρησε ὁ Κροῖσος , μετὰ δὲ ἐν μέρεϊ ἑκάστοισι Ἰώνων τε καὶ Αἰολέων , ἄλλοισι ἄλλας αἰτίας ἐπιφέρων , τῶν μὲν ἐδύνατο μέζονας παρευρίσκειν , μέζονα ἐπαιτιώμενος , τοῖσι δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ φαῦλα ἐπιφέρων .
These were the first whom Croesus attacked; afterwards he made war on the Ionian and Aeolian cities in turn, upon different pretexts: he found graver charges where he could, but sometimes alleged very petty grounds of offense.


1.27.1
167
ὡς δὲ ἄρα οἱ ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ Ἕλληνες κατεστράφατο ἐς φόρου ἀπαγωγήν , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν ἐπενόεε νέας ποιησάμενος ἐπιχειρέειν τοῖσι νησιώτῃσι .
Then, when he had subjugated all the Asiatic Greeks of the mainland and made them tributary to him, he planned to build ships and attack the islanders;


1.27.2
168
ἐόντων δέ οἱ πάντων ἑτοίμων ἐς τὴν ναυπηγίην , οἳ μὲν Βίαντα λέγουσι τὸν Πριηνέα ἀπικόμενον ἐς Σάρδις , οἳ δὲ Πιττακὸν τὸν Μυτιληναῖον , εἰρομένου Κροίσου εἴ τι εἴη νεώτερον περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , εἰπόντα τάδε καταπαῦσαι τὴν ναυπηγίην ·
but when his preparations for shipbuilding were underway, either Bias of  Priene Priene    or Pittacus of  Mytilene Mytilene    (the story is told of both) came to  Sardis Sardis    and, asked by Croesus for news about  Greece Hellas   , put an end to the shipbuilding by giving the following answer:


1.27.3
169
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , νησιῶται ἵππον συνωνέονται μυρίην , ἐς Σάρδις τε καὶ ἐπὶ σὲ ἐν νόῳ ἔχοντες στρατεύεσθαι " .
“O King, the islanders are buying ten thousand horse, intending to march to Sardis against you.”


1.27.3
170
Κροῖσον δὲ ἐλπίσαντα λέγειν ἐκεῖνον ἀληθέα εἰπεῖν " αἲ γὰρ τοῦτο θεοὶ ποιήσειαν ἐπὶ νόον νησιώτῃσι , ἐλθεῖν ἐπὶ Λυδῶν παῖδας σὺν ἵπποισι " .
Croesus, thinking that he spoke the truth, said: “Would that the gods would put this in the heads of the islanders, to come on horseback against the sons of the Lydians!”


1.27.4
171
τὸν δὲ ὑπολαβόντα φάναι " ὦ βασιλεῦ , προθύμως μοι φαίνεαι εὔξασθαι νησιώτας ἱππευομένους λαβεῖν ἐν ἠπείρῳ , οἰκότα ἐλπίζων .
“O King, you appear to me earnestly to wish to catch the islanders riding horses on the mainland, a natural wish.


1.27.4
172
νησιώτας δὲ τί δοκέεις εὔχεσθαι ἄλλο ἤ , ἐπείτε τάχιστα ἐπύθοντό σε μέλλοντα ἐπὶ σφίσι ναυπηγέεσθαι νέας , λαβεῖν ἀρώμενοι Λυδούς ἐν θαλάσσῃ , ἵνα ὓπερ τῶν ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ οἰκημένων Ἑλλήνων τίσωνταί σε , τοὺς σὺ δουλώσας ἔχεις " ;
And what else do you suppose the islanders wished, as soon as they heard that you were building ships to attack them, than to catch Lydians on the seas, so as to be revenged on you for the Greeks who dwell on the mainland, whom you enslaved?”


1.27.5
173
κάρτα τε ἡσθῆναι Κροῖσον τῷ ἐπιλόγῳ καί οἱ , προσφυέως γὰρ δόξαι λέγειν , πειθόμενον παύσασθαι τῆς ναυπηγίης .
Croesus was quite pleased with this conclusion, for he thought the man spoke reasonably and, heeding him, stopped building ships.


1.27.5
174
καὶ οὕτω τοῖσι τὰς νήσους οἰκημένοισι Ἴωσι ξεινίην συνεθήκατο .
Thus he made friends with the Ionians inhabiting the islands.


1.28.1
175
χρόνου δὲ ἐπιγινομένου καὶ κατεστραμμένων σχεδὸν πάντων τῶν ἐντὸς Ἅλυος ποταμοῦ οἰκημένων ·
As time went on, Croesus subjugated almost all the nations west of the Halys;


1.28.1
176
πλὴν γὰρ Κιλίκων καὶ Λυκίων τοὺς ἄλλους πάντας ὑπ’ ἑωυτῷ εἶχε καταστρεψάμενος ὁ Κροῖσος .
for except the Cilicians and Lycians, all the rest Croesus held subject under him.


1.28.1
177
εἰσὶ δὲ οἵδε , Λυδοί , Φρύγες , Μυσοί , Μαριανδυνοί , Χάλυβες , Παφλαγόνες , Θρήικες οἱ Θυνοί τε καὶ Βιθυνοί , Κᾶρες , Ἴωνες , Δωριέες , Αἰολέες , Πάμφυλοι κατεστραμμένων δὲ τούτων καὶ προσεπικτωμένου Κροίσου Λυδοῖσι ,
These were the Lydians, Phrygians, Mysians, Mariandynians, Chalybes, Paphlagonians, the Thracian Thynians and Bithynians, Carians, Ionians, Dorians, Aeolians, and Pamphylians.


1.29.1
178
ἀπικνέονται ἐς Σάρδις ἀκμαζούσας πλούτῳ ἄλλοι τε οἱ πάντες ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος σοφισταί , οἳ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ἐτύγχανον ἐόντες , ὡς ἕκαστος αὐτῶν ἀπικνέοιτο , καὶ δὴ καὶ Σόλων ἀνὴρ Ἀθηναῖος , ὃς Ἀθηναίοισι νόμους κελεύσασι ποιήσας ἀπεδήμησε ἔτεα δέκα κατά θεωρίης πρόφασιν ἐκπλώσας ,ἵνα δὴ μή τινα τῶν νόμων ἀναγκασθῇ , λῦσαι τῶν ἔθετο .
and after these were subdued and subject to Croesus in addition to the Lydians, all the sages from  Greece Hellas    who were living at that time, coming in different ways, came to  Sardis Sardis   , which was at the height of its property; and among them came Solon the Athenian, who, after making laws for the Athenians at their request, went abroad for ten years, sailing forth to see the world, he said. This he did so as not to be compelled to repeal any of the laws he had made,


1.29.2
179
αὐτοὶ γὰρ οὐκ οἷοί τε ἦσαν αὐτὸ ποιῆσαι Ἀθηναῖοι ·
Since the Athenians themselves could not do that,


1.29.2
180
ὁρκίοισι γὰρ μεγάλοισι κατείχοντο δέκα ἔτεα χρήσεσθαι νόμοισι τοὺς ἄν σφι Σόλων θῆται .
for they were bound by solemn oaths to abide for ten years by whatever laws Solon should make.


1.30.1
181
αὐτῶν δὴ ὦν τούτων καὶ τῆς θεωρίης ἐκδημήσας ὁ Σόλων εἵνεκεν ἐς Αἴγυπτον ἀπίκετο παρὰ Ἄμασιν καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐς Σάρδις παρὰ Κροῖσον .
So for that reason, and to see the world, Solon went to visit Amasis in Egypt and then to Croesus in Sardis.


1.30.1
182
ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐξεινίζετο ἐν τοῖσι βασιληίοισι ὑπὸ τοῦ Κροίσου ·
When he got there, Croesus entertained him in the palace,


1.30.1
183
μετὰ δὲ ἡμέρῃ τρίτῃ ἢ τετάρτῃ κελεύσαντος Κροίσου τὸν Σόλωνα θεράποντες περιῆγον κατὰ τοὺς θησαυρούς , καὶ ἐπεδείκνυσαν πάντα ἐόντα μεγάλα τε καὶ ὄλβια .
and on the third or fourth day Croesus told his attendants to show Solon around his treasures, and they pointed out all those things that were great and blest.


1.30.2
184
θεησάμενον δέ μιν τὰ πάντα καὶ σκεψάμενον ὥς οἱ κατὰ καιρὸν ἦν , εἴρετο ὁ Κροῖσος τάδε .
After Solon had seen everything and had thought about it, Croesus found the opportunity to say,


1.30.2
185
" ξεῖνε Ἀθηναῖε , παρ’ ἡμέας γὰρ περὶ σέο λόγος ἀπῖκται πολλὸς καὶ σοφίης εἵνεκεν τῆς σῆς καὶ πλάνης , ὡς φιλοσοφέων γῆν πολλὴν θεωρίης εἵνεκεν ἐπελήλυθας ·
“My Athenian guest, we have heard a lot about you because of your wisdom and of your wanderings, how as one who loves learning you have traveled much of the world for the sake of seeing it,


1.30.2
186
νῦν ὦν ἐπειρέσθαι με ἵμερος ἐπῆλθέ σε εἴ τινα ἤδη πάντων εἶδες ὀλβιώτατον " .
so now I desire to ask you who is the most fortunate man you have seen.”


1.30.3
187
ὃ μὲν ἐλπίζων εἶναι ἀνθρώπων ὀλβιώτατος ταῦτα ἐπειρώτα ·
Croesus asked this question believing that he was the most fortunate of men,


1.30.3
188
Σόλων δὲ οὐδὲν ὑποθωπεύσας ἀλλὰ τῷ ἐόντι χρησάμενος λέγει " ὦ βασιλεῦ , Τέλλον Ἀθηναῖον " .
but Solon, offering no flattery but keeping to the truth, said, “O King, it is Tellus the Athenian.”


1.30.4
189
ἀποθωμάσας δὲ Κροῖσος τὸ λεχθὲν εἴρετο ἐπιστρεφέως ·
Croesus was amazed at what he had said and replied sharply,


1.30.4
190
" κοίῃ δὴ κρίνεις Τέλλον εἶναι ὀλβιώτατον " ;
“In what way do you judge Tellus to be the most fortunate?”


1.30.4
191
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " Τέλλῳ τοῦτο μὲν τῆς πόλιος εὖ ἡκούσης παῖδες ἦσαν καλοί τε κ- ἀγαθοί , καί σφι εἶδε ἅπασι τέκνα ἐκγενόμενα καὶ πάντα παραμείναντα ·
Solon said, “Tellus was from a prosperous city, and his children were good and noble. He saw children born to them all, and all of these survived.


1.30.4
192
τοῦτο δὲ τοῦ βίου εὖ ἥκοντι , ὡς τὰ παρ’ ἡμῖν , τελευτὴ τοῦ βίου λαμπροτάτη ἐπεγένετο ·
His life was prosperous by our standards, and his death was most glorious:


1.30.5
193
γενομένης γὰρ Ἀθηναίοισι μάχης πρὸς τοὺς ἀστυγείτονας ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι , βοηθήσας καὶ τροπὴν ποιήσας τῶν πολεμίων ἀπέθανε κάλλιστα , καί μιν Ἀθηναῖοι δημοσίῃ τε ἔθαψαν αὐτοῦ τῇ περ ἔπεσε καὶ ἐτίμησαν μεγάλως " .
when the Athenians were fighting their neighbors in  Eleusis Eleusis   , he came to help, routed the enemy, and died very finely. The Athenians buried him at public expense on the spot where he fell and gave him much honor.”


1.31.1
194
ὣς δὲ τὰ κατὰ τὸν Τέλλον προετρέψατο ὁ Σόλων τὸν Κροῖσον εἴπας πολλά τε καὶ ὀλβία , ἐπειρώτα τίνα δεύτερον μετ’ ἐκεῖνον ἴδοι , δοκέων πάγχυ δευτερεῖα γῶν οἴσεσθαι .
When Solon had provoked him by saying that the affairs of Tellus were so fortunate, Croesus asked who he thought was next, fully expecting to win second prize.


1.31.1
195
ὃ δ’ εἶπε " Κλέοβίν τε καὶ Βίτωνα .
Solon answered, “Cleobis and Biton.


1.31.2
196
τούτοισι γὰρ ἐοῦσι γένος Ἀργείοισι βίος τε ἀρκέων ὑπῆν , καὶ πρὸς τούτῳ ῥώμη σώματος τοιήδε ·
They were of Argive stock, had enough to live on, and on top of this had great bodily strength.


1.31.2
197
ἀεθλοφόροι τε ἀμφότεροι ὁμοίως ἦσαν , καὶ δὴ καὶ λέγεται ὅδε ὁ λόγος .
Both had won prizes in the athletic contests, and this story is told about them:


1.31.2
198
ἐούσης ὁρτῆς τῇ Ἥρῃ τοῖσι Ἀργείοισι ἔδεε πάντως τὴν μητέρα αὐτῶν ζεύγεϊ κομισθῆναι ἐς τὸ ἱρόν , οἱ δέ σφι βόες ἐκ τοῦ ἀγροῦ οὐ παρεγίνοντο ἐν ὥρῃ ·
there was a festival of Hera in Argos, and their mother absolutely had to be conveyed to the temple by a team of oxen. But their oxen had not come back from the fields in time,


1.31.2
199
ἐκκληιόμενοι δὲ τῇ ὥρῃ οἱ νεηνίαι ὑποδύντες αὐτοὶ ὑπὸ τὴν ζεύγλην εἷλκον τὴν ἅμαξαν , ἐπὶ τῆς ἁμάξης δέ σφι ὠχέετο ἡ μήτηρ ·
so the youths took the yoke upon their own shoulders under constraint of time. They drew the wagon, with their mother riding atop it,


1.31.2
200
σταδίους δὲ πέντε καὶ τεσσεράκοντα διακομίσαντες ἀπίκοντο ἐς τὸ ἱρόν .
traveling five miles until they arrived at the temple.


1.31.3
201
ταῦτα δέ σφι ποιήσασι καὶ ὀφθεῖσι ὑπὸ τῆς πανηγύριος τελευτὴ τοῦ βίου ἀρίστη ἐπεγένετο , διέδεξέ τε ἐν τούτοισι ὁ θεὸς ὡς ἄμεινον εἴη ἀνθρώπῳ τεθνάναι μᾶλλον ἢ ζώειν .
When they had done this and had been seen by the entire gathering, their lives came to an excellent end, and in their case the god made clear that for human beings it is a better thing to die than to live.


1.31.3
202
Ἀργεῖοι μὲν γὰρ περιστάντες ἐμακάριζον τῶν νεηνιέων τὴν ῥώμην , αἱ δὲ Ἀργεῖαι τὴν μητέρα αὐτῶν , οἵων τέκνων ἐκύρησε ·
The Argive men stood around the youths and congratulated them on their strength; the Argive women congratulated their mother for having borne such children.


1.31.4
203
ἡ δὲ μήτηρ περιχαρής ἐοῦσα τῷ τε ἔργῳ καὶ τῇ φήμῃ , στᾶσα ἀντίον τοῦ ἀγάλματος εὔχετο Κλεόβι τε καὶ Βίτωνι τοῖσι ἑωυτῆς τέκνοισι , οἵ μιν ἐτίμησαν μεγάλως , τὴν θεὸν δοῦναι τὸ ἀνθρώπῳ τυχεῖν ἄριστον ἐστί .
She was overjoyed at the feat and at the praise, so she stood before the image and prayed that the goddess might grant the best thing for man to her children Cleobis and Biton, who had given great honor to the goddess.


1.31.5
204
μετὰ ταύτην δὲ τὴν εὐχὴν ὡς ἔθυσάν τε καὶ εὐωχήθησαν , κατακοιμηθέντες ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ ἱρῷ οἱ νεηνίαι οὐκέτι ἀνέστησαν ἀλλ’ ἐν τέλεϊ τούτῳ ἔσχοντο .
After this prayer they sacrificed and feasted.


1.31.5
205
Ἀργεῖοι δὲ σφέων εἰκόνας ποιησάμενοι ἀνέθεσαν ἐς Δελφοὺς ὡς ἀριστῶν γενομένων " .
The youths then lay down in the temple and went to sleep and never rose again; death held them there. The Argives made and dedicated at Delphi statues of them as being the best of men.


1.32.1
206
Σόλων μὲν δὴ εὐδαιμονίης δευτερεῖα ἔνεμε τούτοισι , Κροῖσος δὲ σπερχθεὶς εἶπε " ὦ ξεῖνε Ἀθηναῖε , ἡ δ’ ἡμετέρη εὐδαιμονίη οὕτω τοι ἀπέρριπται ἐς τὸ μηδὲν ὥστε οὐδὲ ἰδιωτέων ἀνδρῶν ἀξίους ἡμέας ἐποίησας " ;
Thus Solon granted second place in happiness to these men. Croesus was vexed and said,


1.32.1
207
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ὦ Κροῖσε , ἐπιστάμενόν με τὸ θεῖον πᾶν ἐὸν φθονερόν τε καὶ ταραχῶδες ἐπειρωτᾷς ἀνθρωπηίων πρηγμάτων πέρι .
“My Athenian guest, do you so much despise our happiness that you do not even make us worth as much as common men?” Solon replied, “Croesus, you ask me about human affairs, and I know that the divine is entirely grudging and troublesome to us.


1.32.2
208
ἐν γὰρ τῷ μακρῷ χρόνῳ πολλὰ μὲν ἐστὶ ἰδεῖν τὰ μή τις ἐθέλει , πολλὰ δὲ καὶ παθεῖν .
In a long span of time it is possible to see many things that you do not want to, and to suffer them, too.


1.32.2
209
ἐς γὰρ ἑβδομήκοντα ἔτεα οὖρον τῆς ζόης ἀνθρώπῳ προτίθημι .
I set the limit of a man's life at seventy years;


1.32.3
210
οὗτοι ἐόντες ἐνιαυτοὶ ἑβδομήκοντα παρέχονται ἡμέρας διηκοσίας καὶ πεντακισχιλίας καὶ δισμυρίας , ἐμβολίμου μηνὸς μὴ γινομένου ·
these seventy years have twenty-five thousand, two hundred days, leaving out the intercalary month.


1.32.3
211
εἰ δὲ δὴ ἐθελήσει τ- ἕτερον τῶν ἐτέων μηνὶ μακρότερον γίνεσθαι , ἵνα δὴ αἱ ὧραι συμβαίνωσι παραγινόμεναι ἐς τὸ δέον , μῆνες μὲν παρὰ τὰ ἑβδομήκοντα ἔτεα οἱ ἐμβόλιμοι γίνονται τριήκοντα πέντε , ἡμέραι δὲ ἐκ τῶν μηνῶν τούτων χίλιαι πεντήκοντα .
But if you make every other year longer by one month, so that the seasons agree opportunely, then there are thirty-five intercalary months during the seventy years, and from these months there are one thousand fifty days.


1.32.4
212
τουτέων τῶν ἁπασέων ἡμερέων τῶν ἐς τὰ ἑβδομήκοντα ἔτεα , ἐουσέων πεντήκοντα καὶ διηκοσιέων καὶ ἑξακισχιλιέων καὶ δισμυριέων , ἡ ἑτέρη αὐτέων τῇ ἑτέρῃ ἡμέρῃ τὸ παράπαν οὐδὲν ὅμοιον προσάγει πρῆγμα .
Out of all these days in the seventy years, all twenty-six thousand, two hundred and fifty of them, not one brings anything at all like another.


1.32.4
213
οὕτω ὦν Κροῖσε πᾶν ἐστὶ ἄνθρωπος συμφορή .
So, Croesus, man is entirely chance.


1.32.5
214
ἐμοὶ δὲ σὺ καὶ πλουτέειν μέγα φαίνεαι καὶ βασιλεὺς πολλῶν εἶναι ἀνθρώπων ·
To me you seem to be very rich and to be king of many people,


1.32.5
215
ἐκεῖνο δὲ τὸ εἴρεό με , οὔκω σε ἐγὼ λέγω , πρὶν τελευτήσαντα καλῶς τὸν αἰῶνα πύθωμαι .
but I cannot answer your question before I learn that you ended your life well.


1.32.5
216
οὐ γάρ τι ὁ μέγα πλούσιος μᾶλλον τοῦ ἐπ’ ἡμέρην ἔχοντος ὀλβιώτερος ἐστί , εἰ μή οἱ τύχη ἐπίσποιτο πάντα καλὰ ἔχοντα εὖ τελευτῆσαὶ τὸν βίον .
The very rich man is not more fortunate than the man who has only his daily needs, unless he chances to end his life with all well.


1.32.5
217
πολλοὶ μὲν γὰρ ζάπλουτοι ἀνθρώπων ἀνόλβιοι εἰσί , πολλοὶ δὲ μετρίως ἔχοντες βίου εὐτυχέες .
Many very rich men are unfortunate, many of moderate means are lucky.


1.32.6
218
ὁ μὲν δὴ μέγα πλούσιος ἀνόλβιος δὲ δυοῖσι προέχει τοῦ εὐτυχέος μοῦνον , οὗτος δὲ τοῦ πλουσίου καὶ ἀνόλβου πολλοῖσι ·
The man who is very rich but unfortunate surpasses the lucky man in only two ways,


1.32.6
219
ὃ μὲν ἐπιθυμίην ἐκτελέσαι καί ἄτην μεγάλην προσπεσοῦσαν ἐνεῖκαι δυνατώτερος , ὁ δὲ τοῖσιδε προέχει ἐκείνου ·
while the lucky surpasses the rich but unfortunate in many. The rich man is more capable of fulfilling his appetites and of bearing a great disaster that falls upon him, and it is in these ways that he surpasses the other.


1.32.6
220
ἄτην μὲν καὶ ἐπιθυμίην οὐκ ὁμοίως δυνατὸς ἐκείνῳ ἐνεῖκαι , ταῦτα δὲ ἡ εὐτυχίη οἱ ἀπερύκει , ἄπηρος δὲ ἐστί , ἄνουσος , ἀπαθὴς κακῶν , εὔπαις , εὐειδής .
The lucky man is not so able to support disaster or appetite as is the rich man, but his luck keeps these things away from him, and he is free from deformity and disease, has no experience of evils, and has fine children and good looks.


1.32.7
221
εἰ δὲ πρὸς τούτοισι ἔτι τελευτήσῃ τὸν βίον εὖ , οὗτος ἐκεῖνος τὸν σὺ ζητέεις , ὁ ὄλβιος κεκλῆσθαι ἄξιος ἐστί ·
If besides all this he ends his life well, then he is the one whom you seek, the one worthy to be called fortunate.


1.32.7
222
πρὶν δ’ ἂν τελευτήσῃ , ἐπισχεῖν , μηδὲ καλέειν κω ὄλβιον ἀλλ’ εὐτυχέα .
But refrain from calling him fortunate before he dies; call him lucky.


1.32.8
223
τὰ πάντα μέν νυν ταῦτα συλλαβεῖν ἄνθρωπον ἐόντα ἀδύνατον ἐστί , ὥσπερ χωρῇ οὐδεμία καταρκέει πάντα ἑωυτῇ παρέχουσα , ἀλλὰ ἄλλο μὲν ἔχει ἑτέρου δὲ ἐπιδέεται ·
It is impossible for one who is only human to obtain all these things at the same time,


1.32.8
224
ἣ δὲ ἂν τὰ πλεῖστα ἔχῃ , αὕτη ἀρίστη .
just as no land is self-sufficient in what it produces. Each country has one thing but lacks another; whichever has the most is the best.


1.32.8
225
ὣς δὲ καὶ ἀνθρώπου σῶμα ἓν οὐδὲν αὔταρκες ἐστί ·
Just so no human being is self-sufficient;


1.32.8
226
τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἔχει , ἄλλου δὲ ἐνδεές ἐστι ·
each person has one thing but lacks another.


1.32.9
227
ὃς δ’ ἂν αὐτῶν πλεῖστα ἔχων διατελέῃ καὶ ἔπειτα τελευτήσῃ εὐχαρίστως τὸν βίον , οὗτος παρ’ ἐμοὶ τὸ οὔνομα τοῦτο ὦ βασιλεῦ δίκαιος ἐστὶ φέρεσθαι .
Whoever passes through life with the most and then dies agreeably is the one who, in my opinion, O King, deserves to bear this name.


1.32.9
228
σκοπέειν δὲ χρὴ παντὸς χρήματος τὴν τελευτήν , κῇ ἀποβήσεται ·
It is necessary to see how the end of every affair turns out,


1.32.9
229
πολλοῖσι γὰρ δὴ ὑποδέξας ὄλβον ὁ θεὸς προρρίζους ἀνέτρεψε " .
for the god promises fortune to many people and then utterly ruins them.


1.33.1
230
ταῦτα λέγων τῷ Κροίσῳ οὔ κως οὔτε ἐχαρίζετο , οὔτε λόγου μιν ποιησάμενος οὐδενὸς ἀποπέμπεται , κάρτα δόξας ἀμαθέα εἶναι , ὃς τὰ παρεόντα ἀγαθὰ μετεὶς τὴν τελευτὴν παντὸς χρήματος ὁρᾶν ἐκέλευε .
By saying this, Solon did not at all please Croesus, who sent him away without regard for him, but thinking him a great fool, because he ignored the present good and told him to look to the end of every affair.


1.34.1
231
μετὰ δὲ Σόλωνα οἰχόμενον ἔλαβέ ἐκ θεοῦ νέμεσις μεγάλη Κροῖσον , ὡς εἰκάσαι , ὅτι ἐνόμισε ἑωυτὸν εἶναι ἀνθρώπων ἁπάντων ὀλβιώτατον .
But after Solon's departure divine retribution fell heavily on Croesus; as I guess, because he supposed himself to be blessed beyond all other men.


1.34.1
232
αὐτίκα δέ οἱ εὕδοντι ἐπέστη ὄνειρος , ὅς οἱ τὴν ἀληθείην ἔφαινε τῶν μελλόντων γενέσθαι κακῶν κατὰ τὸν παῖδα .
Directly, as he slept, he had a dream, which showed him the truth of the evil things which were going to happen concerning his son.


1.34.2
233
ἦσαν δὲ τῷ Κροίσῳ δύο παῖδες , τῶν οὕτερος μὲν διέφθαρτο , ἦν γὰρ δὴ κωφός , ὁ δὲ ἕτερος τῶν ἡλίκων μακρῷ τὰ πάντα πρῶτος ·
He had two sons, one of whom was ruined, for he was mute,


1.34.2
234
οὔνομα δέ οἱ ἦν Ἄτυς .
but the other, whose name was Atys, was by far the best in every way of all of his peers.


1.34.2
235
τοῦτον δὴ ὦν τὸν Ἄτυν σημαίνει τῷ Κροίσῳ ὁ ὄνειρος , ὡς ἀπολέει μιν αἰχμῇ σιδηρέῃ βληθέντα .
The dream showed this Atys to Croesus, how he would lose him struck and killed by a spear of iron.


1.34.3
236
ὃ δ’ ἐπείτε ἐξηγέρθη καὶ ἑωυτῷ λόγον ἔδωκε , καταρρωδήσας τὸν ὄνειρον ἄγεται μὲν τῷ παιδὶ γυναῖκα , ἐωθότα δὲ στρατηγέειν μιν τῶν Λυδῶν οὐδαμῇ ἔτι ἐπὶ τοιοῦτο πρῆγμα ἐξέπεμπε ·
So Croesus, after he awoke and considered, being frightened by the dream, brought in a wife for his son, and although Atys was accustomed to command the Lydian armies,


1.34.3
237
ἀκόντια δὲ καὶ δοράτια καὶ τά τοιαῦτα πάντα τοῖσι χρέωνται ἐς πόλεμον ἄνθρωποι , ἐκ τῶν ἀνδρεώνων ἐκκομίσας ἐς τοὺς θαλάμους συνένησε , μή τί οἱ κρεμάμενον τῷ παιδὶ ἐμπέσῃ .
Croesus now would not send him out on any such enterprise, while he took the javelins and spears and all such things that men use for war from the men's apartments and piled them in his store room, lest one should fall on his son from where it hung.


1.35.1
238
ἔχοντι δέ οἱ ἐν χερσὶ τοῦ παιδὸς τὸν γάμον , ἀπικνέεται ἐς τὰς Σάρδις ἀνὴρ συμφορῇ ἐχόμενος καὶ οὐ καθαρὸς χεῖρας , ἐὼν Φρὺξ μὲν γενεῇ , γένεος δὲ τοῦ βασιληίου .
Now while Croesus was occupied with the marriage of his son,


1.35.1
239
παρελθὼν δὲ οὗτος ἐς τὰ Κροίσου οἰκία κατὰ νόμους τοὺς ἐπιχωρίους καθαρσίου ἐδέετο κυρῆσαι , Κροῖσος δέ μιν ἐκάθηρε .
a Phrygian of the royal house came to Sardis, in great distress and with unclean hands. This man came to Croesus' house, and asked to be purified according to the custom of the country; so Croesus purified him.


1.35.2
240
ἔστι δὲ παραπλησίη ἡ κάθαρσις τοῖσι Λυδοῖσι καὶ τοῖσι Ἕλλησι .
The Lydians have the same manner of purification as the Greeks),


1.35.2
241
ἐπείτε δὲ τὰ νομιζόμενα ἐποίησε ὁ Κροῖσος , ἐπυνθάνετο ὁκόθεν τε καὶ τίς εἴη , λέγων τάδε ·
and when he had done everything customary, he asked the Phrygian where he came from and who he was:


1.35.3
242
" ὤνθρωπε , τίς τε ἐὼν καὶ κόθεν τῆς Φρυγίης ἥκων ἐπίστιός μοι ἐγένεο ;
“Friend,” he said, “who are you, and from what place in Phrygia do you come as my suppliant?


1.35.3
243
τίνα τε ἀνδρῶν ἢ γυναικῶν ἐφόνευσας " ;
And what man or woman have you killed?”


1.35.3
244
ὁ δὲ ἀμείβετο " ὦ βασιλεῦ , Γορδίεω μὲν τοῦ Μίδεω εἰμὶ παῖς , ὀνομάζομαι δὲ Ἄδρηστος , φονεύσας δὲ ἀδελφεὸν ἐμεωυτοῦ ἀέκων πάρειμι ἐξεληλαμένος τε ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ ἐστερημένος πάντων " .
“O King,” the man answered, “I am the son of Gordias the son of Midas, and my name is Adrastus; I killed my brother accidentally, and I come here banished by my father and deprived of all.”


1.35.4
245
Κροῖσος δέ μιν ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε ·
Croesus answered,


1.35.4
246
" ἀνδρῶν τε φίλων τυγχάνεις ἔκγονος ἐὼν καὶ ἐλήλυθας ἐς φίλους , ἔνθα ἀμηχανήσεις χρήματος οὐδενὸς μένων ἐν ἡμετέρου , συμφορήν τε ταύτην ὡς κουφότατα φέρων κερδανέεις πλεῖστον " .
“All of your family are my friends, and you have come to friends, where you shall lack nothing, staying in my house. As for your misfortune, bear it as lightly as possible and you will gain most.”


1.36.1
247
ὃ μὲν δὴ δίαιταν εἶχε ἐν Κροίσου .
So Adrastus lived in Croesus' house.


1.36.1
248
ἐν δὲ τῷ αὐτῷ χρόνῳ τούτῳ ἐν τῷ Μυσίῳ Ὀλύμπῳ ὑὸς χρῆμα γίνεται μέγα ·
About this same time a great monster of a boar appeared on the Mysian Olympus,


1.36.1
249
ὁρμώμενος δὲ οὗτος ἐκ τοῦ ὄρεος τούτου τὰ τῶν Μυσῶν ἔργα διαφθείρεσκε .
who would come off that mountain and ravage the fields of the Mysians.


1.36.1
250
πολλάκις δὲ οἱ Μυσοὶ ἐπ’ αὐτὸν ἐξελθόντες ποιέεσκον μὲν κακὸν οὐδέν , ἔπασχον δὲ πρὸς αὐτοῦ .
The Mysians had gone up against him often; but they never did him any harm but were hurt by him themselves.


1.36.2
251
τέλος δὲ ἀπικόμενοι παρὰ τὸν Κροῖσον τῶν Μυσῶν ἄγγελοι ἔλεγον τάδε .
At last they sent messengers to Croesus, with this message:


1.36.2
252
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , ὑὸς χρῆμα μέγιστον ἀνεφάνη ἡμῖν ἐν τῇ χώρῃ , ὃς τὰ ἔργα διαφθείρει .
“O King, a great monster of a boar has appeared in the land, who is destroying our fields;


1.36.2
253
τοῦτον προθυμεόμενοι ἑλεῖν οὐ δυνάμεθα .
for all our attempts, we cannot kill him;


1.36.2
254
νῦν ὦν προσδεόμεθά σευ τὸν παῖδα καὶ λογάδας νεηνίας καὶ κύνας συμπέμψαι ἡμῖν , ὡς ἄν μιν ἐξέλωμεν ἐκ τῆς χώρης " .
so now we ask you to send your son and chosen young men and dogs with us, so that we may drive him out of the country.”


1.36.3
255
οἳ μὲν δὴ τούτων ἐδέοντο , Κροῖσος δὲ μνημονεύων τοῦ ὀνείρου τὰ ἔπεα ἔλεγέ σφι τάδε .
Such was their request, but Croesus remembered the prophecy of his dream and answered them thus:


1.36.3
256
" παιδὸς μὲν πέρι τοῦ ἐμοῦ μὴ μνησθῆτε ἔτι ·
“Do not mention my son again:


1.36.3
257
οὐ γὰρ ἂν ὑμῖν συμπέμψαιμι ·
I will not send him with you.


1.36.3
258
νεόγαμός τε γὰρ ἐστὶ καὶ ταῦτά οἱ νῦν μέλει .
He is newly married, and that is his present concern.


1.36.3
259
Λυδῶν μέντοι λογάδας καὶ τὸ κυνηγέσιον πᾶν συμπέμψω , καὶ διακελεύσομαι τοῖσι ἰοῦσι εἶναι ὡς προθυμοτάτοισι συνεξελεῖν ὑμῖν τὸ θηρίον ἐκ τῆς χώρης " .
But I will send chosen Lydians, and all the huntsmen, and I will tell those who go to be as eager as possible to help you to drive the beast out of the country.”


1.37.1
260
ταῦτα ἀμείψατο ·
This was his answer, and the Mysians were satisfied with it.


1.37.1
261
ἀποχρεωμένων δὲ τούτοισι τῶν Μυσῶν , ἐπεσέρχεται ὁ τοῦ Κροίσου παῖς ἀκηκοὼς τῶν ἐδέοντο οἱ Μυσοί .
But the son of Croesus now entered, having heard what the Mysians had asked for;


1.37.1
262
οὐ φαμένου δὲ τοῦ Κροίσου τόν γε παῖδά σφι συμπέμψειν , λέγει πρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ νεηνίης τάδε .
and when Croesus refused to send his son with them, the young man said,


1.37.2
263
" ὦ πάτερ , τὰ κάλλιστα πρότερον κοτὲ καὶ γενναιότατα ἡμῖν ἦν ἔς τε πολέμους καὶ ἐς ἄγρας φοιτέοντας εὐδοκιμέειν ·
“Father, it was once thought very fine and noble for us to go to war and the chase and win renown;


1.37.2
264
νῦν δὲ ἀμφοτέρων με τούτων ἀποκληίσας ἔχεις , οὔτε τινὰ δειλίην μοι παριδὼν οὔτε ἀθυμίην νῦν τε τέοισί με χρὴ ὄμμασι ἔς τε ἀγορὴν καὶ ἐξ ἀγορῆς φοιτέοντα φαίνεσθαι ;
but now you have barred me from both of these, although you have seen neither cowardice nor lack of spirit in me. With what face can I now show myself whenever I go to and from the market-place?


1.37.3
265
κοῖος μέν τις τοῖσι πολιήτῃσι δόξω εἶναι , κοῖος δέ τις τῇ νεογάμῳ γυναικί ;
What will the men of the city think of me, and what my newly wedded wife?


1.37.3
266
κοίῳ δὲ ἐκείνη δόξει ἀνδρὶ συνοικέειν ;
With what kind of man will she think that she lives?


1.37.3
267
ἐμὲ ὦν σὺ ἢ μέτες ἰέναι ἐπὶ τὴν θήρην , ἢ λόγῳ ἀνάπεισον ὅκως μοι ἀμείνω ἐστὶ ταῦτα οὕτω ποιεόμενα " .
So either let me go to the hunt, or show me by reasoning that what you are doing is best for me.”


1.38.1
268
ἀμείβεται Κροῖσος τοῖσιδε .
Croesus answered,


1.38.1
269
" ὦ παῖ , οὔτε δειλίην οὔτε ἄλλο οὐδὲν ἄχαρι παριδών , τοι ποιέω ταῦτα , ἀλλά μοι ὄψις ὀνείρου ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ ἐπιστᾶσα ἔφη σε ὀλιγοχρόνιον ἔσεσθαι ·
“My son, I do this not because I have seen cowardice or anything unseemly in you, but the vision of a dream stood over me in my sleep, and told me that you would be short-lived,


1.38.1
270
ὑπὸ γὰρ αἰχμῆς σιδηρέης ἀπολέεσθαι .
for you would be killed by a spear of iron.


1.38.2
271
πρὸς ὧν τὴν ὄψιν ταύτην τόν τε γάμον τοι τοῦτον ἔσπευσα καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ παραλαμβανόμενα οὐκ ἀποπέμπω , φυλακὴν ἔχων , εἴ κως δυναίμην ἐπὶ τῆς ἐμῆς σε ζόης διακλέψαι .
It is because of that vision that I hurried your marriage and do not send you on any enterprise that I have in hand, but keep guard over you, so that perhaps I may rob death of you during my lifetime.


1.38.2
272
εἷς γὰρ μοι μοῦνος τυγχάνεις ἐὼν παῖς ·
You are my only son:


1.38.2
273
τὸν γὰρ δὴ ἕτερον διεφθαρμένον τὴν ἀκοὴν οὐκ εἶναί μοι λογίζομαι " .
for that other, since he is ruined, he doesn't exist for me.”


1.39.1
274
ἀμείβεται ὁ νεηνίης τοῖσιδε .
“Father,” the youth replied,


1.39.1
275
" συγγνώμη μὲν ὦ πάτερ τοι , ἰδόντι γε ὄψιν τοιαύτην , περὶ ἐμὲ φυλακὴν ἔχειν ·
“no one can blame you for keeping guard over me, when you have seen such a vision;


1.39.1
276
τὸ δὲ οὐ μανθάνεις ἀλλὰ λέληθέ σε τὸ ὄνειρον , ἐμέ τοί δίκαιον ἐστί φράζειν .
but it is my right to show you what you do not perceive, and why you mistake the meaning of the dream.


1.39.2
277
φής τοι τὸ ὄνειρον ὑπὸ αἰχμῆς σιδηρέης φάναι ἐμὲ τελευτήσειν .
You say that the dream told you that I should be killed by a spear of iron?


1.39.2
278
ὑὸς δὲ κοῖαι μὲν εἰσὶ χεῖρες , κοίη δὲ αἰχμὴ σιδηρέη τὴν σὺ φοβέαι ;
But has a boar hands? Has it that iron spear which you dread?


1.39.2
279
εἰ μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ ὀδόντος τοι εἶπε τελευτήσειν με , ἢ ἄλλου τευ ὅ τι τούτῳ ἔοικε , χρῆν δή σε ποιέειν τὰ ποιέεις ·
Had the dream said I should be killed by a tusk or some other thing proper to a boar, you would be right in acting as you act;


1.39.2
280
νῦν δὲ ὑπὸ αἰχμῆς .
but no, it was to be by a spear.


1.39.2
281
ἐπείτε ὦν οὐ πρὸς ἄνδρας ἡμῖν γίνεται ἡ μάχη , μέτες με " .
Therefore, since it is not against men that we are to fight, let me go.”


1.40.1
282
ἀμείβεται Κροῖσος " ὦ παῖ , ἔστι τῇ με νικᾷς γνώμην ἀποφαίνων περὶ τοῦ ἐνυπνίου .
Croesus answered,


1.40.1
283
ὡς ὦν νενικημένος ὑπὸ σέο μεταγινώσκω , μετίημί τε σὲ ἰέναι ἐπὶ τὴν ἄγρην " .
“My son, your judgment concerning the dream has somewhat reassured me; and being reassured by you, I change my thinking and permit you to go to the chase.”


1.41.1
284
εἴπας δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Κροῖσος μεταπέμπεται τὸν Φρύγα Ἄδρηστον , ἀπικομένῳ δέ οἱ λέγει τάδε .
Having said this, Croesus sent for Adrastus the Phrygian and when he came addressed him thus:


1.41.1
285
" Ἄδρηστε , ἐγώ σε συμφορῇ , πεπληγμένον ἀχάρι , τήν τοι οὐκ ὀνειδίζω , ἐκάθηρα καὶ οἰκίοισι ὑποδεξάμενος ἔχω , παρέχων πᾶσαν δαπάνην .
“Adrastus, when you were struck by ugly misfortune, for which I do not blame you, it was I who cleansed you, and received and still keep you in my house, defraying all your keep.


1.41.2
286
νῦν ὤν ( ὀφείλεις γὰρ ἐμοῦ προποιήσαντος χρηστὰ ἐς σὲ χρηστοῖσί με ἀμείβεσθαι ) φύλακα παιδός σε τοῦ ἐμοῦ χρηίζω γενέσθαι ἐς ἄγρην ὁρμωμένου , μή τινες κατ’ ὁδὸν κλῶπες κακοῦργοι ἐπὶ δηλήσι φανέωσι ὑμῖν .
Now then, as you owe me a return of good service for the good which I have done you, I ask that you watch over my son as he goes out to the chase. See that no thieving criminals meet you on the way, to do you harm.


1.41.3
287
πρὸς δὲ τούτῳ καὶ σέ τοι χρεόν ἐστι ἰέναι ἔνθα ἀπολαμπρυνέαι τοῖσι χρεόν πατρώιόν τε γάρ τοι ἐστὶ καὶ προσέτι ῥώμη ὑπάρχει " .
Besides, it is only right that you too should go where you can win renown by your deeds. That is fitting for your father's son; and you are strong enough besides.”


1.42.1
288
ἀμείβεται ὁ Ἄδρηστος " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἄλλως μὲν ἔγωγε ἂν οὐκ ἤια ἐς ἄεθλον τοιόνδε ·
Adrastus answered,


1.42.1
289
οὔτε γὰρ συμφορῇ τοιῇδε κεχρημένον οἰκός ἐστι ἐς ὁμήλικας εὖ πρήσσοντας ἰέναι , οὔτε τὸ βούλεσθαι πάρα , πολλαχῇ τε ἂν ἶσχον ἐμεωυτόν .
“O King, I would not otherwise have gone into such an arena. One so unfortunate as I should not associate with the prosperous among his peers; nor have I the wish so to do, and for many reasons I would have held back.


1.42.2
290
νῦν δέ , ἐπείτε σὺ σπεύδεις καὶ δεῖ τοί χαρίζεσθαι , ( ὀφείλω γάρ σε ἀμείβεσθαι χρηστοῖσι ) , ποιέειν εἰμὶ ἕτοιμος ταῦτα , παῖδα τε σόν , τὸν διακελεύεαι φυλάσσειν , ἀπήμονα τοῦ φυλάσσοντος εἵνεκεν προσδόκα τοι ἀπονοστήσειν " .
But now, since you urge it and I must please you (since I owe you a return of good service), I am ready to do this; and as for your son, in so far as I can protect him, look for him to come back unharmed.”


1.43.1
291
τοιούτοισι ἐπείτε οὗτος ἀμείψατο Κροῖσον , ἤισαν μετὰ ταῦτα ἐξηρτυμένοι λογάσι τε νεηνίῃσι καὶ κυσί .
So when Adrastus had answered Croesus thus, they went out provided with chosen young men and dogs.


1.43.1
292
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ ἐς τὸν Ὄλυμπον τὸ ὄρος ἐζήτεον τὸ θηρίον , εὑρόντες δὲ καὶ περιστάντες αὐτὸ κύκλῳ ἐσηκόντιζον .
When they came to Mount Olympus, they hunted for the beast and, finding him, formed a circle and threw their spears at him:


1.43.2
293
ἔνθα δὴ ὁ ξεῖνος , οὗτος δὴ ὁ καθαρθεὶς τὸν φόνον , καλεόμενος δὲ Ἄδρηστος , ἀκοντίζων τὸν ὗν τοῦ μὲν ἁμαρτάνει , τυγχάνει δὲ τοῦ Κροίσου παιδός .
then the guest called Adrastus, the man who had been cleansed of the deed of blood, missed the boar with his spear and hit the son of Croesus.


1.43.3
294
ὃ μὲν δὴ βληθεὶς τῇ αἰχμῇ ἐξέπλησε τοῦ ὀνείρου τὴν φήμην , ἔθεε δέ τις ἀγγελέων τῷ Κροίσῳ τὸ γεγονός , ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐς τὰς Σάρδις τὴν τε μάχην καὶ τὸν τοῦ παιδὸς μόρον ἐσήμηνέ οἱ .
So Atys was struck by the spear and fulfilled the prophecy of the dream. One ran to tell Croesus what had happened, and coming to  Sardis Sardis    told the king of the fight and the fate of his son.


1.44.1
295
ὁ δὲ Κροῖσος τῳ θανάτῳ τοῦ παιδὸς συντεταραγμένος μᾶλλον τι ἐδεινολογέετο ὅτι μιν ἀπέκτεινε τὸν αὐτὸς φόνου ἐκάθηρε ·
Distraught by the death of his son, Croesus cried out the more vehemently because the killer was one whom he himself had cleansed of blood,


1.44.2
296
περιημεκτέων δὲ τῇ συμφορῇ δεινῶς ἐκάλεε μὲν Δία καθάρσιον μαρτυρόμενος τὰ ὑπὸ τοῦ ξείνου πεπονθὼς εἴη ἐκάλεε δὲ ἐπίστιόν τε καὶ ἑταιρήιον , τὸν αὐτὸν τοῦτον ὀνομάζων θεόν , τὸν μὲν ἐπίστιον καλέων , διότι δὴ οἰκίοισι ὑποδεξάμενος τὸν ξεῖνον φονέα τοῦ παιδὸς ἐλάνθανε βόσκων , τὸν δὲ ἑταιρήιον , ὡς φύλακα συμπέμψας αὐτὸν εὑρήκοι πολεμιώτατον .
and in his great and terrible grief at this mischance he called on Zeus by three names — Zeus the Purifier, Zeus of the Hearth, Zeus of Comrades: the first, because he wanted the god to know what evil his guest had done him; the second, because he had received the guest into his house and thus unwittingly entertained the murderer of his son; and the third, because he had found his worst enemy in the man whom he had sent as a protector.


1.45.1
297
παρῆσαν δὲ μετὰ τοῦτο οἱ Λυδοὶ φέροντες τὸν νεκρόν , ὄπισθε δὲ εἵπετό οἱ ὁ φονεύς .
Soon the Lydians came, bearing the corpse, with the murderer following after.


1.45.1
298
στὰς δὲ οὗτος πρὸ τοῦ νεκροῦ παρεδίδου ἑωυτὸν Κροίσῳ προτείνων τὰς χεῖρας , ἐπικατασφάξαι μιν κελεύων τῷ νεκρῷ , λέγων τήν τε προτέρην ἑωυτοῦ συμφορήν , καὶ ὡς ἐπ’ ἐκείνῃ τὸν καθήραντα ἀπολωλεκὼς εἴη , οὐδέ οἱ εἴη βιώσιμον .
He then came and stood before the body and gave himself up to Croesus, holding out his hands and telling him to kill him over the corpse, mentioning his former misfortune, and that on top of that he had destroyed the one who purified him, and that he was not fit to live.


1.45.2
299
Κροῖσος δὲ τούτων ἀκούσας τόν τε Ἄδρηστον κατοικτείρει , καίπερ ἐὼν ἐν κακῷ οἰκηίῳ τοσούτῳ καὶ λέγει πρὸς αὐτόν " ἔχω ὦ ξεῖνε παρὰ σεῦ πᾶσαν τὴν δίκην , ἐπειδὴ σεωυτοῦ καταδικάζεις θάνατον .
On hearing this, Croesus took pity on Adrastus, though his own sorrow was so great, and said to him,


1.45.2
300
εἶς δὲ οὐ σύ μοι τοῦδε τοῦ κακοῦ αἴτιος , εἰ μὴ ὅσον ἀέκων ἐξεργάσαο , ἀλλὰ θεῶν κού τις , ὅς μοι καὶ πάλαι προεσήμαινε τὰ μέλλοντα ἔσεσθαι " .
“Friend, I have from you the entire penalty, since you sentence yourself to death. But it is not you that I hold the cause of this evil, except in so far as you were the unwilling doer of it, but one of the gods, the same one who told me long ago what was to be.”


1.45.3
301
Κροῖσος μέν νυν ἔθαψε ὡς οἰκὸς ἦν τὸν ἑωυτοῦ παῖδα ·
So Croesus buried his own son in such manner as was fitting.


1.45.3
302
Ἄδρηστος δὲ ὁ Γορδίεω τοῦ Μίδεω , οὗτος δὴ ὁ φονεὺς μὲν τοῦ ἑωυτοῦ ἀδελφεοῦ γενόμενος φονεὺς δὲ τοῦ καθήραντος , ἐπείτε ἡσυχίη τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐγένετο περὶ τὸ σῆμα , συγγινωσκόμενος ἀνθρώπων εἶναι τῶν αὐτὸς ᾔδεε βαρυσυμφορώτατος , ἐπικατασφάζει τῷ τύμβῳ ἑωυτόν .
But Adrastus, son of Gordias who was son of Midas, this Adrastus, the destroyer of his own brother and of the man who purified him, when the tomb was undisturbed by the presence of men, killed himself there by the sepulcher, seeing clearly now that he was the most heavily afflicted of all whom he knew.


1.46.1
303
Κροῖσος δὲ ἐπὶ δύο ἔτεα ἐν πένθεϊ μεγάλῳ κατῆστο τοῦ παιδὸς ἐστερημένος .
After the loss of his son, Croesus remained in deep sorrow for two years.


1.46.1
304
μετὰ δὲ ἡ Ἀστυάγεος τοῦ Κυαξάρεω ἡγεμονίη καταιρεθεῖσα ὑπὸ Κύρου τοῦ Καμβύσεω καὶ τὰ τῶν Περσέων πρήγματα αὐξανόμενα πένθεος μὲν Κροῖσον ἀπέπαυσε , ἐνέβησε δὲ ἐς φροντίδα , εἴ κως δύναιτο , πρὶν μεγάλους γενέσθαι τοὺς Πέρσας , καταλαβεῖν αὐτῶν αὐξανομένην τὴν δύναμιν .
After this time, the destruction by Cyrus son of Cambyses of the sovereignty of Astyages son of Cyaxares, and the growth of the power of the Persians, distracted Croesus from his mourning; and he determined, if he could, to forestall the increase of the Persian power before they became great.


1.46.2
305
μετὰ ὦν τὴν διάνοιαν ταύτην αὐτίκα ἀπεπειρᾶτο τῶν μαντείων τῶν τε ἐν Ἕλλησι καὶ τοῦ ἐν Λιβύῃ , διαπέμψας ἄλλους ἄλλῃ , τοὺς μὲν ἐς Δελφοὺς ἰέναι , τοὺς δὲ ἐς Ἄβας τὰς Φωκέων , τοὺς δὲ ἐς Δωδώνην ·
Having thus determined, he at once made inquiries of the Greek and Libyan oracles, sending messengers separately to Delphi, to Abai in Phocia, and to Dodona;


1.46.2
306
οἳ δὲ τινὲς ἐπέμποντο παρὰ τε Ἀμφιάρεων καὶ παρὰ Τροφώνιον , οἳ δὲ τῆς Μιλησίης ἐς Βραγχίδας .
while others were despatched to Amphiaraus and Trophonius, and others to Didyma Branchidae in the Milesian country.


1.46.3
307
ταῦτα μέν νυν τὰ Ἑλληνικὰ μαντήια ἐς τὰ ἀπέπεμψε μαντευσόμενος Κροῖσος ·
These are the Greek oracles to which Croesus sent for divination:


1.46.3
308
Λιβύης δὲ παρὰ Ἄμμωνα ἀπέστελλε ἄλλους χρησομένους .
and he told others to go inquire of Ammon in Libya.


1.46.3
309
διέπεμπε δὲ πειρώμενος τῶν μαντηίων ὅ τι φρονέοιεν , ὡς εἰ φρονέοντα τὴν ἀληθείην εὑρεθείη , ἐπείρηται σφέα δεύτερα πέμπων εἰ ἐπιχειρέοι ἐπὶ Πέρσας στρατεύεσθαι .
His intent in sending was to test the knowledge of the oracles, so that, if they were found to know the truth, he might send again and ask if he should undertake an expedition against the Persians.


1.47.1
310
ἐντειλάμενος δὲ τοῖσι Λυδοῖσι τάδε ἀπέπεμπε ἐς τὴν διάπειραν τῶν χρηστηρίων , ἀπ’ ἧς ἂν ἡμέρης ὁρμηθέωσι ἐκ Σαρδίων , ἀπὸ ταύτης ἡμερολογέοντας τὸν λοιπὸν χρόνον ἑκατοστῇ ἡμέρῃ χρᾶσθαι τοῖσι χρηστηρίοισι , ἐπειρωτῶντας ὅ τι ποιέων τυγχάνοι ὁ Λυδῶν βασιλεὺς Κροῖσος ὁ Ἀλυάττεω ·
And when he sent to test these shrines he gave the Lydians these instructions:


1.47.1
311
ἅσσα δ’ ἂν ἕκαστα τῶν χρηστηρίων θεσπίσῃ , συγγραψαμένους ἀναφέρειν παρ’ ἑωυτόν .
they were to keep track of the time from the day they left Sardis, and on the hundredth day inquire of the oracles what Croesus, king of Lydia, son of Alyattes, was doing then; then they were to write down whatever the oracles answered and bring the reports back to him.


1.47.2
312
ὅ τι μέν νυν τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν χρηστηρίων ἐθέσπισε , οὐ λέγεται πρὸς οὐδαμῶν ·
Now none relate what answer was given by the rest of the oracles.


1.47.2
313
ἐν δὲ Δελφοῖσι ὡς ἐσῆλθον τάχιστα ἐς τὸ μέγαρον οἱ Λυδοὶ χρησόμενοι τῷ θεῷ καὶ ἐπειρώτων τὸ ἐντεταλμένον , ἡ Πυθίη ἐν ἑξαμέτρῳ τόνῳ λέγει τάδε .
But at Delphi, no sooner had the Lydians entered the hall to inquire of the god and asked the question with which they were entrusted, than the Pythian priestess uttered the following hexameter verses:


1.47.3
314
οἶδα δ’ ἐγὼ ψάμμου τ’ ἀριθμὸν καὶ μέτρα θαλάσσης , καὶ κωφοῦ συνίημι , καὶ οὐ φωνεῦντος ἀκούω .
"I know the number of the grains of sand and the extent of the sea, And understand the mute and hear the voiceless.


1.47.3
315
ὀδμή μ’ ἐς φρένας ἦλθε κραταιρίνοιο χελώνης ἑψομένης ἐν χαλκῷ ἅμ’ ἀρνείοισι κρέεσσιν , ᾗ χαλκὸς μὲν ὑπέστρωται , χαλκὸν δ’ ἐπιέσται .
The smell has come to my senses of a strong-shelled tortoise Boiling in a cauldron together with a lamb's flesh, Under which is bronze and over which is bronze."


1.48.1
316
ταῦτα οἱ Λυδοὶ θεσπισάσης τῆς Πυθίης συγγραψάμενοι οἴχοντο ἀπιόντες ἐς τὰς Σάρδις .
Having written down this inspired utterance of the Pythian priestess, the Lydians went back to Sardis.


1.48.1
317
ὡς δὲ καὶ ὧλλοι οἱ περιπεμφθέντες παρῆσαν φέροντες τοὺς χρησμούς , ἐνθαῦτα ὁ Κροῖσος ἕκαστα ἀναπτύσσων ἐπώρα τῶν συγγραμμάτων , τῶν μὲν δὴ οὐδὲν προσίετό μιν ·
When the others as well who had been sent to various places came bringing their oracles, Croesus then unfolded and examined all the writings.


1.48.1
318
ὁ δὲ ὡς τὸ ἐκ Δελφῶν ἤκουσε , αὐτίκα προσεύχετό τε καὶ προσεδέξατο , νομίσας μοῦνον εἶναι μαντήιον τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖσι , ὅτι οἱ ἐξευρήκεε τὰ αὐτὸς ἐποίησε .
Some of them in no way satisfied him. But when he read the Delphian message, he acknowledged it with worship and welcome, considering Delphi as the only true place of divination, because it had discovered what he himself had done.


1.48.2
319
ἐπείτε γὰρ δὴ διέπεμψε παρὰ τὰ χρηστήρια τοὺς θεοπρόπους , φυλάξας τὴν κυρίην τῶν ἡμερέων ἐμηχανᾶτο τοιάδε ·
For after sending his envoys to the oracles, he had thought up something which no conjecture could discover, and carried it out on the appointed day:


1.48.2
320
ἐπινοήσας τὰ ἦν ἀμήχανον ἐξευρεῖν τε καὶ ἐπιφράσασθαι , χελώνην καὶ ἄρνα κατακόψας ὁμοῦ ἧψε αὐτὸς ἐν λέβητι χαλκέῳ , χάλκεον ἐπίθημα ἐπιθείς .
namely, he had cut up a tortoise and a lamb, and then boiled them in a cauldron of bronze covered with a lid of the same.


1.49.1
321
τὰ μὲν δὴ ἐκ Δελφῶν οὕτω τῷ , Κροίσῳ ἐχρήσθη ·
Such, then, was the answer from Delphi delivered to Croesus.


1.49.1
322
κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἀμφιάρεω τοῦ μαντηίου ὑπόκρισιν , οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν ὅ τι τοῖσι Λυδοῖσι ἔχρησε ποιήσασι περὶ τὸ ἱρὸν τὰ νομιζόμενα ( οὐ γὰρ ὦν οὐδὲ τοῦτο λέγεται ) , ἄλλο γε ἢ ὅτι καὶ τοῦτο ἐνόμισε μαντήιον ἀψευδὲς ἐκτῆσθαι .
As to the reply which the Lydians received from the oracle of Amphiaraus when they had followed the due custom of the temple, I cannot say what it was, for nothing is recorded of it, except that Croesus believed that from this oracle too he had obtained a true answer.


1.50.1
323
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα θυσίῃσι μεγάλῃσι τὸν ἐν Δελφοῖσι θεὸν ἱλάσκετο ·
After this, he tried to win the favor of the Delphian god with great sacrifices.


1.50.1
324
κτήνεά τε γὰρ τὰ θύσιμα πάντα τρισχίλια ἔθυσε , κλίνας τε ἐπιχρύσους καὶ ἐπαργύρους καὶ φιάλας χρυσέας καὶ εἵματα πορφύρεα καὶ κιθῶνας , νήσας πυρὴν μεγάλην , κατέκαιε , ἐλπίζων τὸν θεὸν μᾶλλον τι τούτοισι ἀνακτήσεσθαι ·
He offered up three thousand beasts from all the kinds fit for sacrifice, and on a great pyre burnt couches covered with gold and silver, golden goblets, and purple cloaks and tunics; by these means he hoped the better to win the aid of the god.


1.50.1
325
Λυδοῖσι τε πᾶσι προεῖπε θύειν πάντα τινὰ αὐτῶν τούτῳ ὅ τι ἔχοι ἕκαστος .
He also commandeded that every Lydian sacrifice to this god everything whatever each could.


1.50.2
326
ὡς δὲ ἐκ τῆς θυσίης ἐγένετο , καταχεάμενος χρυσὸν ἄπλετον ἡμιπλίνθια ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἐξήλαυνε , ἐπὶ μὰν τὰ μακρότερα ποιέων ἑξαπάλαιστα , ἐπὶ δὲ τὰ βραχύτερα τριπάλαιστα , ὕψος δὲ παλαιστιαῖα .
When the sacrifice was over, he melted down a vast store of gold and made ingots of it, the longer sides of which were of six and the shorter of three palms' length, and the height was one palm.


1.50.2
327
ἀριθμὸν δὲ ἑπτακαίδεκα καὶ ἑκατόν , καὶ τούτων ἀπέφθου χρυσοῦ τέσσερα , τρίτον ἡμιτάλαντον ἕκαστον ἕλκοντα , τὰ δὲ ἄλλα ἡμιπλίνθια λευκοῦ χρυσοῦ , σταθμὸν διτάλαντα .
There were a hundred and seventeen of these. Four of them were of refined gold, each weighing two talents and a half; the rest were of gold with silver alloy, each of two talents' weight.


1.50.3
328
ἐποιέετο δὲ καὶ λέοντος εἰκόνα χρυσοῦ ἀπέφθου ἕλκουσαν σταθμὸν τάλαντα δέκα .
He also had a figure of a lion made of refined gold, weighing ten talents.


1.50.3
329
οὗτος ὁ λέων , ἐπείτε κατεκαίετο ὁ ἐν Δελφοῖσι νηός , κατέπεσε ἀπὸ τῶν ἡμιπλινθίων ( ἐπὶ γὰρ τούτοισι ἵδρυτο ) , καὶ νῦν κεῖται ἐν τῷ Κορινθίων θησαυρῷ , ἕλκων σταθμὸν ἕβδομον ἡμιτάλαντον ·
When the temple of Delphi was burnt, this lion fell from the ingots which were the base on which it stood; and now it is in the treasury of the Corinthians, but weighs only six talents and a half,


1.50.3
330
ἀπετάκη γὰρ αὐτοῦ τέταρτον ἡμιτάλαντον .
for the fire melted away three and a half talents.


1.51.1
331
ἐπιτελέσας δὲ ὁ Κροῖσος ταῦτα ἀπέπεμπε ἐς Δελφούς , καὶ τάδε ἄλλα ἅμα τοῖσι , κρητῆρας δύο μεγάθεϊ μεγάλους , χρύσεον καὶ ἀργύρεον , τῶν ὁ μὲν χρύσεος ἔκειτο ἐπὶ δεξιὰ ἐσιόντι ἐς τὸν νηόν , ὁ δὲ ἀργύρεος ἐπ’ ἀριστερά .
When these offerings were ready, Croesus sent them to  Delphi Delphi   , with other gifts besides: namely, two very large bowls, one of gold and one of silver. The golden bowl stood to the right, the silver to the left of the temple entrance.


1.51.2
332
μετεκινήθησαν δὲ καὶ οὗτοι ὑπὸ τὸν νηὸν κατακαέντα καὶ ὁ μὲν χρύσεος κεῖται ἐν τῷ Κλαζομενίων θησαυρῷ , ἕλκων σταθμὸν εἴνατον ἡμιτάλαντον καὶ ἔτι δυώδεκα μνέας , ὁ δὲ ἀργύρεος ἐπὶ τοῦ προνηίου τῆς γωνίης , χωρέων ἀμφορέας ἑξακοσίους ·
These too were removed about the time of the temple's burning, and now the golden bowl, which weighs eight and a half talents and twelve minae, is in the treasury of the Clazomenians, and the silver bowl at the corner of the forecourt of the temple.


1.51.2
333
ἐπικίρναται γὰρ ὑπὸ Δελφῶν Θεοφανίοισι .
This bowl holds six hundred nine-gallon measures: for the Delphians use it for a mixing-bowl at the feast of the Divine Appearance.


1.51.3
334
φασὶ δὲ μιν Δελφοὶ Θεοδώρου τοῦ Σαμίου ἔργον εἶναι , καὶ ἐγὼ δοκέω ·
It is said by the Delphians to be the work of Theodorus of Samos, and I agree with them,


1.51.3
335
οὐ γὰρ τὸ συντυχὸν φαίνεταί μοι ἔργον εἶναι .
for it seems to me to be of no common workmanship.


1.51.3
336
καὶ πίθους τε ἀργυρέους τέσσερας ἀπέπεμψε , οἳ ἐν τῷ Κορινθίων θησαυρῷ ἑστᾶσι , καὶ περιρραντήρια δύο ἀνέθηκε , χρύσεόν τε καὶ ἀργύρεον , τῶν τῷ χρυσέῳ ἐπιγέγραπται Λακεδαιμονίων φαμένων εἶναι ἀνάθημα , οὐκ ὀρθῶς λέγοντες ·
Moreover, Croesus sent four silver casks, which stand in the treasury of the Corinthians, and dedicated two sprinkling-vessels, one of gold, one of silver. The golden vessel bears the inscription “Given by the Lacedaemonians,” who claim it as their offering. But they are wrong,


1.51.4
337
ἔστι γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο Κροίσου , ἐπέγραψε δὲ τῶν τις Δελφῶν Λακεδαιμονίοισι βουλόμενος χαρίζεσθαι , τοῦ ἐπιστάμενος τὸ οὔνομα οὐκ ἐπιμνήσομαι .
for this, too, is Croesus' gift. The inscription was made by a certain Delphian, whose name I know but do not mention, out of his desire to please the Lacedaemonians.


1.51.4
338
ἀλλ’ ὁ μὲν παῖς , δι’ οὗ τῆς χειρὸς ῥέει τὸ ὕδωρ , Λακεδαιμονίων ἐστί , οὐ μέντοι τῶν γε περιρραντηρίων οὐδέτερον .
The figure of a boy, through whose hand the water runs, is indeed a Lacedaemonian gift; but they did not give either of the sprinkling-vessels.


1.51.5
339
ἄλλα τε ἀναθήματα οὐκ ἐπίσημα πολλὰ ἀπέπεμψε ἅμα τούτοισι ὁ Κροῖσος , καὶ χεύματα ἀργύρεα κυκλοτερέα , καὶ δὴ καὶ γυναικὸς εἴδωλον χρύσεον τρίπηχυ , τὸ Δελφοὶ τῆς ἀρτοκόπου τῆς Κροίσου εἰκόνα λέγουσι εἶναι .
Along with these Croesus sent, besides many other offerings of no great distinction, certain round basins of silver, and a female figure five feet high, which the Delphians assert to be the statue of the woman who was Croesus' baker.


1.51.5
340
πρὸς δὲ καὶ τῆς ἑωυτοῦ γυναικὸς τὰ ἀπὸ τῆς δειρῆς ἀνέθηκε ὁ Κροῖσος καὶ τὰς ζώνας .
Moreover, he dedicated his own wife's necklaces and girdles.


1.52.1
341
ταῦτα μὲν ἐς Δελφοὺς ἀπέπεμψε , τῷ δὲ Ἀμφιάρεῳ , πυθόμενος αὐτοῦ τήν τε ἀρετὴν καὶ τὴν πάθην , ἀνέθηκε σάκος τε χρύσεον πᾶν ὁμοίως καὶ αἰχμὴν στερεὴν πᾶσαν χρυσέην , τὸ ξυστὸν τῇσι λόγχῃσι ἐὸν ὁμοίως χρύσεον ·
Such were the gifts which he sent to Delphi.


1.52.1
342
τὰ ἔτι καὶ ἀμφότερα ἐς ἐμὲ ἦν κείμενα ἐν Θήβῃσι καὶ Θηβέων ἐν τῳ νηῷ τοῦ Ἰσμηνίου Ἀπόλλωνος .
To Amphiaraus, of whose courage and fate he had heard, he dedicated a shield made entirely of gold and a spear all of solid gold, point and shaft alike. Both of these were until my time at Thebes, in the Theban temple of Ismenian Apollo.


1.53.1
343
τοῖσι δὲ ἄγειν μέλλουσι τῶν Λυδῶν ταῦτα τὰ δῶρα ἐς τὰ ἱρὰ ἐνετέλλετο ὁ Κροῖσος ἐπειρωτᾶν τὰ χρηστήρια εἰ στρατεύηται ἐπὶ Πέρσας Κροῖσος καὶ εἴ τινα στρατὸν ἀνδρῶν προσθέοιτο φίλον , ὡς δὲ ἀπικόμενοι ἐς τὰ ἀπεπέμφθησαν , οἱ Λυδοὶ ἀνέθεσαν τὰ ἀναθήματα , ἐχρέωντο τοῖσι χρηστηρίοισι λέγοντες " Κροῖσος ὁ Λυδῶν τε καὶ ἄλλων ἐθνέων βασιλεύς , νομίσας τάδε μαντήια εἶναι μοῦνα ἐν ἀνθρώποισι , ὑμῖν τε ἄξια δῶρα ἔδωκε τῶν ἐξευρημάτων , καὶ νῦν ὑμέας ἐπειρωτᾷ εἰ στρατεύηται ἐπὶ Πέρσας καὶ εἴ τινα στρατὸν ἀνδρῶν προσθέοιτο σύμμαχον " .
The Lydians who were to bring these gifts to the temples were instructed by Croesus to inquire of the oracles whether he was to send an army against the Persians and whether he was to add an army of allies.


1.53.3
344
οἳ μὲν ταῦτα ἐπειρώτων , τῶν δὲ μαντηίων ἀμφοτέρων ἐς τ- αὐτὸ αἱ γνῶμαι συνέδραμον , προλέγουσαι Κροίσῳ , ἢν στρατεύηται ἐπὶ Πέρσας , μεγάλην ἀρχὴν μιν καταλύσειν ·
Such was their inquiry; and the judgment given to Croesus by each of the two oracles was the same: namely, that if he should send an army against the Persians he would destroy a great empire.


1.53.3
345
τοὺς δὲ Ἑλλήνων δυνατωτάτους συνεβούλευόν οἱ ἐξευρόντα φίλους προσθέσθαι .
And they advised him to discover the mightiest of the Greeks and make them his friends.


1.54.1
346
ἐπείτε δὲ ἀνενειχθέντα τὰ θεοπρόπια ἐπύθετο ὁ Κροῖσος , ὑπερήσθη τε τοῖσι χρηστηρίοισι , πάγχυ τε ἐλπίσας καταλύσειν τὴν Κύρου βασιληίην , πέμψας αὖτις ἐς Πυθὼ Δελφοὺς δωρέεται , πυθόμενος αὐτῶν τὸ πλῆθος , κατ’ ἄνδρα δύο στατῆρσι ἕκαστον χρυσοῦ .
When the divine answers had been brought back and Croesus learned of them, he was very pleased with the oracles. So, altogether expecting that he would destroy the kingdom of Cyrus, he sent once again to  Delphi Pytho    and endowed the Delphians, whose number he had learned, with two gold staters apiece.


1.54.2
347
Δελφοὶ δὲ ἀντὶ τούτων ἔδοσαν Κροίσῳ καὶ Λυδοῖσι προμαντηίην καὶ ἀτελείην καὶ προεδρίην , καὶ ἐξεῖναι τῷ βουλομένῳ αὐτῶν γίνεσθαι Δελφὸν ἐς τὸν αἰεὶ χρόνον .
The Delphians, in return, gave Croesus and all Lydians the right of first consulting the oracle, exemption from all charges, the chief seats at festivals, and perpetual right of Delphian citizenship to whoever should wish it.


1.55.1
348
δωρησάμενος δὲ τοὺς Δελφοὺς ὁ Κροῖσος ἐχρηστηριάζετο τὸ τρίτον ·
After his gifts to the Delphians, Croesus made a third inquiry of the oracle,


1.55.1
349
ἐπείτε γὰρ δὴ παρέλαβε τοῦ μαντείου ἀληθείην , ἐνεφορέετο αὐτοῦ .
for he wanted to use it to the full, having received true answers from it;


1.55.1
350
ἐπειρώτα δὲ τάδε χρηστηριαζόμενος , εἴ οἱ πολυχρόνιος ἔσται ἡ μουναρχίη .
and the question which he asked was whether his sovereignty would be of long duration. To this the Pythian priestess answered as follows:


1.55.2
351
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη οἱ χρᾷ τάδε .
The Pythian priestess answered him thus:


1.55.2
352
ἀλλ’ ὅταν ἡμίονος βασιλεὺς Μήδοισι γένηται , καὶ τότε , Λυδὲ ποδαβρέ , πολυψήφιδα παρ’ Ἕρμον φεύγειν μηδὲ μένειν μηδ’ αἰδεῖσθαι κακός εἶναι .
“When the Medes have a mule as king, Just then, tender-footed Lydian, by the stone-strewn Hermus Flee and do not stay, and do not be ashamed to be a coward.”


1.56.1
353
τούτοισι ἐλθοῦσι τοῖσι ἔπεσι ὁ Κροῖσος πολλόν τι μάλιστα πάντων ἥσθη , ἐλπίζων ἡμίονον οὐδαμὰ ἀντ’ ἀνδρὸς βασιλεύσειν Μήδων , οὐδ’ ὦν αὐτὸς οὐδὲ οἱ ἐξ αὐτοῦ παύσεσθαι κοτὲ τῆς ἀρχῆς .
When he heard these verses, Croesus was pleased with them above all, for he thought that a mule would never be king of the Medes instead of a man,


1.56.1
354
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐφρόντιζε ἱστορέων τοὺς ἂν Ἑλλήνων δυνατωτάτους ἐόντας προσκτήσαιτο φίλους , ἱστορέων δὲ εὕρισκε Λακεδαιμονίους καὶ Ἀθηναίους προέχοντας τοὺς μὲν τοῦ Δωρικοῦ γένεος τοὺς δὲ τοῦ Ἰωνικοῦ .
and therefore that he and his posterity would never lose his empire. Then he sought very carefully to discover who the mightiest of the Greeks were, whom he should make his friends.


1.56.2
355
ταῦτα γὰρ ἦν τὰ προκεκριμένα , ἐόντα τὸ ἀρχαῖον τὸ μὲν Πελασγικὸν τὸ δὲ Ἑλληνικὸν ἔθνος .
He found by inquiry that the chief peoples were the Lacedaemonians among those of Doric, and the Athenians among those of Ionic stock.


1.56.2
356
καὶ τὸ μὲν οὐδαμῇ κω ἐξεχώρησε , τὸ δὲ πολυπλάνητον κάρτα .
These races, Ionian and Dorian, were the foremost in ancient time, the first a Pelasgian and the second a Hellenic people. The Pelasgian race has never yet left its home; the Hellenic has wandered often and far.


1.56.3
357
ἐπὶ μὲν γὰρ Δευκαλίωνος βασιλέος οἴκεε γῆν τὴν Φθιῶτιν , ἐπὶ δὲ Δώρου τοῦ Ἕλληνος τὴν ὑπὸ τὴν Ὄσσαν τε καὶ τὸν Ὄλυμπον χώρην , καλεομένην δὲ Ἱστιαιῶτιν ·
For in the days of king Deucalion it inhabited the land of Phthia, then the country called Histiaean, under Ossa and Olympus, in the time of Dorus son of Hellen;


1.56.3
358
ἐκ δὲ τῆς Ἱστιαιώτιδος ὡς ἐξανέστη ὑπὸ Καδμείων , οἴκεε ἐν Πίνδῳ Μακεδνὸν καλεόμενον ·
driven from this Histiaean country by the Cadmeans, it settled about Pindus in the territory called Macedonian;


1.56.3
359
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ αὖτις ἐς τὴν Δρυοπίδα μετέβη καὶ ἐκ τῆς Δρυοπίδος οὕτω ἐς Πελοπόννησον ἐλθὸν Δωρικὸν ἐκλήθη .
from there again it migrated to Dryopia, and at last came from Dryopia into the Peloponnese, where it took the name of Dorian.


1.57.1
360
ἥντινα δὲ γλῶσσαν ἵεσαν οἱ Πελασγοί , οὐκ ἔχω ἀτρεκέως εἰπεῖν .
What language the Pelasgians spoke I cannot say definitely.


1.57.1
361
εἰ δὲ χρεόν ἐστι τεκμαιρόμενον λέγειν τοῖσι νῦν ἔτι ἐοῦσι Πελασγῶν τῶν ὑπὲρ Τυρσηνῶν Κρηστῶνα πόλιν οἰκεόντων , οἳ ὅμουροι κοτὲ ἦσαν τοῖσι νῦν Δωριεῦσι καλεομένοισι ( οἴκεον δὲ τηνικαῦτα γῆν τὴν νῦν Θεσσαλιῶτιν καλεομένην ) , καὶ τῶν Πλακίην τε καὶ Σκυλάκην Πελασγῶν οἰκησάντων ἐν Ἑλλησπόντῳ , οἳ σύνοικοι ἐγένοντο Ἀθηναίοισι , καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα Πελασγικὰ ἐόντα πολίσματα τὸ οὔνομα μετέβαλε ·
But if one may judge by those that still remain of the Pelasgians who live above the Tyrrheni in the city of Creston—who were once neighbors of the people now called Dorians, and at that time inhabited the country which now is called Thessalian—


1.57.2
362
εἰ τούτοισι τεκμαιρόμενον δεῖ λέγειν , ἦσαν οἱ Πελασγοὶ βάρβαρον γλῶσσαν ἱέντες .
and of the Pelasgians who inhabited Placia and Scylace on the  Canakkale Hellespont   , who came to live among the Athenians, and by other towns too which were once Pelasgian and afterwards took a different name: if, as I said, one may judge by these, the Pelasgians spoke a language which was not Greek.


1.57.3
363
εἰ τοίνυν ἦν καὶ πᾶν τοιοῦτο τὸ Πελασγικόν , τὸ Ἀττικὸν ἔθνος ἐὸν Πελασγικὸν ἅμα τῇ μεταβολῇ τῇ ἐς Ἕλληνας καὶ τὴν γλῶσσαν μετέμαθε .
If, then, all the Pelasgian stock spoke so, then the Attic nation, being of Pelasgian blood, must have changed its language too at the time when it became part of the Hellenes.


1.57.3
364
καὶ γὰρ δὴ οὔτε οἱ Κρηστωνιῆται οὐδαμοῖσι τῶν νῦν σφέας περιοικεόντων εἰσὶ ὁμόγλωσσοι οὔτε οἱ Πλακιηνοί , σφίσι δὲ ὁμόγλωσσοι ·
For the people of Creston and Placia have a language of their own in common, which is not the language of their neighbors;


1.57.3
365
δηλοῦσί τε ὅτι τὸν ἠνείκαντο γλώσσης χαρακτῆρα μεταβαίνοντες ἐς ταῦτα τὰ χωρία , τοῦτον ἔχουσι ἐν φυλακῇ .
and it is plain that they still preserve the manner of speech which they brought with them in their migration into the places where they live.


1.58.1
366
τὸ δὲ Ἑλληνικὸν γλώσσῃ μὲν ἐπείτε ἐγένετο αἰεί κοτε τῇ αὐτῇ διαχρᾶται , ὡς ἐμοὶ καταφαίνεται εἶναι ·
But the Hellenic stock, it seems clear to me, has always had the same language since its beginning;


1.58.1
367
ἀποσχισθὲν μέντοι ἀπὸ τοῦ Πελασγικοῦ ἐόν ἀσθενές , ἀπό σμικροῦ τεο τὴν ἀρχὴν ὁρμώμενον αὔξηται ἐς πλῆθος τῶν ἐθνέων , Πελασγῶν μάλιστα προσκεχωρηκότων αὐτῷ καὶ ἄλλων ἐθνέων βαρβάρων συχνῶν .
yet being, when separated from the Pelasgians, few in number, they have grown from a small beginning to comprise a multitude of nations, chiefly because the Pelasgians and many other foreign peoples united themselves with them.


1.58.1
368
πρόσθε δὲ ὦν ἔμοιγε δοκέει οὐδὲ τὸ Πελασγικὸν ἔθνος , ἐὸν βάρβαρον , οὐδαμὰ μεγάλως αὐξηθῆναι .
Before that, I think, the Pelasgic stock nowhere increased much in number while it was of foreign speech.


1.59.1
369
τούτων δὴ ὦν τῶν ἐθνέων τὸ μὲν Ἀττικὸν κατεχόμενόν τε καὶ διεσπασμένον ἐπυνθάνετο ὁ Κροῖσος ὑπὸ Πεισιστράτου τοῦ Ἱπποκράτεος τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον τυραννεύοντος Ἀθηναίων .
Now of these two peoples, Croesus learned that the Attic was held in subjection and divided into factions by Pisistratus, son of Hippocrates, who at that time was sovereign over the Athenians.


1.59.1
370
Ἱπποκράτεϊ γὰρ ἐόντι ἰδιώτῃ καὶ θεωρέοντι τὰ Ὀλύμπια τέρας ἐγένετο μέγα ·
This Hippocrates was still a private man when a great marvel happened to him when he was at Olympia to see the games:


1.59.1
371
θύσαντος γὰρ αὐτοῦ τὰ ἱρὰ οἱ λέβητες ἐπεστεῶτες καὶ κρεῶν τε ἐόντες ἔμπλεοι καὶ ὕδατος ἄνευ πυρὸς ἔζεσαν καὶ ὑπερέβαλον .
when he had offered the sacrifice, the vessels, standing there full of meat and water, boiled without fire until they boiled over.


1.59.2
372
Χίλων δὲ ὁ Λακεδαιμόνιος παρατυχὼν καὶ θεησάμενος τὸ τέρας συνεβούλευε Ἱπποκράτεϊ πρῶτα μὲν γυναῖκα μὴ ἄγεσθαι τεκνοποιὸν ἐς τὰ οἰκία , εἰ δὲ τυγχάνει ἔχων , δευτέρα τὴν γυναῖκα ἐκπέμπειν , καὶ εἴ τίς οἱ τυγχάνει ἐὼν παῖς , τοῦτον ἀπείπασθαι .
Chilon the Lacedaemonian, who happened to be there and who saw this marvel, advised Hippocrates not to take to his house a wife who could bear children, but if he had one already, then to send her away, and if he had a son, to disown him.


1.59.3
373
οὔκων ταῦτα παραινέσαντος Χίλωνος πείθεσθαι θέλειν τὸν Ἱπποκράτεα ·
Hippocrates refused to follow the advice of Chilon;


1.59.3
374
γενέσθαι οἱ μετὰ ταῦτα τὸν Πεισίστρατον τοῦτον , ὃς στασιαζόντων τῶν παράλων καὶ τῶν ἐκ τοῦ πεδίου Ἀθηναίων , καὶ τῶν μὲν προεστεῶτος Μεγακλέος τοῦ Ἀλκμέωνος , τῶν δὲ ἐκ τοῦ πεδίου Λυκούργου Ἀριστολαΐδεω , καταφρονήσας τὴν τυραννίδα ἤγειρε τρίτην στάσιν ·
and afterward there was born to him this Pisistratus, who, when there was a feud between the Athenians of the coast under Megacles son of Alcmeon and the Athenians of the plain under Lycurgus son of Aristolaides,


1.59.3
375
συλλέξας δὲ στασιώτας καὶ τῷ λόγῳ τῶν ὑπερακρίων προστὰς μηχανᾶται τοιάδε .
raised up a third faction, as he coveted the sovereign power. He collected partisans and pretended to champion the uplanders, and the following was his plan.


1.59.4
376
τρωματίσας ἑωυτόν τε καὶ ἡμιόνους ἤλασε ἐς τὴν ἀγορὴν τὸ ζεῦγος ὡς ἐκπεφευγὼς τοὺς ἐχθρούς , οἵ μιν ἐλαύνοντα ἐς ἀγρὸν ἠθέλησαν ἀπολέσαι δῆθεν , ἐδέετό τε τοῦ δήμου φυλακῆς τινος πρὸς αὐτοῦ κυρῆσαι , πρότερον εὐδοκιμήσας ἐν τῇ πρὸς Μεγαρέας γενομένῃ στρατηγίῃ , Νίσαιάν τε ἑλὼν καὶ ἄλλα ἀποδεξάμενος μεγάλα ἔργα .
Wounding himself and his mules, he drove his wagon into the marketplace, with a story that he had escaped from his enemies, who would have killed him (so he said) as he was driving into the country. So he implored the people to give him a guard: and indeed he had won a reputation in his command of the army against the Megarians, when he had taken   Nisaea    and performed other great exploits.


1.59.5
377
ὁ δὲ δῆμος ὁ τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἐξαπατηθεὶς ἔδωκέ οἱ τῶν ἀστῶν καταλέξας ἄνδρας τούτους οἳ δορυφόροι μὲν οὐκ ἐγένοντο Πεισιστράτου , κορυνηφόροι δέ ·
Taken in, the Athenian people gave him a guard of chosen citizens,


1.59.5
378
ξύλων γὰρ κορύνας ἔχοντες εἵποντό οἱ ὄπισθε .
whom Pisistratus made clubmen instead of spearmen: for the retinue that followed him carried wooden clubs.


1.59.6
379
συνεπαναστάντες δὲ οὗτοι ἅμα Πεισιστράτῳ ἔσχον τὴν ἀκρόπολιν .
These rose with Pisistratus and took the Acropolis;


1.59.6
380
ἔνθα δὴ ὁ Πεισίστρατος ἦρχε Ἀθηναίων , οὔτε τιμὰς τὰς ἐούσας συνταράξας οὔτε θέσμια μεταλλάξας , ἐπί τε τοῖσι κατεστεῶσι ἔνεμε τὴν πόλιν κοσμέων καλῶς τε καὶ εὖ .
and Pisistratus ruled the Athenians, disturbing in no way the order of offices nor changing the laws, but governing the city according to its established constitution and arranging all things fairly and well.


1.60.1
381
μετὰ δὲ οὐ πολλὸν χρόνον τ- αὐτὸ φρονήσαντες οἵ τε τοῦ Μεγακλέος στασιῶται καὶ οἱ τοῦ Λυκούργου ἐξελαύνουσί μιν .
But after a short time the partisans of Megacles and of Lycurgus made common cause and drove him out.


1.60.1
382
οὕτω μὲν Πεισίστρατος ἔσχε τὸ πρῶτον Ἀθήνας , καὶ τὴν τυραννίδα οὔκω κάρτα ἐρριζωμένην ἔχων ἀπέβαλε .
In this way Pisistratus first got Athens and, as he had a sovereignty that was not yet firmly rooted, lost it.


1.60.1
383
οἳ δὲ ἐξελάσαντες Πεισίστρατον αὖτις ἐκ νέης ἐπ’ ἀλλήλοισι ἐστασίασαν .
Presently his enemies who together had driven him out began to feud once more.


1.60.2
384
περιελαυνόμενος δὲ τῇ στάσι ὁ Μεγακλέης ἐπεκηρυκεύετο Πεισιστράτῳ , εἰ βούλοιτό οἱ τὴν θυγατέρα ἔχειν γυναῖκα ἐπὶ τῇ τυραννίδι .
Then Megacles, harassed by factional strife, sent a message to Pisistratus offering him his daughter to marry and the sovereign power besides.


1.60.3
385
ἐνδεξαμένου δὲ τὸν λόγον καὶ ὁμολογήσαντος ἐπὶ τούτοισι Πεισιστράτου , μηχανῶνται δὴ ἐπὶ τῇ κατόδῳ πρῆγμα εὐηθέστατον , ὡς ἐγὼ εὑρίσκω , μακρῷ , ἐπεί γε ἀπεκρίθη ἐκ παλαιτέρου τοῦ βαρβάρου ἔθνεος τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν ἐὸν καὶ δεξιώτερον καὶ εὐηθείης ἠλιθίου ἀπηλλαγμένον μᾶλλον , εἰ καὶ τότε γε οὗτοι ἐν Ἀθηναίοισι τοῖσι πρώτοισι λεγομένοισι εἶναι Ἑλλήνων σοφίην μηχανῶνται τοιάδε .
When this offer was accepted by Pisistratus, who agreed on these terms with Megacles, they devised a plan to bring Pisistratus back which, to my mind, was so exceptionally foolish that it is strange (since from old times the Hellenic stock has always been distinguished from foreign by its greater cleverness and its freedom from silly foolishness) that these men should devise such a plan to deceive Athenians, said to be the subtlest of the Greeks.


1.60.4
386
ἐν τῷ δήμῳ τῷ Παιανιέι ἦν γυνὴ τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Φύη , μέγαθος ἀπὸ τεσσέρων πηχέων ἀπολείπουσα τρεῖς δακτύλους καὶ ἄλλως εὐειδής ·
There was in the Paeanian deme a woman called Phya, three fingers short of six feet, four inches in height, and otherwise, too, well-formed.


1.60.4
387
ταύτην τὴν γυναῖκα σκευάσαντες πανοπλίῃ , ἐς ἅρμα ἐσβιβάσαντες καὶ προδέξαντες σχῆμα οἷόν τι ἔμελλε εὐπρεπέστατον φανέεσθαι ἔχουσα , ἤλαυνον ἐς τὸ ἄστυ , προδρόμους κήρυκας προπέμψαντες ·
This woman they equipped in full armor and put in a chariot, giving her all the paraphernalia to make the most impressive spectacle, and so drove into the city; heralds ran before them,


1.60.4
388
οἳ τὰ ἐντεταλμένα ἠγόρευον ἀπικόμενοι ἐς τὸ ἄστυ , λέγοντες τοιάδε ·
and when they came into town proclaimed as they were instructed:


1.60.5
389
" ὦ Ἀθηναῖοι , δέκεσθε ἀγαθῷ νόῳ Πεισίστρατον , τὸν αὐτὴ ἡ Ἀηθναίη τιμήσασα ἀνθρώπων μάλιστα κατάγει ἐς τὴν ἑωυτῆς ἀκρόπολιν " .
“Athenians, give a hearty welcome to Pisistratus, whom Athena herself honors above all men and is bringing back to her own acropolis.”


1.60.5
390
οἳ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα διαφοιτέοντες ἔλεγον ·
So the heralds went about proclaiming this;


1.60.5
391
αὐτίκα δὲ ἔς τε τοὺς δήμους φάτις ἀπίκετο ὡς Ἀθηναίη Πεισίστρατον κατάγει , καὶ οἱ ἐν τῷ ἄστεϊ πειθόμενοι τὴν γυναῖκα εἶναι αὐτὴν τὴν θεὸν προσεύχοντό τε τὴν ἄνθρωπον καὶ ἐδέκοντο Πεισίστρατον .
and immediately the report spread in the demes that Athena was bringing Pisistratus back, and the townsfolk, believing that the woman was the goddess herself, worshipped this human creature and welcomed Pisistratus.


1.61.1
392
ἀπολαβὼν δὲ τὴν τυραννίδα τρόπῳ τῷ εἰρημένῳ ὁ Πεισίστρατος κατὰ τὴν ὁμολογίην τὴν πρὸς Μεγακλέα γενομένην γαμέει τοῦ Μεγακλέος τὴν θυγατέρα .
Having got back his sovereignty in the manner which I have described, Pisistratus married Megacles' daughter according to his agreement with Megacles.


1.61.1
393
οἷα δὲ παίδων τέ οἱ ὑπαρχόντων νεηνιέων καὶ λεγομένων ἐναγέων εἶναι τῶν Ἀλκμεωνιδέων , οὐ βουλόμενός οἱ γενέσθαι ἐκ τῆς νεογάμου γυναικὸς τέκνα ἐμίσγετό οἱ οὐ κατὰ νόμον .
But as he already had young sons, and as the Alcmeonid family were said to be under a curse, he had no wish that his newly-wedded wife bear him children, and therefore had unusual intercourse with her.


1.61.2
394
τὰ μέν νυν πρῶτα ἔκρυπτε ταῦτα ἡ γυνή , μετὰ δὲ εἴτε ἱστορεύσῃ εἴτε καὶ οὒ φράζει τῇ ἑωυτῆς μητρί , ἣ δὲ τῷ ἀνδρί .
At first the woman hid the fact:


1.61.2
395
ὀργῇ δὲ ὡς εἶχε καταλλάσσετο τὴν ἔχθρην τοῖσι στασιώτῃσι .
presently she told her mother (whether interrogated or not, I do not know) and the mother told her husband.


1.61.2
396
μαθὼν δὲ ὁ Πεισίστρατος τὰ ποιεύμενα ἐπ’ ἑωυτῷ ἀπαλλάσσετο ἐκ τῆς χώρης τὸ παράπαν , ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐς Ἐρέτριαν ἐβουλεύετο ἅμα τοῖσι παισί .
Megacles was very angry to be dishonored by Pisistratus; and in his anger he patched up his quarrel with the other faction. Pisistratus, learning what was going on, went alone away from the country altogether, and came to Eretria where he deliberated with his sons.


1.61.3
397
Ἱππίεω δὲ γνώμῃ νικήσαντος ἀνακτᾶσθαι ὀπίσω τὴν τυραννίδα , ἐνθαῦτα ἤγειρον δωτίνας ἐκ τῶν πολίων αἵτινές σφι προαιδέοντό κού τι .
The opinion of Hippias prevailing, that they should recover the sovereignty, they set out collecting contributions from all the cities that owed them anything.


1.61.3
398
πολλῶν δὲ μεγάλα παρασχόντων χρήματα , Θηβαῖοι ὑπερεβάλοντο τῇ δόσι τῶν χρημάτων .
Many of these gave great amounts, the Thebans more than any,


1.61.4
399
μετὰ δέ , οὐ πολλῷ λόγῳ εἰπεῖν , χρόνος διέφυ καὶ πάντα σφι ἐξήρτυτο ἐς τὴν κάτοδον ·
and in course of time, not to make a long story, everything was ready for their return:


1.61.4
400
καὶ γὰρ Ἀργεῖοι μισθωτοὶ ἀπίκοντο ἐκ Πελοποννήσου , καὶ Νάξιός σφι ἀνὴρ ἀπιγμένος ἐθελοντής , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Λύγδαμις , προθυμίην πλείστην παρείχετο , κομίσας καὶ χρήματα καὶ ἄνδρας .
for they brought Argive mercenaries from the Peloponnese, and there joined them on his own initiative a man of Naxos called Lygdamis, who was most keen in their cause and brought them money and men.


1.62.1
401
ἐξ Ἐρετρίης δὲ ὁρμηθέντες διὰ ἑνδεκάτου ἔτεος ἀπίκοντο ὀπίσω , καὶ πρῶτον τῆς Ἀττικῆς ἴσχουσι Μαραθῶνα .
So after ten years they set out from Eretria and returned home. The first place in Attica which they took and held was Marathon:


1.62.1
402
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τῷ χώρῳ σφι στρατοπεδευομένοισι οἵ τε ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεος στασιῶται ἀπίκοντο ἄλλοι τε ἐκ τῶν δήμων προσέρρεον , τοῖσι ἡ τυραννὶς πρὸ ἐλευθερίης ἦν ἀσπαστότερον .
and while encamped there they were joined by their partisans from the city, and by others who flocked to them from the country — demesmen who loved the rule of one more than freedom. These, then, assembled;


1.62.2
403
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ συνηλίζοντο , Ἀθηναίων δὲ οἱ ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεος , ἕως μὲν Πεισίστρατος τὰ χρήματα ἤγειρε , καὶ μεταῦτις ὡς ἔσχε Μαραθῶνα , λόγον οὐδένα εἶχον ·
but the Athenians in the city, who while Pisistratus was collecting money and afterwards when he had taken Marathon took no notice of it,


1.62.2
404
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐπύθοντο ἐκ τοῦ Μαραθῶνος αὐτὸν πορεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὸ ἄστυ , οὕτω δὴ βοηθέουσι ἐπ’ αὐτόν .
did now, and when they learned that he was marching from Marathon against Athens, they set out to attack him.


1.62.3
405
καὶ οὗτοί τε πανστρατιῇ ἤισαν ἐπὶ τοὺς κατιόντας καὶ οἱ ἀμφὶ Πεισίστρατον , ὡς ὁρμηθέντες ἐκ Μαραθῶνος ἤισαν ἐπὶ τὸ ἄστυ , ἐς τ- αὐτὸ συνιόντες ἀπικνέονται ἐπὶ Παλληνίδος Ἀθηναίης ἱρόν , καὶ ἀντία ἔθεντο τὰ ὅπλα .
They came out with all their force to meet the returning exiles. Pisistratus' men encountered the enemy when they had reached the temple of Pallenian Athena in their march from Marathon towards the city, and encamped face to face with them.


1.62.4
406
ἐνθαῦτα θείῃ πομπῇ χρεώμενος παρίσταται Πεισιστράτῳ Ἀμφίλυτος ὁ Ἀκαρνὰν χρησμολόγος ἀνήρ , ὅς οἱ προσιὼν χρᾷ ἐν ἑξαμέτρῳ τόνῳ τάδε λέγων ·
There (by the providence of heaven) Pisistratus met Amphilytus the Acarnanian, a diviner, who came to him and prophesied as follows in hexameter verses:


1.62.4
407
ἔρριπται δ’ ὁ βόλος , τὸ δὲ δίκτυον ἐκπεπέτασται , θύννοι δ’ οἰμήσουσι σεληναίης διὰ νυκτός .
“The cast is made, the net spread, The tunny-fish shall flash in the moonlit night.”


1.63.1
408
ὃ μὲν δή οἱ ἐνθεάζων χρᾷ τάδε , Πεισίστρατος δὲ συλλαβὼν τὸ χρηστήριον καὶ φὰς δέκεσθαι τὸ χρησθὲν ἐπῆγε τὴν στρατιήν .
So Amphilytus spoke, being inspired; Pisistratus understood him and, saying that he accepted the prophecy, led his army against the enemy.


1.63.1
409
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ οἱ ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεος πρὸς ἄριστον τετραμμένοι ἦσαν δὴ τηνικαῦτα , καὶ μετὰ τὸ ἄριστον μετεξέτεροι αὐτῶν οἳ μὲν πρὸς κύβους οἳ δὲ πρὸς ὕπνον .
The Athenians of the city had by this time had breakfast, and after breakfast some were dicing and some were sleeping:


1.63.1
410
οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ Πεισίστρατον ἐσπεσόντες τοὺς Ἀθηναίους τρέπουσι .
they were attacked by Pisistratus' men and put to flight.


1.63.2
411
φευγόντων δὲ τούτων βουλὴν ἐνθαῦτα σοφωτάτην Πεισίστρατος ἐπιτεχνᾶται , ὅκως μήτε ἁλισθεῖεν ἔτι οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι διεσκεδασμένοι τε εἶεν ·
So they fled, and Pisistratus devised a very subtle plan to keep them scattered and prevent them assembling again:


1.63.2
412
ἀναβιβάσας τοὺς παῖδας ἐπὶ ἵππους προέπεμπε , οἳ δὲ καταλαμβάνοντες τοὺς φεύγοντας ἔλεγον τὰ ἐντεταλμένα ὑπὸ Πεισιστράτου , θαρσέειν τε κελεύοντες καὶ ἀπιέναι ἕκαστον ἐπὶ τὰ ἑωυτοῦ .
he had his sons mount and ride forward: they overtook the fugitives and spoke to them as they were instructed by Pisistratus, telling them to take heart and each to depart to his home.


1.64.1
413
πειθομένων δὲ τῶν Ἀθηναίων , οὕτω δὴ Πεισίστρατος τὸ τρίτον σχὼν Ἀθήνας ἐρρίζωσε τὴν τυραννίδα ἐπικούροισί τε πολλοῖσι καὶ χρημάτων συνόδοισι , τῶν μὲν αὐτόθεν τῶν δὲ ἀπὸ Στρυμόνος ποταμοῦ συνιόντων , ὁμήρους τε τῶν παραμεινάντων Ἀθηναίων καὶ μὴ αὐτίκα φυγόντων παῖδας λαβὼν καὶ καταστήσας ἐς Νάξον ( καὶ γὰρ ταύτην ὁ Πεισίστρατος κατεστρέψατο πολέμῳ καὶ ἐπέτρεψε Λυγδάμι ) πρὸς τε ἔτι τούτοισι τὴν νῆσον Δῆλον καθήρας ἐκ τῶν λογίων καθήρας δὲ ὧδε ·
The Athenians did, and by this means Pisistratus gained  Athens Athens    for the third time, rooting his sovereignty in a strong guard and revenue collected both from  Athens Athens    and from the district of the river Strymon, and he took hostage the sons of the Athenians who remained and did not leave the city at once, and placed these in  Nisos Naxos   .


1.64.2
414
ἐπ’ ὅσον ἔποψις τοῦ ἱροῦ εἶχε , ἐκ τούτου τοῦ χώρου παντὸς ἐξορύξας τοὺς νεκροὺς μετεφόρεε ἐς ἄλλον χῶρον τῆς Δήλου .
(He had conquered  Nisos Naxos    too and put Lygdamis in charge.) And besides this, he purified the island of  Delos Delos    as a result of oracles, and this is how he did it: he removed all the dead that were buried in ground within sight of the temple and conveyed them to another part of  Delos Delos   .


1.64.3
415
καὶ Πεισίστρατος μὲν ἐτυράννευε Ἀθηνέων , Ἀθηναίων δὲ οἳ μὲν ἐν τῇ μάχη ἐπεπτώκεσαν , οἳ δὲ αὐτῶν μετ’ Ἀλκμεωνιδέων ἔφευγον ἐκ τῆς οἰκηίης .
So Pisistratus was sovereign of  Athens Athens   : and as for the Athenians, some had fallen in the battle, and some, with the Alcmeonids, were exiles from their native land.


1.65.1
416
τοὺς μέν νυν Ἀθηναίους τοιαῦτα τὸν χρόνον τοῦτον ἐπυνθάνετο ὁ Κροῖσος κατέχοντα , τοὺς δὲ Λακεδαιμονίους ἐκ κακῶν τε μεγάλων πεφευγότας καὶ ἐόντας ἤδη τῷ πολέμῳ κατυπερτέρους Τεγεητέων .
So Croesus learned that at that time such problems were oppressing the Athenians, but that the Lacedaemonians had escaped from the great evils and had mastered the Tegeans in war.


1.65.1
417
ἐπὶ γὰρ Λέοντος βασιλεύοντος καὶ Ἡγησικλέος ἐν Σπάρτῃ τοὺς ἄλλους πολέμους εὐτυχέοντες οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι πρὸς Τεγεήτας μούνους προσέπταιον .
In the kingship of Leon and Hegesicles at Sparta, the Lacedaemonians were successful in all their other wars but met disaster only against the Tegeans.


1.65.2
418
τὸ δὲ ἔτι πρότερον τούτων καί κακονομώτατοι ἦσαν σχεδὸν πάντων Ἑλλήνων κατά τε σφέας αὐτοὺς καὶ ξείνοισι ἀπρόσμικτοι ·
Before this they had been the worst-governed of nearly all the Hellenes and had had no dealings with strangers,


1.65.2
419
μετέβαλον δὲ ὧδε ἐς εὐνομίην .
but they changed to good government in this way:


1.65.2
420
Λυκούργου τῶν Σπαρτιητέων δοκίμου ἀνδρὸς ἐλθόντος ἐς Δελφοὺς ἐπὶ τὸ χρηστήριον , ὡς ἐσήιε ἐς τὸ μέγαρον , εὐθὺς ἡ Πυθίη λέγει τάδε .
Lycurgus, a man of reputation among the Spartans, went to the oracle at Delphi. As soon as he entered the hall, the priestess said in hexameter:


1.65.3
421
ἥκεις ὦ Λυκόοργε ἐμὸν ποτὶ πίονα νηόν Ζηνὶ φίλος καὶ πᾶσιν Ὀλύμπια δώματ’ ἔχουσι .
“You have come to my rich temple, Lycurgus, A man dear to Zeus and to all who have Olympian homes.


1.65.3
422
δίζω ἤ σε θεὸν μαντεύσομαι ἢ ἄνθρωπον .
I am in doubt whether to pronounce you man or god,


1.65.3
423
ἀλλ’ ἔτι καὶ μᾶλλον θεὸν ἔλπομαι , ὦ Λυκόοργε .
But I think rather you are a god, Lycurgus.”


1.65.4
424
οἳ μὲν δή τινες πρὸς τούτοισι λέγουσι καὶ φράσαι αὐτῷ τὴν Πυθίην τὸν νῦν κατεστεῶτα κόσμον Σπαρτιήτῃσι .
Some say that the Pythia also declared to him the constitution that now exists at Sparta,


1.65.4
425
ὡς δ’ αὐτοὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι λέγουσι , Λυκοῦργον ἐπιτροπεύσαντα Λεωβώτεω , ἀδελφιδέου μὲν ἑωυτοῦ βασιλεύοντος δὲ Σπαρτιητέων , ἐκ Κρήτης ἀγαγέσθαι ταῦτα .
but the Lacedaemonians themselves say that Lycurgus brought it from Crete when he was guardian of his nephew Leobetes, the Spartan king.


1.65.5
426
ὡς γὰρ ἐπετρόπευσε τάχιστα , μετέστησε τὰ νόμιμα πάντα , καὶ ἐφύλαξε ταῦτα μὴ παραβαίνειν ·
Once he became guardian, he changed all the laws and took care that no one transgressed the new ones:


1.65.5
427
μετὰ δὲ τὰ ἐς πόλεμον ἔχοντα , ἐνωμοτίας καὶ τριηκάδας καὶ συσσίτια , πρός τε τούτοισι τοὺς ἐφόρους καὶ γέροντας ἔστησε Λυκοῦργος .
Lycurgus afterwards established their affairs of war: the sworn divisions, the bands of thirty, the common meals; also the ephors and the council of elders.


1.66.1
428
οὕτω μὲν μεταβαλόντες εὐνομήθησαν , τῷ δὲ Λυκούργῳ τελευτήσαντι ἱρὸν εἱσάμενοι σέβονται μεγάλως .
Thus they changed their bad laws to good ones, and when Lycurgus died they built him a temple and now worship him greatly.


1.66.1
429
οἷα δὲ ἐν τε χώρῃ ἀγαθῇ καὶ πλήθεϊ οὐκ ὀλίγων ἀνδρῶν , ἀνά τε ἔδραμον αὐτίκα καὶ εὐθηνήθησαν , καὶ δή σφι οὐκέτι ἀπέχρα ἡσυχίην ἄγειν , ἀλλὰ καταφρονήσαντες Ἀρκάδων κρέσσονες εἶναι ἐχρηστηριάζοντο ἐν Δελφοῖσι ἐπὶ πάσῃ τῇ Ἀρκάδων χωρῇ .
Since they had good land and many men, they immediately flourished and prospered. They were not content to live in peace, but, confident that they were stronger than the Arcadians, asked the oracle at Delphi about gaining all the Arcadian land.


1.66.2
430
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη σφι χρᾷ τάδε .
She replied in hexameter:


1.66.2
431
Ἀρκαδίην μ’ αἰτεῖς ·
“You ask me for Arcadia?


1.66.2
432
μέγα μ’ αἰτεῖς ·
You ask too much;


1.66.2
433
οὐ τοι δώσω .
I grant it not.


1.66.2
434
πολλοὶ ἐν Ἀρκαδίῃ βαλανηφάγοι ἄνδρες ἔασιν , οἵ σ’ ἀποκωλύσουσιν .
There are many men in Arcadia, eaters of acorns, Who will hinder you.


1.66.2
435
ἐγὼ δὲ τοι οὔτι μεγαίρω ·
But I grudge you not.


1.66.2
436
δώσω τοί Τεγέην ποσσίκροτον ὀρχήσασθαι καὶ καλὸν πεδίον σχοίνῳ διαμετρήσασθαι .
I will give you Tegea to beat with your feet in dancing, And its fair plain to measure with a rope.”


1.66.3
437
ταῦτα ὡς ἀπενειχθέντα ἤκουσαν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ,Ἀρκάδων μὲν τῶν ἄλλων ἀπείχοντο , οἳ δὲ πέδας φερόμενοι ἐπὶ Τεγεήτας ἐστρατεύοντο , χρησμῷ κιβδήλῳ πίσυνοι , ὡς δὴ ἐξανδραποδιούμενοι τοὺς Τεγεήτας .
When the Lacedaemonians heard the oracle reported, they left the other Arcadians alone and marched on  Tegea Tegea    carrying chains, relying on the deceptive oracle. They were confident they would enslave the Tegeans, but they were defeated in battle.


1.66.4
438
ἑσσωθέντες δὲ τῇ συμβολῇ , ὅσοι αὐτῶν ἐζωγρήθησαν , πέδας τε ἔχοντες τὰς ἐφέροντο αὐτοὶ καὶ σχοίνῳ διαμετρησάμενοι τὸ πεδίον τὸ Τεγεητέων ἐργάζοντο .
Those taken alive were bound in the very chains they had brought with them, and they measured the Tegean plain with a rope by working the fields.


1.66.4
439
αἱ δὲ πέδαι αὗται ἐν τῇσι ἐδεδέατο ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἦσαν σόαι ἐν Τεγέῃ περὶ τὸν νηὸν τῆς Ἀλέης Ἀθηναίης κρεμάμεναι .
The chains in which they were bound were still preserved in my day, hanging up at the temple of Athena Alea.


1.67.1
440
κατὰ μὲν δὴ τὸν πρότερον πόλεμον συνεχέως αἰεὶ κακῶς ἀέθλεον πρὸς τοὺς Τεγεήτας , κατὰ δὲ τὸν κατὰ Κροῖσον χρόνον καὶ τὴν Ἀναξανδρίδεώ τε καὶ Ἀρίστωνος βασιληίην ἐν Λακεδαίμονι ἤδη οἱ Σπαρτιῆται κατυπέρτεροι τῷ πολέμῳ ἐγεγόνεσαν , τρόπῳ τοιῷδε γενόμενοι .
In the previous war the Lacedaemonians continually fought unsuccessfully against the Tegeans, but in the time of Croesus and the kingship of Anaxandrides and Ariston in  Sparta Lacedaemon    the Spartans had gained the upper hand. This is how:


1.67.2
441
ἐπειδὴ αἰεὶ τῷ πολέμῳ ἑσσοῦντο ὑπὸ Τεγεητέων , πέμψαντες θεοπρόπους ἐς Δελφοὺς ἐπειρώτων τίνα ἂν θεῶν ἱλασάμενοι κατύπερθε τῷ πολέμῳ Τεγεητέων γενοίατο .
when they kept being defeated by the Tegeans, they sent ambassadors to Delphi to ask which god they should propitiate to prevail against the Tegeans in war.


1.67.2
442
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη σφι ἔχρησε τὰ Ὀρέστεω τοῦ Ἀγαμέμνονος ὀστέα ἐπαγαγομένους .
The Pythia responded that they should bring back the bones of Orestes, son of Agamemnon.


1.67.3
443
ὡς δὲ ἀνευρεῖν οὐκ οἷοί τε ἐγίνοντο τὴν θήκην τοῦ Ὀρέστεω ἔπεμπον αὖτις τὴν ἐς θεὸν ἐπειρησομένους τὸν χῶρον ἐν τῷ κέοιτο Ὀρέστης .
When they were unable to discover Orestes' tomb, they sent once more to the god to ask where he was buried.


1.67.3
444
εἰρωτῶσι δὲ ταῦτα τοῖσι θεοπρόποισι λέγει ἡ Πυθίη τάδε .
The Pythia responded in hexameter to the messengers:


1.67.4
445
ἔστι τις Ἀρκαδίης Τεγέη λευρῷ ἐνὶ χώρῳ , ἔνθ’ ἄνεμοι πνείουσι δύω κρατερῆς ὑπ’ ἀνάγκης , καὶ τύπος ἀντίτυπος , καὶ πῆμ’ ἐπὶ πήματι κεῖται .
“There is a place Tegea in the smooth plain of Arcadia, / Where two winds blow under strong compulsion. / Blow lies upon blow, woe upon woe.


1.67.4
446
ἔνθ’ Ἀγαμεμνονίδην κατέχει φυσίζοος αἶα , τὸν σὺ κομισσάμενος Τεγέης ἐπιτάρροθος ἔσσῃ .
There the life-giving earth covers the son of Agamemnon. Bring him back, and you shall be lord of Tegea.”


1.67.5
447
ὡς δὲ καὶ ταῦτα ἤκουσαν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ἀπεῖχον τῆς ἐξευρέσιος οὐδὲν ἔλασσον , πάντα διζήμενοι , ἐς οὗ δὴ Λίχης τῶν ἀγαθοεργῶν καλεομένων Σπαρτιητέων ἀνεῦρε , οἱ δὲ ἀγαθοεργοὶ εἰσὶ τῶν ἀστῶν , ἐξιόντες ἐκ τῶν ἱππέων αἰεὶ οἱ πρεσβύτατοι , πέντε ἔτεος ἑκάστου ·
When the Lacedaemonians heard this, they were no closer to discovery, though they looked everywhere. Finally it was found by Lichas, who was one of the Spartans who are called “doers of good deeds.” These men are those citizens who retire from the knights, the five oldest each year.


1.67.5
448
τοὺς δεῖ τοῦτὸν τὸν ἐνιαυτόν , τὸν ἂν ἐξίωσι ἐκ τῶν ἱππέων , Σπαρτιητέων τῷ κοινῷ διαπεμπομένους μὴ ἐλινύειν ἄλλους ἄλλῃ .
They have to spend the year in which they retire from the knights being sent here and there by the Spartan state, never resting in their efforts.


1.68.1
449
τούτων ὦν τῶν ἀνδρῶν Λίχης ἀνεῦρε ἐν Τεγέῃ καὶ συντυχίῃ χρησάμενος καὶ σοφίῃ .
It was Lichas, one of these men, who found the tomb in Tegea by a combination of luck and skill.


1.68.1
450
ἐούσης γὰρ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ἐπιμιξίης πρὸς τοὺς Τεγεήτας , ἐλθὼν ἐς χαλκήιον ἐθηεῖτο σίδηρον ἐξελαυνόμενον , καὶ ἐν θώματι ἦν ὀρέων τὸ ποιεόμενον .
At that time there was free access to Tegea, so he went into a blacksmith's shop and watched iron being forged, standing there in amazement at what he saw done.


1.68.2
451
μαθὼν , δέ μιν ὁ χαλκεὺς ἀποθωμάζοντα εἶπε παυσάμενος τοῦ ἔργου " ἦ κου ἄν , ὦ ξεῖνε Λάκων εἴ περ εἶδες τό περ ἐγώ , κάρτα ἂν ἐθώμαζες , ὅκου νῦν οὕτω τυγχάνεις θῶμα ποιεύμενος τὴν ἐργασίην τοῦ σιδήρου .
The smith perceived that he was amazed, so he stopped what he was doing and said, “My Laconian guest, if you had seen what I saw, then you would really be amazed, since you marvel so at ironworking.


1.68.3
452
ἐγὼ γὰρ ἐν τῇδε θέλων τῇ αὐλῇ φρέαρ ποιήσασθαι , ὀρύσσων ἐπέτυχον σορῷ ἑπταπήχεϊ ·
I wanted to dig a well in the courtyard here, and in my digging I hit upon a coffin twelve feet long.


1.68.3
453
ὑπὸ δὲ ἀπιστίης μὴ μὲν γενέσθαι μηδαμὰ μέζονας ἀνθρώπους τῶν νῦν ἄνοιξα αὐτὴν καὶ εἶδον τὸν νεκρὸν μήκεϊ ἴσον ἐόντα τῇ σορῷ ·
I could not believe that there had ever been men taller than now, so I opened it and saw that the corpse was just as long as the coffin.


1.68.3
454
μετρήσας δὲ συνέχωσα ὀπίσω " .
I measured it and then reburied it.”


1.68.3
455
ὃ μὲν δή οἱ ἔλεγε τά περ ὀπώπεε , ὁ δὲ ἐννώσας τὰ λεγόμενα συνεβάλλετο τὸν Ὀρέστεα κατὰ τὸ θεοπρόπιον τοῦτον εἶναι , τῇδε συμβαλλόμενος ·
So the smith told what he had seen, and Lichas thought about what was said and reckoned that this was Orestes, according to the oracle.


1.68.4
456
τοῦ χαλκέος δύο ὁρέων φύσας τοὺς ἀνέμους εὕρισκε ἐόντας , τὸν δὲ ἄκμονα καὶ τὴν σφῦραν τόν τε τύπον καὶ τὸν ἀντίτυπον , τὸν δὲ ἐξελαυνόμενον σίδηρον τὸ πῆμα ἐπὶ πήματι κείμενον , κατὰ τοιόνδε τι εἰκάζων , ὡς ἐπὶ κακῷ ἀνθρώπου σίδηρος ἀνεύρηται .
In the smith's two bellows he found the winds, hammer and anvil were blow upon blow, and the forging of iron was woe upon woe, since he figured that iron was discovered as an evil for the human race.


1.68.5
457
συμβαλόμενος δὲ ταῦτα καὶ ἀπελθὼν ἐς Σπάρτην ἔφραζε Λακεδαιμονίοσσι πᾶν τὸ πρῆγμα .
After reasoning this out, he went back to Sparta and told the Lacedaemonians everything.


1.68.5
458
οἳ δὲ ἐκ λόγου πλαστοῦ ἐπενείκαντὲς οἱ αἰτίην ἐδίωξαν .
They made a pretence of bringing a charge against him and banishing him.


1.68.5
459
ὁ δὲ ἀπικόμενος ἐς Τεγέην καὶ φράζων τὴν ἑωυτοῦ συμφορὴν πρὸς τὸν χαλκέα ἐμισθοῦτο παρ’ οὐκ ἐκδιδόντος τὴν αὐλήν ·
Coming to Tegea, he explained his misfortune to the smith and tried to rent the courtyard, but the smith did not want to lease it.


1.68.6
460
χρόνῳ δὲ ὡς ἀνέγνωσε , ἐνοικίσθη , ἀνορύξας δὲ τὸν τάφον καὶ τὰ ὀστέα συλλέξας οἴχετο φέρων ἐς Σπάρτην .
Finally he persuaded him and set up residence there. He dug up the grave and collected the bones, then hurried off to Sparta with them.


1.68.6
461
καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου τοῦ χρόνου , ὅκως πειρῴατο ἀλλήλων , πολλῷ κατυπέρτεροι τῷ πολέμῳ ἐγίνοντο οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ·
Ever since then the Spartans were far superior to the Tegeans whenever they met each other in battle.


1.68.6
462
ἤδη δέ σφι καὶ ἡ πολλὴ τῆς Πελοποννήσου ἦν κατεστραμμένη .
By the time of Croesus' inquiry, the Spartans had subdued most of the Peloponnese.


1.69.1
463
ταῦτα δὴ ὦν πάντα πυνθανόμενος ὁ Κροῖσος ἔπεμπε ἐς Σπάρτην ἀγγέλους δῶρά τε φέροντας καὶ δεησομένους συμμαχίης , ἐντειλάμενός τε τὰ λέγειν χρῆν .
Croesus, then, aware of all this, sent messengers to Sparta with gifts to ask for an alliance, having instructed them what to say.


1.69.1
464
οἳ δὲ ἐλθόντες ἔλεγον " ἔπεμψε ἡμέας Κροῖσος ὁ Λυδῶν τε καὶ ἄλλων ἐθνέων βασιλεύς , λέγων τάδε .
They came and said:


1.69.2
465
ὦ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , χρήσαντος τοῦ θεοῦ τὸν Ἕλληνα φίλον προσθέσθαι , ὑμέας γὰρ πυνθάνομαι προεστάναι τῆς Ἑλλάδος , ὑμέας ὦν κατὰ τὸ χρηστήριον προσκαλέομαι φίλος τε θέλων γενέσθαι καὶ σύμμαχος ἄνευ τε δόλου καὶ ἀπάτης " .
“Croesus, King of  Lydia Lydia    and other nations, has sent us with this message: ‘Lacedaemonians, the god has declared that I should make the Greek my friend; now, therefore, since I learn that you are the leaders of  Greece Hellas   , I invite you, as the oracle bids; I would like to be your friend and ally, without deceit or guile.’”


1.69.3
466
Κροῖσος μὲν δὴ ταῦτα δι’ ἀγγέλων ἐπεκηρυκεύετο , Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ ἀκηκοότες καὶ αὐτοὶ τὸ θεοπρόπιον τὸ Κροίσῳ γενόμενον ἥσθησάν τε τῇ ἀπίξι τῶν Λυδῶν καὶ ἐποιήσαντο ὅρκια ξεινίης πέρι καὶ συμμαχίης ·
Croesus proposed this through his messengers; and the Lacedaemonians, who had already heard of the oracle given to Croesus, welcomed the coming of the Lydians and swore to be his friends and allies;


1.69.3
467
καὶ γὰρ τινὲς αὐτοὺς εὐεργεσίαι εἶχον ἐκ Κροίσου πρότερον ἔτι γεγονυῖαι .
and indeed they were obliged by certain benefits which they had received before from the king.


1.69.4
468
πέμψαντες γὰρ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐς Σάρδις χρυσὸν ὠνέοντο , ἐς ἄγαλμα βουλόμενοι χρήσασθαι τοῦτο τὸ νῦν τῆς Λακωνικῆς ἐν Θόρνακι ἵδρυται Ἀπόλλωνος ·
For the Lacedaemonians had sent to Sardis to buy gold, intending to use it for the statue of Apollo which now stands on Thornax in Laconia;


1.69.4
469
Κροῖσος δέ σφι ὠνεομένοισι ἔδωκε δωτίνην .
and Croesus, when they offered to buy it, made them a free gift of it.


1.70.1
470
τούτων τε ὦν εἵνεκεν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τὴν συμμαχίην ἐδέξαντο , καὶ ὅτι ἐκ πάντων σφέας προκρίνας Ἑλλήνων αἱρέετο φίλους .
For this reason, and because he had chosen them as his friends before all the other Greeks, the Lacedaemonians accepted the alliance.


1.70.1
471
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν αὐτοὶ ἦσαν ἕτοιμοι ἐπαγγείλαντι , τοῦτο δὲ ποιησάμενοι κρητῆρα χάλκεον ζῳδίων τε ἔξωθεν πλήσαντες περὶ τὸ χεῖλος καὶ μεγάθεϊ τριηκοσίους ἀμφορέας χωρέοντα ἦγον , δῶρον βουλόμενοι ἀντιδοῦναι Κροίσῳ .
So they declared themselves ready to serve him when he should require, and moreover they made a bowl of bronze, engraved around the rim outside with figures, and large enough to hold twenty-seven hundred gallons, and brought it with the intention of making a gift in return to Croesus.


1.70.2
472
οὗτος ὁ κρητὴρ οὐκ ἀπίκετο ἐς Σάρδις δι’ αἰτίας διφασίας λεγομένας τάσδε ·
This bowl never reached Sardis, for which two reasons are given:


1.70.2
473
οἱ μὲν Λακεδαιμόνιοι λέγουσι ὡς ἐπείτε ἀγόμενος ἐς τὰς Σάρδις ὁ κρητὴρ ἐγίνετο κατὰ τὴν Σαμίην , πυθόμενοι Σάμιοι ἀπελοίατο αὐτὸν νηυσὶ μακρῇσι ἐπιπλώσαντες ·
the Lacedaemonians say that when the bowl was near Samos on its way to Sardis, the Samians descended upon them in warships and carried it off;


1.70.3
474
αὐτοὶ δὲ Σάμιοι λέγουσι ὡς ἐπείτε ὑστέρησαν οἱ ἄγοντες τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων τὸν κρητῆρα , ἐπυνθάνοντο δὲ Σάρδις τε καὶ Κροῖσον ἡλωκέναι , ἀπέδοντο τὸν κρητῆρα ἐν Σάμῳ , ἰδιώτας δὲ ἄνδρας πριαμένους ἀναθεῖναί μιν ἐς τὸ Ἥραιον .
but the Samians themselves say that the Lacedaemonians who were bringing the bowl, coming too late, and learning that Sardis and Croesus were taken, sold it in Samos to certain private men, who set it up in the temple of Hera.


1.70.3
475
τάχα δὲ ἂν καὶ οἱ ἀποδόμενοι λέγοιεν ἀπικόμενοι ἐς Σπάρτην ὡς ἀπαιρεθείησαν ὑπὸ Σαμίων .
And it may be that the sellers of the bowl, when they returned to Sparta, said that they had been robbed of it by the Samians.


1.70.3
476
κατὰ μέν νυν τὸν κρητῆρα οὕτω ἔσχε .
Such are the tales about the bowl.


1.71.1
477
Κροῖσος δὲ ἁμαρτὼν τοῦ χρησμοῦ ἐποιέετο στρατηίην ἐς Καππαδοκίην , ἐλπίσας καταιρήσειν Κῦρόν τε καὶ τὴν Περσέων δύναμιν .
Croesus, mistaking the meaning of the oracle, invaded  Cappadocia Cappadocia   , expecting to destroy Cyrus and the Persian power.


1.71.2
478
παρασκευαζομένου δὲ Κροίσου στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ Πέρσας , τῶν τις Λυδῶν νομιζόμενος καὶ πρόσθε εἶναι σοφός , ἀπὸ δὲ ταύτης τῆς γνώμης καὶ τὸ κάρτα οὔνομα ἐν Λυδοῖσι ἔχων , συνεβούλευσε Κροίσῳ τάδε ·
But while he was preparing to march against the Persians, a certain Lydian, who was already held to be a wise man, and who, from the advice which he now gave, won a great name among the Lydians, advised him as follows (his name was Sandanis):


1.71.2
479
οὔνομά οἱ ἦν Σάνδανις .
“O King, you are getting ready to march against men who wear trousers of leather and whose complete wardrobe is of leather,


1.71.2
480
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἐπ’ ἄνδρας τοιούτους στρατεύεσθαι παρασκευάζεαι , οἳ σκυτίνας μὲν ἀναξυρίδας σκυτίνην δὲ τὴν ἄλλην ἐσθῆτα φορέουσι , σιτέονται δὲ οὐκ ὅσα ἐθέλουσι ἀλλ’ ὅσα ἔχουσι , χώρην ἔχοντες τρηχέαν .
and who eat not what they like but what they have; for their land is stony.


1.71.3
481
πρὸς δὲ οὐκ οἴνῳ διαχρέωνται ἀλλὰ ὑδροποτέουσι , οὐ σῦκα δὲ ἔχουσι τρώγειν , οὐκ ἄλλο ἀγαθὸν οὐδέν .
Further, they do not use wine, but drink water, have no figs to eat, or anything else that is good.


1.71.3
482
τοῦτο μὲν δή , εἰ νικήσεις , τί σφέας ἀπαιρήσεαι , τοῖσί γε μὴ ἔστι μηδέν ;
Now if you conquer them, of what will you deprive them, since they have nothing?


1.71.3
483
τοῦτο δέ , ἢν νικηθῇς , μάθε ὅσα ἀγαθὰ ἀποβαλέεις ·
But if on the other hand you are conquered, then look how many good things you will lose;


1.71.3
484
γευσάμενοι γὰρ τῶν ἡμετέρων ἀγαθῶν περιέξονται οὐδὲ ἀπωστοὶ ἔσονται .
for once they have tasted of our blessings they will cling so tightly to them that nothing will pry them away.


1.71.4
485
ἐγὼ μέν νυν θεοῖσι ἔχω χάριν , οἳ οὐκ ἐπὶ νόον ποιέουσι Πέρσῃσι στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ Λυδούς " .
For myself, then, I thank the gods that they do not put it in the heads of the Persians to march against the Lydians.”


1.71.4
486
ταῦτα λέγων οὐκ ἔπειθε τὸν Κροῖσον .
Sandanis spoke thus but he did not persuade Croesus.


1.71.4
487
Πέρσῃσι γάρ , πρὶν Λυδοὺς καταστρέψασθαι , ἦν οὔτε ἁβρὸν οὔτε ἀγαθὸν οὐδέν .
Indeed, before they conquered the Lydians, the Persians had no luxury and no comforts.


1.72.1
488
οἱ δὲ Καππαδόκαι ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων Σύριοι ὀνομάζονται ·
Now the Cappadocians are called by the Greeks Syrians,


1.72.1
489
ἦσαν δὲ οἱ Σύριοι οὗτοι τὸ μὲν πρότερον ἢ Πέρσας ἄρξαι Μήδων κατήκοοι , τότε δὲ Κύρου .
and these Syrians before the Persian rule were subjects of the Medes, and, at this time, of Cyrus.


1.72.2
490
ὁ γὰρ οὖρος ἦν τῆς τε Μηδικῆς ἀρχῆς καὶ τῆς Λυδικῆς ὁ Ἅλυς ποταμός , ὃς ῥέει ἐξ Ἀρμενίου ὄρεος διὰ Κιλίκων , μετὰ δὲ Ματιηνοὺς μὲν ἐν δεξιῇ ἔχει ῥέων , ἐκ δὲ τοῦ ἑτέρου Φρύγας ·
For the boundary of the Median and Lydian empires was the river Halys, which flows from the Armenian mountains first through Cilicia and afterwards between the Matieni on the right and the Phrygians on the other hand;


1.72.2
491
παραμειβόμενος δὲ τούτους καὶ ῥέων ἄνω πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον ἔνθεν μὲν Συρίους Καππαδόκας ἀπέργει , ἐξ εὐωνύμου δὲ Παφλαγόνας .
then, passing these and still flowing north, it separates the Cappadocian Syrians on the right from the Paphlagonians on the left.


1.72.3
492
οὕτω ὁ Ἅλυς ποταμὸς ἀποτάμνει σχεδὸν πάντα τῆς Ἀσίης τὰ κάτω ἐκ θαλάσσης τῆς ἀντίον Κύπρου ἐς τὸν Εὔξεινον πόντον .
Thus the Halys river cuts off nearly the whole of the lower part of Asia from the Cyprian to the Black sea.


1.72.3
493
ἔστι δὲ αὐχὴν οὗτος τῆς χώρης ταύτης ἁπάσης ·
Here is the narrowest neck of all this land;


1.72.3
494
μῆκος ὁδοῦ εὐζώνῳ ἀνδρὶ πέντε ἡμέραι ἀναισιμοῦνται .
the length of the journey across for a man traveling unencumbered is five days.


1.73.1
495
ἐστρατεύετο δὲ ὁ Κροῖσος ἐπὶ τὴν Καππαδοκίην τῶνδε εἵνεκα , καὶ γῆς ἱμέρῳ προσκτήσασθαι πρὸς τὴν ἑωυτοῦ μοῖραν βουλόμενος , καὶ μάλιστα τῷ χρηστηρίῳ πίσυνος ἐὼν καὶ τίσασθαι θέλων ὑπὲρ Ἀστυάγεος Κῦρον .
The reasons for Croesus' expedition against  Cappadocia Cappadocia    were these: he desired to gain territory in addition to his own, and (these were the chief causes) he trusted the oracle and wished to avenge Astyages on Cyrus; for Cyrus, son of Cambyses, had conquered Astyages and held him in subjection.


1.73.2
496
Ἀστυάγεα γὰρ τὸν Κυαξάρεω , ἐόντα Κροίσου μὲν γαμβρὸν Μήδων δὲ βασιλέα , Κῦρος ὁ Καμβύσεω καταστρεψάμενος εἶχε , γενόμενον γαμβρὸν Κροίσῳ ὧδε .
Now Astyages, son of Cyaxares and the king of Media, was Croesus' brother-in-law: and this is how he came to be so.


1.73.3
497
Σκυθέων τῶν νομάδων εἴλῃ ἀνδρῶν στασιάσασα ὑπεξῆλθε ἐς γῆν τὴν Μηδικήν ·
A tribe of wandering Scythians separated itself from the rest, and escaped into Median territory.


1.73.3
498
ἐτυράννευε δὲ τὸν χρόνον τοῦτον Μήδων Κυαξάρης ὁ Φραόρτεω τοῦ Δηιόκεω , ὃς τοὺς Σκύθας τούτους τὸ μὲν πρῶτον περιεῖπε εὖ ὡς ἐόντας ἱκέτας ·
This was then ruled by Cyaxares, son of Phraortes, son of Deioces.


1.73.3
499
ὥστε δὲ περὶ πολλοῦ ποιεόμενος αὐτούς , παῖδάς σφι παρέδωκε τὴν γλῶσσάν τε ἐκμαθεῖν καὶ τὴν τέχνην τῶν τόξων .
Cyaxares at first treated the Scythians kindly, as suppliants for his mercy; and, as he had a high regard for them, he entrusted boys to their tutelage to be taught their language and the skill of archery.


1.73.4
500
χρόνου δὲ γενομένου , καὶ αἰεὶ φοιτεόντων τῶν Σκυθέων ἐπ’ ἄγρην καὶ αἰεί τι φερόντων , καὶ κοτε συνήνεικε ἑλεῖν σφεας μηδέν ·
As time went on, it happened that the Scythians, who were accustomed to go hunting and always to bring something back, once had taken nothing,


1.73.4
501
νοστήσαντας δὲ αὐτοὺς κεινῇσι χερσὶ ὁ Κυαξάρης ( ἦν γάρ , ὡς διέδεξε , ὀργὴν ἄκρος ) τρηχέως κάρτα περιέσπε ἀεικείῃ .
and when they returned empty-handed, Cyaxares treated them very roughly and contemptuously (being, as appears from this, prone to anger).


1.73.5
502
οἳ δὲ ταῦτα πρὸς Κυαξάρεω παθόντες , ὥστε ἀνάξια σφέων αὐτῶν πεπονθότες , ἐβούλευσαν τῶν παρὰ σφίσι διδασκομένων παίδων ἕνα κατακόψαι , σκευάσαντες δὲ αὐτὸν ὥσπερ ἐώθεσαν καὶ τὰ θηρία σκευάζειν , Κυαξάρῃ δοῦναι φέροντες ὡς ἄγρην δῆθεν , δόντες δὲ τὴν ταχίστην κομίζεσθαι παρὰ Ἀλυάττεα τὸν Σαδυάττεω ἐς Σάρδις .
The Scythians, feeling themselves wronged by the treatment they had from Cyaxares, planned to take one of the boys who were their pupils and cut him in pieces; then, dressing the flesh as they were accustomed to dress the animals which they killed, to bring and give it to Cyaxares as if it were the spoils of the hunt; and after that, to make their way with all speed to Alyattes son of Sadyattes at  Sardis Sardis   . All this they did.


1.73.6
503
ταῦτα καὶ ἐγένετο .
Cyaxares and the guests who ate with him dined on the boy's flesh,


1.73.6
504
καὶ γὰρ Κυαξάρης καὶ οἱ παρεόντες δαιτυμόνες τῶν κρεῶν τούτων ἐπάσαντο , καὶ οἱ Σκύθαι ταῦτα ποιήσαντες Ἀλυάττεω ἱκέται ἐγένοντο .
and the Scythians, having done as they planned, fled to Alyattes for protection.


1.74.1
505
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα , οὐ γὰρ δὴ ὁ Ἀλυάττης ἐξεδίδου τοὺς Σκύθας ἐξαιτέοντι Κυαξάρῃ , πόλεμος τοῖσι Λυδοῖσι καὶ τοῖσι Μήδοισι ἐγεγόνεε ἐπ’ ἔτεα πέντε , ἐν τοῖσι πολλάκις μὲν οἱ Μῆδοι τοὺς Λυδοὺς ἐνίκησαν , πολλάκις δὲ οἱ Λυδοὶ τοὺς Μήδους , ἐν δὲ καὶ νυκτομαχίην τινὰ ἐποιήσαντο ·
After this, since Alyattes would not give up the Scythians to Cyaxares at his demand, there was war between the Lydians and the Medes for five years; each won many victories over the other, and once they fought a battle by night.


1.74.2
506
διαφέρουσι δέ σφι ἐπὶ ἴσης τὸν πόλεμον τῷ ἕκτῳ ἔτεϊ συμβολῆς γενομένης συνήνεικε ὥστε τῆς μάχης συνεστεώσης τὴν ἡμέρην ἐξαπίνης νύκτα γενέσθαι .
They were still warring with equal success, when it happened, at an encounter which occurred in the sixth year, that during the battle the day was suddenly turned to night.


1.74.2
507
τὴν δὲ μεταλλαγὴν ταύτην τῇ ἡμέρης Θαλῆς ὁ Μιλήσιος τοῖσι Ἴωσι προηγόρευσε ἔσεσθαι , οὖρον προθέμενος ἐνιαυτὸν τοῦτον ἐν τῷ δὴ καὶ ἐγένετο ἡ μεταβολή .
Thales of Miletus had foretold this loss of daylight to the Ionians, fixing it within the year in which the change did indeed happen.


1.74.3
508
οἱ δὲ Λυδοί τε καὶ οἱ Μῆδοι ἐπείτε εἶδον νύκτα ἀντὶ ἡμέρης γενομένην , τῆς μάχης τε ἐπαύσαντο καὶ μᾶλλόν τι ἔσπευσαν καὶ ἀμφότεροι εἰρήνην ἑωυτοῖσι γενέσθαι .
So when the Lydians and Medes saw the day turned to night, they stopped fighting, and both were the more eager to make peace.


1.74.3
509
οἱ δὲ συμβιβάσαντες αὐτοὺς ἦσαν οἵδε , Συέννεσίς τε ὁ Κίλιξ καὶ Λαβύνητος ὁ Βαβυλώνιος .
Those who reconciled them were Syennesis the Cilician and Labynetus the Babylonian;


1.74.4
510
οὗτοί σφι καὶ τὸ ὅρκιον οἱ σπεύσαντες γενέσθαι ἦσαν καὶ γάμων ἐπαλλαγὴν ἐποίησαν ·
they brought it about that there should be a sworn agreement and a compact of marriage between them:


1.74.4
511
Ἀλυάττεα γὰρ ἔγνωσαν δοῦναι τὴν θυγατέρα Ἀρύηνιν Ἀστυάγεϊ τῷ Κυαξάρεω παιδί ·
they judged that Alyattes should give his daughter Aryenis to Astyages, son of Cyaxares;


1.74.4
512
ἄνευ γὰρ ἀναγκαίης ἰσχυρῆς συμβάσιες ἰσχυραὶ οὐκ ἐθέλουσι συμμένειν .
for without strong constraint agreements will not keep their force.


1.74.5
513
ὅρκια δὲ ποιέεται ταῦτα τὰ ἔθνεα τὰ πέρ τε Ἕλληνες , καὶ πρὸς τούτοισι , ἐπεὰν τοὺς βραχίονας ἐπιτάμωνται ἐς τὴν ὁμοχροίην , τὸ αἷμα ἀναλείχουσι ἀλλήλων .
These nations make sworn compacts as do the Greeks; and besides, when they cut the skin of their arms, they lick each other's blood.


1.75.1
514
τοῦτον δὴ ὦν τὸν Ἀστυάγεα Κῦρος ἐόντα ἑωυτοῦ μητροπάτορα καταστρεψάμενος ἔσχε δι’ αἰτίην τὴν ἐγὼ ἐν τοῖσι ὀπίσω λόγοισι σημανέω ·
Cyrus had subjugated this Astyages, then, Cyrus' own mother's father, for the reason which I shall presently disclose.


1.75.2
515
τὰ Κροῖσος ἐπιμεμφόμενος τῷ Κύρῳ ἔς τε τὰ χρηστήρια ἔπεμπε εἰ στρατεύηται ἐπὶ Πέρσας , καὶ δὴ καὶ ἀπικομένου χρησμοῦ κιβδήλου , ἐλπίσας πρὸς ἑωυτοῦ τὸν χρησμὸν εἶναι , ἐστρατεύετο ἐς τὴν Περσέων μοῖραν .
Having this reason to quarrel with Cyrus, Croesus sent to ask the oracles if he should march against the Persians; and when a deceptive answer came he thought it to be favorable to him, and so led his army into the Persian territory.


1.75.3
516
ὡς δὲ ἀπίκετο ἐπὶ τὸν Ἅλυν ποταμὸν ὁ Κροῖσος , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν , ὡς μὲν ἐγὼ λέγω , κατὰ τὰς ἐούσας γεφύρας διεβίβασε τὸν στρατόν , ὡς δὲ ὁ πολλὸς λόγος Ἑλλήνων , Θαλῆς οἱ ὁ Μιλήσιος διεβίβασε .
When he came to the river  Halys Halys   , he transported his army across it — by the bridges which were there then, as I maintain; but the general belief of the Greeks is that Thales of  Miletus Miletus    got the army across.


1.75.4
517
ἀπορέοντος γὰρ Κροίσου ὅκως οἱ διαβήσεται τὸν ποταμὸν ὁ στρατός ( οὐ γὰρ δὴ εἶναι κω τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον τὰς γεφύρας ταύτας ) λέγεται παρεόντα τὸν Θαλῆν ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ ποιῆσαι αὐτῷ τὸν ποταμὸν ἐξ ἀριστερῆς χειρὸς ῥέοντα τοῦ στρατοῦ καὶ ἐκ δεξιῆς ῥέειν , ποιῆσαι δὲ ὧδε ·
The story is that, as Croesus did not know how his army could pass the river (as the aforesaid bridges did not yet exist then), Thales, who was in the encampment, made the river, which flowed on the left of the army, also flow on the right, in the following way.


1.75.5
518
ἄνωθεν τοῦ στρατοπέδου ἀρξάμενον διώρυχα βαθέαν ὀρύσσειν , ἄγοντα μηνοειδέα , ὅκως ἂν τὸ στρατόπεδον ἱδρυμένον κατὰ νώτου λάβοι , ταύτῃ κατὰ τὴν διώρυχα ἐκτραπόμενος ἐκ τῶν ἀρχαίων ῥεέθρων , καὶ αὖτις παραμειβόμενος τὸ στρατόπεδον ἐς τὰ ἀρχαῖα ἐσβάλλοι ·
Starting from a point on the river upstream from the camp, he dug a deep semi-circular trench, so that the stream, turned from its ancient course, would flow in the trench to the rear of the camp and, passing it, would issue into its former bed,


1.75.5
519
ὥστε ἐπείτε καὶ ἐσχίσθη τάχιστα ὁ ποταμός , ἀμφοτέρῃ διαβατὸς ἐγένετο , οἳ δὲ καὶ τὸ παράπαν λέγουσι καὶ τὸ ἀρχαῖον ῥέεθρον ἀποξηρανθῆναι .
with the result that as soon as the river was thus divided into two, both channels could be forded.


1.75.6
520
ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν οὐ προσίεμαι ·
Some even say that the ancient channel dried up altogether.


1.75.6
521
κῶς γὰρ ὀπίσω πορευόμενοι διέβησαν αὐτόν ;
But I do not believe this; for in that case, how did they pass the river when they were returning?


1.76.1
522
Κροῖσος δὲ ἐπείτε διαβὰς σὺν τῷ στρατῷ ἀπίκετο τῆς Καππαδοκίης ἐς τὴν Πτερίην καλεομένην ( ἡ δὲ Πτερίη ἐστὶ τῆς χώρης ταύτης τὸ ἰσχυρότατον , κατὰ Σινώπην πόλιν τὴν ἐν Εὐξείνῳ πόντῳ μάλιστά κῃ κειμένη ) , ἐνθαῦτα ἐστρατοπεδεύετο φθείρων τῶν Συρίων τοὺς κλήρους ·
Passing over with his army, Croesus then came to the part of  Cappadocia Cappadocia    called  Pteria Pteria    (it is the strongest part of this country and lies on the line of the city of  Sinope Sinope    on the  Black Euxine sea   ), where he encamped and devastated the farms of the Syrians;


1.76.2
523
καὶ εἷλε μὲν τῶν Πτερίων τὴν πόλιν καὶ ἠνδραποδίσατο , εἷλε δὲ τὰς περιοικίδας αὐτῆς πάσας , Συρίους τε οὐδὲν ἐόντας αἰτίους ἀναστάτους ἐποίησε .
and he took and enslaved the city of the Pterians, and took all the places around it also, and drove the Syrians from their homes, though they had done him no harm.


1.76.2
524
Κῦρος δὲ ἀγείρας τὸν ἑωυτοῦ στρατὸν καὶ παραλαβὼν τοὺς μεταξὺ οἰκέοντας πάντας ἠντιοῦτο Κροίσῳ .
Cyrus, mustering his army, advanced to oppose Croesus, gathering to him all those who lived along the way.


1.76.3
525
πρὶν δὲ ἐξελαύνειν ὁρμῆσαι τὸν στρατόν , πέμψας κήρυκας ἐς τοὺς Ἴωνας ἐπειρᾶτο σφέας ἀπὸ Κροίσου ἀπιστάναι .
But before beginning his march, he sent heralds to the Ionians to try to draw them away from Croesus.


1.76.3
526
Ἴωνες μέν νυν οὐκ ἐπείθοντο .
The Ionians would not be prevailed on;


1.76.3
527
Κῦρος δὲ ὡς ἀπίκετο καὶ ἀντεστρατοπεδεύσατο Κροίσῳ , ἐνθαῦτα ἐν τῇ Πτερίῃ χωρῇ ἐπειρῶντο κατὰ τὸ ἰσχυρὸν ἀλλήλων .
but when Cyrus arrived and encamped face to face with Croesus, there in the Pterian country the armies had a trial of strength.


1.76.4
528
μάχης δὲ καρτερῆς γενομένης καὶ πεσόντων ἀμφοτέρων πολλῶν , τέλος οὐδέτεροι νικήσαντες διέστησαν νυκτὸς ἐπελθούσης .
The fighting was fierce, many on both sides fell, and at nightfall they disengaged with neither side victorious.


1.76.4
529
καὶ τὰ μὲν στρατόπεδα ἀμφότερα οὕτω ἠγωνίσατο .
The two sides contended thus.


1.77.1
530
Κροῖσος δὲ μεμφθεὶς κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος τὸ ἑωυτοῦ στράτευμα ( ἦν γάρ οἱ ὁ συμβαλὼν στρατὸς πολλὸν ἐλάσσων ἢ ὁ Κύρου ) , τοῦτο μεμφθείς , ὡς τῇ ὑστεραίῃ οὐκ ἐπειρᾶτο ἐπιὼν ὁ Κῦρος , ἀπήλαυνε ἐς τὰς Σάρδις ἐν νόῳ ἔχων παρακαλέσας μὲν Αἰγυπτίους κατὰ τὸ ὅρκιον ( ἐποιήσατο γὰρ καὶ πρὸς Ἄμασιν βασιλεύοντα Αἰγύπτου συμμαχίην πρότερον ἤ περ πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους ) , μεταπεμψάμενος δὲ καὶ Βαβυλωνίους ( καὶ γὰρ πρὸς τούτους αὐτῷ ἐπεποίητο συμμαχίη , ἐτυράννευε δὲ τὸν χρόνον τοῦτον τῶν Βαβυλωνίων Λαβύνητος ) , ἐπαγγείλας δὲ καὶ Λακεδαιμονίοισι παρεῖναι ἐς χρόνον ῥητόν ἁλίσας τε δὴ τούτους καὶ τὴν ἑωυτοῦ συλλέξας στρατιὴν ἐνένωτο τὸν χειμῶνα παρείς , ἅμα τῷ ἔαρι στρατεύειν ἐπὶ τοὺς Πέρσας .
Croesus was not content with the size of his force, for his army that had engaged was far smaller than that of Cyrus; therefore, when on the day after the battle Cyrus did not try attacking again, he marched away to  Sardis Sardis   , intending to summon the Egyptians in accordance with their treaty


1.77.4
531
καὶ ὃ μὲν ταῦτα φρονέων , ὡς ἀπίκετο ἐς τὰς Σάρδις , ἔπεμπε κήρυκας κατὰ τὰς συμμαχίας προερέοντας ἐς πέμπτον μῆνα συλλέγεσθαι ἐς Σάρδις ·
With such an intention, as soon as he returned to Sardis, he sent heralds to all his allies, summoning them to assemble at Sardis in five months' time;


1.77.4
532
τὸν δὲ παρεόντα καὶ μαχεσάμενον στρατὸν Πέρσῃσι , ὃς ἦν αὐτοῦ ξεινικός , πάντα ἀπεὶς διεσκέδασε οὐδαμὰ ἐλπίσας μὴ κοτε ἄρα ἀγωνισάμενος οὕτω παραπλησίως Κῦρος ἐλάσῃ ἐπὶ Σάρδις .
and as for the soldiers whom he had with him, who had fought with the Persians, all of them who were mercenaries he discharged, never thinking that after a contest so equal Cyrus would march against Sardis.


1.78.1
533
ταῦτα ἐπιλεγομένῳ Κροίσῳ τὸ προάστειον πᾶν ὀφίων ἐνεπλήσθη ·
This was how Croesus reasoned. Meanwhile, snakes began to swarm in the outer part of the city;


1.78.1
534
φανέντων δὲ αὐτῶν οἱ ἵπποι μετιέντες τὰς νομὰς νέμεσθαι φοιτέοντες κατήσθιον .
and when they appeared the horses, leaving their accustomed pasture, devoured them.


1.78.1
535
ἰδόντι δὲ τοῦτο Κροίσῳ , ὥσπερ καὶ ἦν ἔδοξε τέρας εἶναι ·
When Croesus saw this he thought it a portent, and so it was.


1.78.2
536
αὐτίκα δὲ ἔπεμπε θεοπρόπους ἐς τῶν ἐξηγητέων Τελμησσέων .
He at once sent to the homes of the Telmessian interpreters, to inquire concerning it;


1.78.2
537
ἀπικομένοισι δὲ τοῖσι θεοπρόποισι καὶ μαθοῦσι πρὸς Τελμησσέων τὸ θέλει σημαίνειν τὸ τέρας , οὐκ ἐξεγένετο Κροίσῳ ἀπαγγεῖλαι ·
but though his messengers came and learned from the Telmessians what the portent meant, they could not bring back word to Croesus,


1.78.2
538
πρὶν γὰρ ἢ ὀπίσω σφέας ἀναπλῶσαι ἐς τὰς Σάρδις ἥλω ὁ Κροῖσος .
for he was a prisoner before they could make their voyage back to Sardis.


1.78.3
539
Τελμησσέες μέντοι τάδε ἔγνωσαν , στρατὸν ἀλλόθροον προσδόκιμον εἶναι Κροίσῳ ἐπὶ τὴν χώρην , ἀπικόμενον δὲ τοῦτον καταστρέψεσθαι τοὺς ἐπιχωρίους , λέγοντες ὄφιν εἶναι γῆς παῖδα , ἵππον δὲ πολέμιόν τε καὶ ἐπήλυδα .
Nonetheless, this was the judgment of the Telmessians: that Croesus must expect a foreign army to attack his country, and that when it came, it would subjugate the inhabitants of the land:


1.78.3
540
Τελμησσέες μέν νυν ταῦτα ὑπεκρίναντο Κροίσῳ ἤδη ἡλωκότι , οὐδὲν κω εἰδότες τῶν ἦν περὶ Σάρδις τε καὶ αὐτὸν Κροῖσον .
for the snake, they said, was the offspring of the land, but the horse was an enemy and a foreigner. This was the answer which the Telmessians gave Croesus, knowing as yet nothing of the fate of Sardis and of the king himself; but when they gave it, Croesus was already taken.


1.79.1
541
Κῦρος δὲ αὐτίκα ἀπελαύνοντος Κροίσου μετὰ τὴν μάχην τὴν γενομένην ἐν τῇ Πτερίῃ , μαθὼν ὡς ἀπελάσας μέλλοι Κροῖσος διασκεδᾶν τὸν στρατόν , βουλευόμενος εὕρισκε πρῆγμά οἷ εἶναι ἐλαύνειν ὡς δύναιτο τάχιστα ἐπὶ τὰς Σάρδις , πρὶν ἢ τὸ δεύτερον ἁλισθῆναι τῶν Λυδῶν τὴν δύναμιν .
When Croesus marched away after the battle in the Pterian country, Cyrus, learning that Croesus had gone intending to disband his army, deliberated and perceived that it would be opportune for him to march quickly against  Sardis Sardis   , before the power of the Lydians could be assembled again.


1.79.2
542
ὡς δέ οἱ ταῦτα ἔδοξε , καὶ ἐποίεε κατὰ τάχος ·
This he decided, and this he did immediately;


1.79.2
543
ἐλάσας γὰρ τὸν στρατὸν ἐς τὴν Λυδίην αὐτὸς ἄγγελος Κροίσῳ ἐληλύθεε .
he marched his army into Lydia and so came himself to bring the news of it to Croesus.


1.79.2
544
ἐνθαῦτα Κροῖσος ἐς ἀπορίην πολλὴν ἀπιγμένος , ὥς οἱ παρὰ δόξαν ἔσχε τὰ πρήγματα ἢ ὡς αὐτὸς κατεδόκεε , ὅμως τοὺς Λυδοὺς ἐξῆγε ἐς μάχην .
All had turned out contrary to Croesus' expectation. He was in a great quandary; nevertheless, he led out the Lydians to battle.


1.79.3
545
ἦν δὲ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ἔθνος οὐδὲν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ οὔτε ἀνδρηιότερον οὔτε ἀλκιμώτερον τοῦ Λυδίου .
Now at this time there was no nation in Asia more valiant or warlike than the Lydian.


1.79.3
546
ἡ δὲ μάχη σφέων ἦν ἀπ’ ἵππων , δόρατά τε ἐφόρεον μεγάλα , καὶ αὐτοὶ ἦσαν ἱππεύεσθαι ἀγαθοί .
It was their custom to fight on horseback, carrying long spears, and they were skillful at managing horses.


1.80.1
547
ἐς τὸ πεδίον δὲ συνελθόντων τοῦτο τὸ πρὸ τοῦ ἄστεος ἐστὶ τοῦ Σαρδιηνοῦ , ἐὸν μέγα τε καὶ ψιλὸν ( διὰ δὲ αὐτοῦ ποταμοὶ ῥέοντες καὶ ἄλλοι καὶ Ὕλλος συρρηγνῦσι ἐς τὸν μέγιστον , καλεόμενον δὲ Ἕρμον , ὃς ἐξ ὄρεος ἱροῦ μητρὸς Δινδυμήνης ῥέων ἐκδιδοῖ ἐς θάλασσαν κατὰ Φωκαίην πόλιν ) , ἐνθαῦτα ὁ Κῦρος ὡς εἶδε τοὺς Λυδοὺς ἐς μάχην τασσομένους , καταρρωδήσας τὴν ἵππον ἐποίησε Ἁρπάγου ὑποθεμένου ἀνδρὸς Μήδου τοιόνδε ·
So the armies met in the plain, wide and bare, that is before the city of  Sardis Sardis   : the Hyllus and other rivers flow across it and run violently together into the greatest of them, which is called Hermus (this flows from the mountain sacred to the Mother Dindymene and empties into the sea near the city of  Foca Phocaea   ).


1.80.2
548
ὅσαι τῷ στρατῷ τῷ ἑωυτοῦ εἵποντο σιτοφόροι τε καὶ σκευοφόροι κάμηλοι , ταύτας πάσας ἁλίσας καὶ ἀπελὼν τὰ ἄχθεα ἄνδρας ἐπ’ αὐτὰς ἀνέβησε ἱππάδα στολὴν ἐνεσταλμένους , σκευάσας δὲ αὐτοὺς προσέταξε τῆς ἄλλης στρατιῆς προϊέναι πρὸς τὴν Κροίσου ἵππον , τῇ δὲ καμήλῳ ἕπεσθαι τὸν πεζὸν στρατὸν ἐκέλευσε , ὄπισθε δὲ τοῦ πεζοῦ ἐπέταξε τὴν πᾶσαν ἵππον .
When Cyrus saw the Lydians maneuvering their battle-lines here, he was afraid of their cavalry, and therefore at the urging of one Harpagus, a Mede, he did as I shall describe. Assembling all the camels that followed his army bearing food and baggage, he took off their burdens and mounted men upon them equipped like cavalrymen; having equipped them, he ordered them to advance before his army against Croesus' cavalry; he directed the infantry to follow the camels, and placed all his cavalry behind the infantry.


1.80.3
549
ὡς δέ οἱ πάντες διετετάχατο , παραίνεσε τῶν μὲν ἄλλων Λυδῶν μὴ φειδομένους κτείνειν πάντα τὸν ἐμποδὼν γινόμενον , Κροῖσον δὲ αὐτὸν μὴ κτείνειν , μηδὲ ἢν συλλαμβανόμενος ἀμύνηται .
When they were all in order, he commanded them to kill all the other Lydians who came in their way, and spare none, but not to kill Croesus himself, even if he should defend himself against capture.


1.80.4
550
ταῦτα μὲν παραίνεσε , τὰς δὲ καμήλους ἔταξε ἀντία τῆς ἵππου τῶνδε εἵνεκεν ·
Such was his command.


1.80.4
551
κάμηλον ἵππος φοβέεται , καὶ οὐκ ἀνέχεται οὔτε τὴν ἰδέην αὐτοῦ ὁρέων οὔτε τὴν ὀδμὴν ὀσφραινόμενος .
The reason for his posting the camels to face the cavalry was this: horses fear camels and can endure neither the sight nor the smell of them;


1.80.4
552
αὐτοῦ δὴ ὦν τούτου εἵνεκεν ἐσεσόφιστο , ἵνα τῷ Κροίσῳ ἄχρηστον ᾖ τὸ ἱππικόν , τῷ δή τι καὶ ἐπεῖχε ἐλλάμψεσθαι ὁ Λυδός .
this then was the intention of his maneuver, that Croesus' cavalry, on which the Lydian relied to distinguish himself, might be of no use.


1.80.5
553
ὡς δὲ καὶ συνήισαν ἐς τὴν μάχην , ἐνθαῦτα ὡς ὤσφροντο τάχιστα τῶν καμήλων οἱ ἵπποι καὶ εἶδον αὐτάς , ὀπίσω ἀνέστρεφον , διέφθαρτό τε τῷ Κροίσῳ ἡ ἐλπίς .
So when battle was joined, as soon as the horses smelled and saw the camels they turned to flight, and all Croesus' hope was lost.


1.80.6
554
οὐ μέντοι οἵ γε Λυδοὶ τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν δειλοὶ ἦσαν , ἀλλ’ ὡς ἔμαθον τὸ γινόμενον , ἀποθορόντες ἀπὸ τῶν ἵππων πεζοὶ τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι συνέβαλλον .
Nevertheless the Lydians were no cowards; when they saw what was happening, they leaped from their horses and fought the Persians on foot.


1.80.6
555
χρόνῳ δὲ πεσόντων ἀμφοτέρων πολλῶν ἐτράποντο οἱ Λυδοί , κατειληθέντες δὲ ἐς τὸ τεῖχος ἐπολιορκέοντο ὑπὸ τῶν Περσέων .
Many of both armies fell; at length the Lydians were routed and driven within their city wall, where they were besieged by the Persians.


1.81.1
556
τοῖσι μὲν δὴ κατεστήκεε πολιορκίη .
So then they were besieged.


1.81.1
557
Κροῖσος δὲ δοκέων οἱ χρόνον ἐπὶ μακρὸν ἔσεσθαι τὴν πολιορκίην ἔπεμπε ἐκ τοῦ τείχεος ἄλλους ἀγγέλους ἐς τὰς συμμαχίας .
But Croesus, supposing that the siege would last a long time, again sent messengers from the city to his allies;


1.81.1
558
οἱ μὲν γὰρ πρότεροι διεπέμποντο ἐς πέμπτον μῆνα προερέοντες συλλέγεσθαι ἐς Σάρδις , τούτους δὲ ἐξέπεμπε τὴν ταχίστην δέεσθαι βοηθέειν ὡς πολιορκεομένου Κροίσου .
whereas the former envoys had been sent to summon them to muster at Sardis in five months' time, these were to announce that Croesus was besieged and to plead for help as quickly as possible.


1.82.1
559
ἔς τε δὴ ὦν τὰς ἄλλας ἔπεμπε συμμαχίας καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐς Λακεδαίμονα .
So he sent to the Lacedaemonians as well as to the rest of the allies.


1.82.1
560
τοῖσι δὲ καὶ αὐτοῖσι τοῖσι Σπαρτιήτῃσι κατ’ αὐτὸν τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον συνεπεπτώκεε ἔρις ἐοῦσα πρὸς Ἀργείους περὶ χώρου καλεομένου Θυρέης ·
Now at this very time the Spartans themselves were feuding with the Argives over the country called Thyrea;


1.82.2
561
τὰς γὰρ Θυρέας ταύτας ἐούσας τῆς Ἀργολίδος μοίρης ἀποταμόμενοι ἔσχον οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι .
for this was a part of the Argive territory which the Lacedaemonians had cut off and occupied.


1.82.2
562
ἦν δὲ καὶ ἡ μέχρι Μαλέων ἡ πρὸς ἑσπέρην Ἀργείων , ἥ τε ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ χώρῇ καὶ ἡ Κυθηρίη νῆσος καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ τῶν νήσων .
(All the land towards the west, as far as Malea, belonged then to the Argives, and not only the mainland, but the island of Cythera and the other islands.)


1.82.3
563
βοηθησάντων δὲ Ἀργείων τῇ σφετέρῃ ἀποταμνομένῃ , ἐνθαῦτα συνέβησαν ἐς λόγους συνελθόντες ὥστε τριηκοσίους ἑκατέρων μαχέσασθαι , ὁκότεροι δ’ ἂν περιγένωνται , τούτων εἶναι τὸν χῶρον ·
The Argives came out to save their territory from being cut off, then after debate the two armies agreed that three hundred of each side should fight, and whichever party won would possess the land.


1.82.3
564
τὸ δὲ πλῆθος τοῦ στρατοῦ ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι ἑκάτερον ἐς τὴν ἑωυτοῦ μηδὲ παραμένειν ἀγωνιζομένων , τῶνδε εἵνεκεν ἵνα μὴ παρεόντων τῶν στρατοπέδων ὁρῶντες οἱ ἕτεροι ἑσσουμένους τοὺς σφετέρους ἀπαμύνοιεν .
The rest of each army was to go away to its own country and not be present at the battle, since, if the armies remained on the field, the men of either party might render assistance to their comrades if they saw them losing.


1.82.4
565
συνθέμενοι ταῦτα ἀπαλλάσσοντο , λογάδες δὲ ἑκατέρων ὑπολειφθέντες συνέβαλον .
Having agreed, the armies drew off, and picked men of each side remained and fought.


1.82.4
566
μαχομένων δὲ σφέων καὶ γινομένων ἰσοπαλέων ὑπελείποντο ἐξ ἀνδρῶν ἑξακοσίων τρεῖς , Ἀργείων μὲν Ἀλκήνωρ τε καὶ Χρομίος , Λακεδαιμονίων δὲ Ὀθρυάδης ·
Neither could gain advantage in the battle; at last, only three out of the six hundred were left, Alcenor and Chromios of the Argives, Othryades of the Lacedaemonians:


1.82.4
567
ὑπελείφθησαν δὲ οὗτοι νυκτὸς ἐπελθούσης .
these three were left alive at nightfall.


1.82.5
568
οἱ μὲν δὴ δύο τῶν Ἀργείων ὡς νενικηκότες ἔθεον ἐς τὸ Ἄργος , ὁ δὲ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων Ὀθρυάδης σκυλεύσας τοὺς Ἀργείων νεκροὺς καὶ προσφορήσας τὰ ὅπλα πρὸς τὸ ἑωυτοῦ στρατόπεδον ἐν τῇ τάξι εἶχε ἑωυτόν .
Then the two Argives, believing themselves victors, ran to Argos;


1.82.5
569
ἡμέρῃ δὲ δευτέρῃ παρῆσαν πυνθανόμενοι ἀμφότεροι .
but Othryades the Lacedaemonian, after stripping the Argive dead and taking the arms to his camp, waited at his position. On the second day both armies came to learn the issue.


1.82.6
570
τέως μὲν δὴ αὐτοὶ ἑκάτεροι ἔφασαν νικᾶν , λέγοντες οἳ μὲν ὡς ἑωυτῶν πλεῦνες περιγεγόνασι , οἳ δὲ τοὺς μὲν ἀποφαίνοντες πεφευγότας , τὸν δὲ σφέτερον παραμείναντα καὶ σκυλεύσαντα τοὺς ἐκείνων νεκρούς ·
For a while both claimed the victory, the Argives arguing that more of their men had survived, the Lacedaemonians showing that the Argives had fled, while their man had stood his ground and stripped the enemy dead.


1.82.7
571
τέλος δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἔριδος συμπεσόντες ἐμάχοντο , πεσόντων δὲ καὶ ἀμφοτέρων πολλῶν ἐνίκων Λακεδαιμόνιοι .
At last from arguing they fell to fighting; many of both sides fell, but the Lacedaemonians gained the victory.


1.82.7
572
Ἀργεῖοι μέν νυν ἀπὸ τούτου τοῦ χρόνου κατακειράμενοι τὰς κεφαλάς , πρότερον ἐπάναγκες κομῶντες , ἐποιήσαντο νόμον τε καὶ κατάρην μὴ πρότερον θρέψειν κόμην Ἀργείων μηδένα , μηδὲ τὰς γυναῖκάς σφι χρυσοφορήσειν , πρὶν Θυρέας ἀνασώσωνται .
The Argives, who before had worn their hair long by fixed custom, shaved their heads ever after and made a law, with a curse added to it, that no Argive grow his hair, and no Argive woman wear gold, until they recovered Thyreae;


1.82.8
573
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ τὰ ἐναντία τούτων ἔθεντο νόμον ·
and the Lacedaemonians made a contrary law, that they wear their hair long ever after;


1.82.8
574
οὐ γὰρ κομῶντες πρὸ τούτου ἀπὸ τούτου κομᾶν .
for until now they had not worn it so.


1.82.8
575
τὸν δὲ ἕνα λέγουσι τὸν περιλειφθέντα τῶν τριηκοσίων Ὀθρυάδην , αἰσχυνόμενον ἀπονοστέειν ἐς Σπάρτην τῶν οἱ συλλοχιτέων διεφθαρμένων , αὐτοῦ μιν ἐν τῇσι Θυρέῃσι καταχρήσασθαι ἑωυτόν .
Othryades, the lone survivor of the three hundred, was ashamed, it is said, to return to Sparta after all the men of his company had been killed, and killed himself on the spot at Thyreae.


1.83.1
576
τοιούτων δὲ τοῖσι Σπαρτιήτῃσι ἐνεστεώτων πρηγμάτων ἧκε ὁ Σαρδιηνὸς κῆρυξ δεόμενος Κροίσῳ βοηθέειν πολιορκεομένῳ .
The Sardian herald came after this had happened to the Spartans to ask for their help for Croesus, now besieged;


1.83.1
577
οἳ δὲ ὅμως , ἐπείτε ἐπύθοντο τοῦ κήρυκος , ὁρμέατο βοηθέειν .
nonetheless, when they heard the herald, they prepared to send help;


1.83.1
578
καί σφι ἤδη παρεσκευασμένοισι καὶ νεῶν ἐουσέων ἑτοίμων ἦλθε ἄλλη ἀγγελίη , ὡς ἡλώκοι τὸ τεῖχος τῶν Λυδῶν καὶ ἔχοιτο Κροῖσος ζωγρηθείς .
but when they were already equipped and their ships ready, a second message came that the fortification of the Lydians was taken and Croesus a prisoner.


1.83.1
579
οὕτω δὴ οὗτοι μὲν συμφορὴν ποιησάμενοι μεγάλην ἐπέπαυντο .
Then, though very sorry indeed, they ceased their efforts.


1.84.1
580
Σάρδιες δὲ ἥλωσαν ὧδε .
This is how Sardis was taken.


1.84.1
581
ἐπειδὴ τεσσερεσκαιδεκάτη ἐγένετο ἡμέρη πολιορκεομένῳ Κροίσῳ , Κῦρος τῇ στρατιῇ τῇ ἑωυτοῦ διαπέμψας ἱππέας προεῖπε τῷ πρώτῳ ἐπιβάντι τοῦ τείχεος δῶρα δώσειν .
When Croesus had been besieged for fourteen days, Cyrus sent horsemen around in his army to promise to reward whoever first mounted the wall.


1.84.2
582
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο πειρησαμένης τῆς στρατιῆς ὡς οὐ προεχώρεε , ἐνθαῦτα τῶν ἄλλων πεπαυμένων ἀνὴρ Μάρδος ἐπειρᾶτο προσβαίνων , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Ὑροιάδης , κατὰ τοῦτο τῆς ἀκροπόλιος τῇ οὐδεὶς ἐτέτακτο φύλακος ·
After this the army made an assault, but with no success.


1.84.2
583
οὐ γὰρ ἦν δεινὸν κατὰ τοῦτο μὴ ἁλῷ κοτέ .
Then, when all the others were stopped, a certain Mardian called Hyroeades attempted to mount by a part of the acropolis where no guard had been set, since no one feared that it could be taken by an attack made here.


1.84.3
584
ἀπότομός τε γὰρ ἐστὶ ταύτῃ ἡ ἀκρόπολις καὶ ἄμαχος ·
For here the height on which the acropolis stood is sheer and unlikely to be assaulted;


1.84.3
585
τῇ οὐδὲ Μήλης ὁ πρότερον βασιλεὺς Σαρδίων μούνῃ οὐ περιήνεικε τὸν λέοντα τὸν οἱ ἡ παλλακὴ ἔτεκε , Τελμησσέων δικασάντων ὡς περιενειχθέντος τοῦ λέοντος τὸ τεῖχος ἔσονται Σάρδιες ἀνάλωτοι .
this was the only place where Meles the former king of Sardis had not carried the lion which his concubine had borne him, the Telmessians having declared that if this lion were carried around the walls, Sardis could never be taken.


1.84.3
586
ὁ δὲ Μήλης κατὰ τὸ ἄλλο τεῖχος περιενείκας , τῇ ἦν ἐπίμαχον τὸ χωρίον τῆς ἀκροπόλιος , κατηλόγησε τοῦτο ὡς ἐὸν ἄμαχόν τε καὶ ἀπότομον ·
Meles then carried the lion around the rest of the wall of the acropolis where it could be assaulted, but neglected this place, because the height was sheer and defied attack.


1.84.3
587
ἔστι δὲ πρὸς τοῦ Τμώλου τετραμμένον τῆς πόλιος .
It is on the side of the city which faces towards Tmolus.


1.84.4
588
ὁ ὦν δὴ Ὑροιάδης οὗτος ὁ Μάρδος ἰδὼν τῇ προτεραίῃ τῶν τινα Λυδῶν κατὰ τοῦτο τῆς ἀκροπόλιος καταβάντα ἐπὶ κυνέην ἄνωθεν κατακυλισθεῖσαν καὶ ἀνελόμενον , ἐφράσθη καὶ ἐς θυμὸν ἐβάλετο ·
The day before, then, Hyroeades, this Mardian, had seen one of the Lydians come down by this part of the acropolis after a helmet that had fallen down, and fetch it; he took note of this and considered it.


1.84.5
589
τότε δὲ δὴ αὐτός τε ἀναβεβήκεε καὶ κατ’ αὐτὸν ἄλλοι Περσέων ἀνέβαινον ·
And now he climbed up himself, and other Persians after him.


1.84.5
590
προσβάντων δὲ συχνῶν οὕτω δὴ Σάρδιές τε ἡλώκεσαν καὶ πᾶν τὸ ἄστυ ἐπορθέετο .
Many ascended, and thus Sardis was taken and all the city sacked.


1.85.1
591
κατ’ αὐτὸν δὲ Κροῖσον τάδε ἐγίνετο .
I will now relate what happened to Croesus himself.


1.85.1
592
ἦν οἱ παῖς , τοῦ καὶ πρότερον ἐπεμνήσθην , τὰ μὲν ἄλλα ἐπιεικής , ἄφωνος δέ .
He had a son, whom I have already mentioned, fine in other respects, but mute.


1.85.1
593
ἐν τῇ ὦν παρελθούσῃ εὐεστοῖ ὁ Κροῖσος τὸ πᾶν ἐς αὐτὸν ἐπεποιήκεε , ἄλλα τε ἐπιφραζόμενος , καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐς Δελφοὺς περὶ αὐτοῦ ἐπεπόμφεε χρησομένους .
Now in his days of prosperity past Croesus had done all that he could for his son; and besides resorting to other devices he had sent to Delphi to inquire of the oracle concerning him.


1.85.2
594
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη οἱ εἶπε τάδε .
The Pythian priestess answered him thus:


1.85.2
595
Λυδὲ γένος , πολλῶν βασιλεῦ , μέγα νήπιε Κροῖσε , μὴ βούλου πολύευκτον ἰὴν ἀνὰ δώματ’ ἀκούειν παιδὸς φθεγγομένου .
"Lydian, king of many, greatly foolish Croesus,


1.85.2
596
τὸ δέ σοι πολὺ λώιον ἀμφὶς ἔμμεναι ·
Wish not to hear in the palace the voice often prayed for / Of your son speaking.


1.85.2
597
αὐδήσει γὰρ ἐν ἤματι πρῶτον ἀνόλβῳ .
It were better for you that he remain mute as before; / For on an unlucky day shall he first speak."


1.85.3
598
ἁλισκομένου δὴ τοῦ τείχεος , ἤιε γὰρ τῶν τις Περσέων ἀλλογνώσας Κροῖσον ὡς ἀποκτενέων , Κροῖσος μέν νυν ὁρέων ἐπιόντα ὑπὸ τῆς παρεούσης συμφορῆς παρημελήκεε , οὐδὲ τί οἱ διέφερε πληγέντι ἀποθανεῖν ·
So at the taking of the fortification a certain Persian, not knowing who Croesus was, came at him meaning to kill him. Croesus saw him coming, but because of the imminent disaster he was past caring, and it made no difference to him whether he were struck and killed.


1.85.4
599
ὁ δὲ παῖς οὗτος ὁ ἄφωνος ὡς εἶδε ἐπιόντα τὸν Πέρσην , ὑπὸ δέους τε καὶ κακοῦ ἔρρηξε φωνήν , εἶπε δὲ " ὤνθρώπε , μὴ κτεῖνε Κροῖσον " .
But this mute son, when he saw the Persian coming on, in fear and distress broke into speech and cried, “Man, do not kill Croesus!”


1.85.4
600
οὗτος μὲν δὴ τοῦτο πρῶτον ἐφθέγξατο , μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο ἤδη ἐφώνεε τὸν πάντα χρόνον τῆς ζόης .
This was the first word he uttered, and after that for all the rest of his life he had power of speech.


1.86.1
601
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι τάς τε δὴ Σάρδις ἔσχον καὶ αὐτὸν Κροῖσον ἐζώγρησαν , ἄρξαντα ἔτεα τεσσερεσκαίδεκα καὶ τεσσερεσκαίδεκα ἡμέρας πολιορκηθέντα , κατὰ τὸ χρηστήριόν τε καταπαύσαντα τὴν ἑωυτοῦ μεγάλην ἀρχήν .
The Persians gained Sardis and took Croesus prisoner.


1.86.1
602
λαβόντες δὲ αὐτὸν οἱ Πέρσαι ἤγαγον παρὰ Κῦρον .
Croesus had ruled fourteen years and been besieged fourteen days. Fulfilling the oracle, he had destroyed his own great empire. The Persians took him and brought him to Cyrus,


1.86.2
603
ὁ δὲ συννήσας πυρὴν μεγάλην ἀνεβίβασε ἐπ’ αὐτὴν τὸν Κροῖσόν τε ἐν πέδῃσι δεδεμένον καὶ δὶς ἑπτὰ Λυδῶν παρ’ αὐτὸν παῖδας , ἐν νόῳ ἔχων εἴτε δὴ ἀκροθίνια ταῦτα καταγιεῖν θεῶν ὅτεῳ δή , εἴτε καὶ εὐχὴν ἐπιτελέσαι θέλων , εἴτε καὶ πυθόμενος τὸν Κροῖσον εἶναι θεοσεβέα τοῦδε εἵνεκεν ἀνεβίβασε ἐπὶ τὴν πυρήν , βουλόμενος εἰδέναι εἴ τίς μιν δαιμόνων ῥύσεται τοῦ μὴ ζῶντα κατακαυθῆναι .
who erected a pyre and mounted Croesus atop it, bound in chains, with twice seven sons of the Lydians beside him. Cyrus may have intended to sacrifice him as a victory-offering to some god, or he may have wished to fulfill a vow, or perhaps he had heard that Croesus was pious and put him atop the pyre to find out if some divinity would deliver him from being burned alive.


1.86.3
604
τὸν μὲν δὴ ποιέειν ταῦτα ·
So Cyrus did this.


1.86.3
605
τῷ δὲ Κροίσῳ ἑστεῶτι ἐπὶ τῆς πυρῆς ἐσελθεῖν , καίπερ ἐν κακῷ ἐόντι τοσούτῳ , τὸ τοῦ Σόλωνος ὥς οἱ εἴη σὺν θεῷ εἰρημένον , τὸ μηδένα εἶναι τῶν ζωόντων ὄλβιον .
As Croesus stood on the pyre, even though he was in such a wretched position it occurred to him that Solon had spoken with god's help when he had said that no one among the living is fortunate.


1.86.3
606
ὡς δὲ ἄρα μιν προσστῆναι τοῦτο , ἀνενεικάμενόν τε καὶ ἀναστενάξαντα ἐκ πολλῆς ἡσυχίης ἐς τρὶς ὀνομάσαι " Σόλων " .
When this occurred to him, he heaved a deep sigh and groaned aloud after long silence, calling out three times the name “Solon.”


1.86.4
607
καὶ τὸν Κῦρον ἀκούσαντα κελεῦσαι τοὺς ἑρμηνέας ἐπειρέσθαι τὸν Κροῖσον τίνα τοῦτον ἐπικαλέοιτο , καὶ τοὺς προσελθόντας ἐπειρωτᾶν ·
Cyrus heard and ordered the interpreters to ask Croesus who he was invoking.


1.86.4
608
Κροῖσον δὲ τέως μὲν σιγὴν ἔχειν εἰρωτώμενον , μετὰ δὲ ὡς ἠναγκάζετο , εἰπεῖν " τὸν ἂν ἐγὼ πᾶσι τυράννοισι προετίμησα μεγάλων χρημάτων ἐς λόγους ἐλθεῖν " .
They approached and asked, but Croesus kept quiet at their questioning, until finally they forced him and he said, “I would prefer to great wealth his coming into discourse with all despots.”


1.86.4
609
ὡς δέ σφι ἄσημα ἔφραζε , πάλιν ἐπειρώτων τὰ λεγόμενα .
Since what he said was unintelligible, they again asked what he had said,


1.86.5
610
λιπαρεόντων δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ ὄχλον παρεχόντων , ἔλεγε δὴ ὡς ἦλθε ἀρχὴν ὁ Σόλων ἐὼν Ἀθηναῖος , καὶ θεησάμενος πάντα τὸν ἑωυτοῦ ὄλβον ἀποφλαυρίσειε οἷα δὴ εἶπας , ὥς τε αὐτῷ πάντα ἀποβεβήκοι τῇ περ ἐκεῖνος εἶπε , οὐδέν τι μᾶλλον ἐς ἑωυτὸν λέγων ἢ οὐκ ἐς ἅπαν τὸ ἀνθρώπινον καὶ μάλιστα τοὺς παρὰ σφίσι αὐτοῖσι ὀλβίους δοκέοντας εἶναι .
persistently harassing him. He explained that first Solon the Athenian had come and seen all his fortune and spoken as if he despised it.


1.86.5
611
τὸν μὲν Κροῖσον ταῦτα ἀπηγέεσθαι , τῆς δὲ πυρῆς ἤδη ἁμμένης καίεσθαι τὰ περιέσχατα .
Now everything had turned out for him as Solon had said, speaking no more of him than of every human being, especially those who think themselves fortunate. While Croesus was relating all this, the pyre had been lit and the edges were on fire.


1.86.6
612
καὶ τὸν Κῦρον ἀκούσαντα τῶν ἑρμηνέων τὰ Κροῖσος εἶπε , μεταγνόντα τε καὶ ἐννώσαντα ὅτι καὶ αὐτὸς ἄνθρωπος ἐὼν ἄλλον ἄνθρωπον , γενόμενον ἑωυτοῦ εὐδαιμονίῃ οὐκ ἐλάσσω , ζῶντα πυρὶ διδοίη , πρός τε τούτοισι δείσαντα τὴν τίσιν καὶ ἐπιλεξάμενον ὡς οὐδὲν εἴη τῶν ἐν ἀνθρώποισι ἀσφαλέως ἔχον , κελεύειν σβεννύναι τὴν ταχίστην τὸ καιόμενον πῦρ καὶ καταβιβάζειν Κροῖσόν τε καὶ τοὺς μετὰ Κροίσου .
When Cyrus heard from the interpreters what Croesus said, he relented and considered that he, a human being, was burning alive another human being, one his equal in good fortune.


1.86.6
613
καὶ τοὺς πειρωμένους οὐ δύνασθαι ἔτι τοῦ πυρὸς ἐπικρατῆσαι .
In addition, he feared retribution, reflecting how there is nothing stable in human affairs. He ordered that the blazing fire be extinguished as quickly as possible, and that Croesus and those with him be taken down, but despite their efforts they could not master the fire.


1.87.1
614
ἐνθαῦτα λέγεται ὑπὸ Λυδῶν Κροῖσον μαθόντα τὴν Κύρου μετάγνωσιν , ὡς ὥρα πάντα μὲν ἄνδρα σβεννύντα τὸ πῦρ , δυναμένους δὲ οὐκέτι καταλαβεῖν , ἐπιβώσασθαι τὸν Ἀπόλλωνα ἐπικαλεόμενον , εἴ τί οἱ κεχαρισμένον ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἐδωρήθη , παραστῆναι καὶ ῥύσασθαι αὐτὸν ἐκ τοῦ παρεόντος κακοῦ .
Then the Lydians say that Croesus understood Cyrus' change of heart, and when he saw everyone trying to extinguish the fire but unable to check it, he invoked Apollo, crying out that if Apollo had ever been given any pleasing gift by him, let him offer help and deliver him from the present evil.


1.87.2
615
τὸν μὲν δακρύοντα ἐπικαλέεσθαι τὸν θεόν , ἐκ δὲ αἰθρίης τε καὶ νηνεμίης συνδραμεῖν ἐξαπίνης νέφεα καὶ χειμῶνά τε καταρραγῆναι καὶ ὗσαι ὕδατι λαβροτάτῳ , κατασβεσθῆναί τε τὴν πυρήν .
Thus he in tears invoked the god, and suddenly out of a clear and windless sky clouds gathered, a storm broke, and it rained violently, extinguishing the pyre.


1.87.2
616
οὕτω δὴ μαθόντα τὸν Κῦρον ὡς εἴη ὁ Κροῖσος καὶ θεοφιλὴς καὶ ἀνὴρ ἀγαθός , καταβιβάσαντα αὐτὸν ἀπὸ τῆς πυρῆς εἰρέσθαι τάδε .
Thus Cyrus perceived that Croesus was dear to god and a good man. He had him brought down from the pyre and asked,


1.87.3
617
" Κροῖσε , τίς σε ἀνθρώπων ἀνέγνωσε ἐπὶ γῆν τὴν ἐμὴν στρατευσάμενον πολέμιον ἀντὶ φίλου ἐμοὶ καταστῆναι " ;
“Croesus, what man persuaded you to wage war against my land and become my enemy instead of my friend?”


1.87.3
618
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἐγὼ ταῦτα ἔπρηξα τῇ σῇ μὲν εὐδαιμονίῃ , τῇ ἐμεωυτοῦ δὲ κακοδαιμονίῃ , αἴτιος δὲ τούτων ἐγένετο ὁ Ἑλλήνων θεὸς ἐπαείρας ἐμὲ στρατεύεσθαι .
He replied, “O King, I acted thus for your good fortune, but for my own ill fortune. The god of the Hellenes is responsible for these things, inciting me to wage war.


1.87.4
619
οὐδεὶς γὰρ οὕτω ἀνόητος ἐστὶ ὅστις πόλεμον πρὸ εἰρήνης αἱρέεται ·
No one is so foolish as to choose war over peace.


1.87.4
620
ἐν μὲν γὰρ τῇ οἱ παῖδες τοὺς πατέρας θάπτουσι , ἐν δὲ τῷ οἱ πατέρες τοὺς παῖδας .
In peace sons bury their fathers, in war fathers bury their sons.


1.87.4
621
ἀλλὰ ταῦτα δαίμοσί κου φίλον ἦν οὕτω γενέσθαι " .
But I suppose it was dear to the divinity that this be so.”


1.88.1
622
ὅ μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεγε , Κῦρος δὲ αὐτὸν λύσας κατεῖσέ τε ἐγγὺς ἑωυτοῦ καὶ κάρτα ἐν πολλῇ προμηθίῃ εἶχε , ἀπεθώμαζέ τε ὁρέων καὶ αὐτὸς καὶ οἱ περὶ ἐκεῖνον ἐόντες πάντες .
Croesus said this, and Cyrus freed him and made him sit near and was very considerate to him,


1.88.1
623
ὁ δὲ συννοίῃ ἐχόμενος ἥσυχος ἦν ·
and both he and all that were with him were astonished when they looked at Croesus. He for his part was silent, deep in thought.


1.88.2
624
μετὰ δὲ ἐπιστραφείς τε καὶ ἰδόμενος τοὺς Πέρσας τὸ τῶν Λυδῶν ἄστυ κεραΐζοντας εἶπε " ὦ βασιλεῦ , κότερον λέγειν πρὸς σὲ τὰ νοέων τυγχάνω ἢ σιγᾶν ἐν τῷ παρεόντι χρή " ;
Presently he turned and said (for he saw the Persians sacking the city of the Lydians), “O King, am I to say to you what is in my mind now, or keep silent?”


1.88.2
625
Κῦρος δέ μιν θαρσέοντα ἐκέλευε λέγειν ὅ τι βούλοιτο .
When Cyrus urged him to speak up boldly, Croesus asked,


1.88.2
626
ὁ δὲ αὐτὸν εἰρώτα λέγων " οὗτος ὁ πολλὸς ὅμιλος τί ταῦτα πολλῇ σπουδῇ ἐργάζεται " ;
“The multitude there, what is it at which they are so busily engaged?”


1.88.3
627
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " πόλιν τε τὴν σὴν διαρπάζει καὶ χρήματα τὰ σὰ διαφορέει " .
“They are plundering your city,” said Cyrus, “and carrying off your possessions.”


1.88.3
628
Κροῖσος δὲ ἀμείβετο " οὔτε πόλιν τὴν ἐμὴν οὔτε χρήματα τὰ ἐμὰ διαρπάζει ·
“No,” Croesus answered, “not my city, and not my possessions;


1.88.3
629
οὐδὲν γὰρ ἐμοὶ ἔτι τούτων μέτα ·
for I no longer have any share of all this;


1.88.3
630
ἀλλὰ φέρουσί τε καὶ ἄγουσι τὰ σά " .
it is your wealth that they are pillaging.”


1.89.1
631
Κύρῳ δὲ ἐπιμελὲς ἐγένετο τὰ Κροῖσος εἶπε ·
Cyrus thought about what Croesus had said.


1.89.1
632
μεταστησάμενος δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους , εἴρετο Κροῖσον ὅ τι οἱ ἐνορῴη ἐν τοῖσι ποιευμένοισι .
Telling the rest to withdraw, he asked Croesus what fault he saw in what was being done.


1.89.1
633
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ἐπείτε με θεοὶ ἔδωκαν δοῦλον σοί , δικαιῶ , εἴ τι ἐνορέω πλέον , σημαίνειν σοί .
“Since the gods have made me your slave,” replied the Lydian, “it is right that if I have any further insight I should point it out to you.


1.89.2
634
Πέρσαι φύσιν ἐόντες ὑβρισταὶ εἰσὶ ἀχρήματοι .
The Persians being by nature violent men are poor;


1.89.2
635
ἢν ὦν σὺ τούτους περιίδῃς διαρπάσαντας καὶ κατασχόντας χρήματα μεγάλα , τάδε τοὶ ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐπίδοξα γενέσθαι .
so if you let them seize and hold great possessions, you may expect the following things from this.


1.89.2
636
ὃς ἂν αὐτῶν πλεῖστα κατάσχῃ , τοῦτον προσδέκεσθαί τοι ἐπαναστησόμενον .
Whoever has got most will revolt against you.


1.89.2
637
νῦν ὦν ποίησον ὧδε , εἲ τοι ἀρέσκει τὰ ἐγὼ λέγω ·
Therefore do this, if you like what I say.


1.89.3
638
κάτισον τῶν δορυφόρων ἐπὶ πάσῃσι τῇσι πύλῃσι φυλάκους , οἳ λεγόντων πρὸς τοὺς ἐκφέροντας τὰ χρήματα ἀπαιρεόμενοι ὡς σφέα ἀναγκαίως ἔχει δεκατευθῆναι τῷ Διί .
Have men of your guard watch all the gates; let them take the spoil from those who are carrying it out, and say that it must be paid as a tithe to Zeus.


1.89.3
639
καὶ σύ τέ σφι οὐκ ἀπεχθήσεαι βίῃ ἀπαιρεόμενος τὰ χρήματα , καὶ ἐκεῖνοι συγγνόντες ποιέειν σε δίκαια ἑκόντες προήσουσι " .
Thus you shall not be hated by them for taking their wealth by force, and they, recognizing that you act justly, will give up the spoil willingly.”


1.90.1
640
ταῦτα ἀκούων ὁ Κῦρος ὑπερήδετο , ὥς οἱ ἐδόκεε εὖ ὑποτίθεσθαι ·
When Cyrus heard this, he was exceedingly pleased, for he believed the advice good;


1.90.1
641
αἰνέσας δὲ πολλά , καὶ ἐντειλάμενος τοῖσι δορυφόροισι τὰ Κροῖσος ὑπεθήκατο ἐπιτελέειν , εἶπε πρὸς Κροῖσον τάδε .
and praising him greatly, and telling his guard to act as Croesus had advised, he said:


1.90.1
642
" Κροῖσε , ἀναρτημένου σεῦ ἀνδρὸς βασιλέος χρηστὰ ἔργα καὶ ἔπεα ποιέειν , αἰτέο δόσιν ἥντινα βούλεαί τοι γενέσθαι παραυτίκα " .
“Croesus, now that you, a king, are determined to act and to speak with integrity, ask me directly for whatever favor you like.”


1.90.2
643
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ὦ δέσποτα , ἐάσας με χαριεῖ μάλιστα τὸν θεὸν τῶν Ἑλλήνων , τὸν ἐγὼ ἐτίμησα θεῶν μάλιστα , ἐπειρέσθαι πέμψαντα τάσδε τὰς πέδας , εἰ ἐξαπατᾶν τοὺς εὖ ποιεῦντας νόμος ἐστί οἱ " .
“Master,” said Croesus, “you will most gratify me if you will let me send these chains of mine to that god of the Greeks whom I especially honored and to ask him if it is his way to deceive those who serve him well.”


1.90.2
644
Κῦρος δὲ εἴρετο ὅ τι οἱ τοῦτο ἐπηγορέων παραιτέοιτο .
When Cyrus asked him what grudge against the god led him to make this request,


1.90.3
645
Κροῖσος δέ οἱ ἐπαλιλλόγησε πᾶσαν τὴν ἑωυτοῦ διάνοιαν καὶ τῶν χρηστηρίων τὰς ὑποκρίσιας καὶ μάλιστα τὰ ἀναθήματα , καὶ ὡς ἐπαερθεὶς τῷ μαντηίῳ ἐστρατεύσατο ἐπὶ Πέρσας ·
Croesus repeated to him the story of all his own aspirations, and the answers of the oracles, and more particularly his offerings, and how the oracle had encouraged him to attack the Persians;


1.90.3
646
λέγων δὲ ταῦτα κατέβαινε αὖτις παραιτεόμενος ἐπεῖναί οἱ τῷ θεῷ τοῦτο ὀνειδίσαι .
and so saying he once more insistently pled that he be allowed to reproach the god for this.


1.90.3
647
Κῦρος δὲ γελάσας εἶπε " καὶ τούτου τεύξεαι παρ’ ἐμεῦ , Κροῖσε , καὶ ἄλλου παντὸς τοῦ ἂν ἑκάστοτε δέῃ " .
At this Cyrus smiled, and replied, “This I will grant you, Croesus, and whatever other favor you may ever ask me.”


1.90.4
648
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ἤκουσε ὁ Κροῖσος , πέμπων τῶν Λυδῶν ἐς Δελφοὺς ἐνετέλλετο τιθέντας τὰς πέδας ἐπὶ τοῦ νηοῦ τὸν οὐδὸν εἰρωτᾶν εἰ οὔ τι ἐπαισχύνεται τοῖσι μαντηίοισι ἐπαείρας Κροῖσον στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ Πέρσας ὡς καταπαύσοντα τὴν Κύρου δύναμιν , ἀπ’ ἧς οἱ ἀκροθίνια τοιαῦτα γενέσθαι , δεικνύντας τὰς πέδας ·
When Croesus heard this, he sent Lydians to Delphi, telling them to lay his chains on the doorstep of the temple, and to ask the god if he were not ashamed to have persuaded Croesus to attack the Persians, telling him that he would destroy Cyrus' power;


1.90.4
649
ταῦτά τε ἐπειρωτᾶν , καὶ εἰ ἀχαρίστοισι νόμος εἶναι τοῖσι Ἑλληνικοῖσι θεοῖσι .
of which power (they were to say, showing the chains) these were the first-fruits. They should ask this; and further, if it were the way of the Greek gods to be ungrateful.


1.91.1
650
ἀπικομένοισι δὲ τοῖσι Λυδοῖσι καὶ λέγουσι τὰ ἐντεταλμένα τὴν Πυθίην λέγεται εἰπεῖν τάδε .
When the Lydians came, and spoke as they had been instructed, the priestess (it is said) made the following reply.


1.91.1
651
" τὴν πεπρωμένην μοῖραν ἀδύνατα ἐστὶ ἀποφυγεῖν καὶ θεῷ ·
“No one may escape his lot, not even a god. Croesus has paid for the sin of his ancestor of the fifth generation before, who was led by the guile of a woman to kill his master, though he was one of the guard of the Heraclidae,


1.91.1
652
Κροῖσος δὲ πέμπτου γονέος ἁμαρτάδα ἐξέπλησε , ὃς ἐὼν δορυφόρος Ἡρακλειδέων , δόλῳ γυναικηίῳ ἐπισπόμενος ἐφόνευσε τὸν δεσπότεα καὶ ἔσχε τὴν ἐκείνου τιμὴν οὐδέν οἱ προσήκουσαν .
and who took to himself the royal state of that master, to which he had no right.


1.91.2
653
προθυμεομένου δὲ Λοξίεω ὅκως ἂν κατὰ τοὺς παῖδας τοῦ Κροίσου γένοιτο τὸ Σαρδίων πάθος καὶ μὴ κατ’ αὐτὸν Κροῖσον , οὐκ οἷόν τε ἐγίνετο παραγαγεῖν μοίρας .
And it was the wish of Loxias that the evil lot of  Sardis Sardis    fall in the lifetime of Croesus' sons, not in his own; but he could not deflect the Fates.


1.91.3
654
ὅσον δὲ ἐνέδωκαν αὗται , ἤνυσέ τε καὶ ἐχαρίσατό οἱ ·
Yet as far as they gave in, he did accomplish his wish and favor Croesus:


1.91.3
655
τρία γὰρ ἔτεα ἐπανεβάλετο τὴν Σαρδίων ἅλωσιν , καὶ τοῦτο ἐπιστάσθω Κροῖσος ὡς ὕστερον τοῖσι ἔτεσι τούτοισι ἁλοὺς τῆς πεπρωμένης .
for he delayed the taking of Sardis for three years. And let Croesus know this: that although he is now taken, it is by so many years later than the destined hour.


1.91.3
656
δευτέρα δὲ τούτων καιομένῳ αὐτῷ ἐπήρκεσε .
And further, Loxias saved Croesus from burning.


1.91.4
657
κατὰ δὲ τὸ μαντήιον τὸ γενόμενον οὐκ ὀρθῶς Κροῖσος μέμφεται .
But as to the oracle that was given to him, Croesus is wrong to complain concerning it.


1.91.4
658
προηγόρευε γὰρ οἱ Λοξίης , ἢν στρατεύηται ἐπὶ Πέρσας , μεγάλην ἀρχὴν αὐτὸν καταλύσειν .
For Loxias declared to him that if he led an army against the Persians, he would destroy a great empire.


1.91.4
659
τὸν δὲ πρὸς ταῦτα χρῆν εὖ μέλλοντα βουλεύεσθαι ἐπειρέσθαι πέμψαντα κότερα τὴν ἑωυτοῦ ἢ τὴν Κύρου λέγοι ἀρχήν .
Therefore he ought, if he had wanted to plan well, to have sent and asked whether the god spoke of Croesus' or of Cyrus' empire.


1.91.4
660
οὐ συλλαβὼν δὲ τὸ ῥηθὲν οὐδ’ ἐπανειρόμενος ἑωυτὸν αἴτιον ἀποφαινέτω ·
But he did not understand what was spoken, or make further inquiry: for which now let him blame himself.


1.91.5
661
τῷ καὶ τὸ τελευταῖον χρηστηριαζομένῳ εἶπε Λοξίης περὶ ἡμιόνου , οὐδὲ τοῦτο συνέλαβε .
When he asked that last question of the oracle and Loxias gave him that answer concerning the mule, even that Croesus did not understand.


1.91.5
662
ἦν γὰρ δὴ ὁ Κῦρος οὗτος ἡμίονος ·
For that mule was in fact Cyrus, who was the son of two parents not of the same people, of whom the mother was better and the father inferior:


1.91.5
663
ἐκ γὰρ δυῶν οὐκ ὁμοεθνέων ἐγεγόνεε , μητρὸς ἀμείνονος , πατρὸς δὲ ὑποδεεστέρου ·
for she was a Mede and the daughter of Astyages king of the Medes; but he was a Persian and a subject of the Medes and although in all respects her inferior he married this lady of his.”


1.91.6
664
ἣ μὲν γὰρ ἦν Μηδὶς καὶ Ἀστυάγεος θυγάτηρ τοῦ Μήδων βασιλέος , ὁ δὲ Πέρσης τε ἦν καὶ ἀρχόμενος ὑπ’ ἐκείνοισι καὶ ἔνερθε ἐὼν τοῖσι ἅπασι δεσποίνῃ τῇ ἑωυτοῦ συνοίκεε " .
This was the answer of the priestess to the Lydians.


1.91.6
665
ταῦτα μὲν ἡ Πυθίη ὑπεκρίνατο τοῖσι Λυδοῖσι , οἳ δὲ ἀνήνεικαν ἐς Σάρδις καὶ ἀπήγγειλαν Κροίσῳ .
They carried it to Sardis and told Croesus.


1.91.6
666
ὁ δὲ ἀκούσας συνέγνω ἑωυτοῦ εἶναι τὴν ἁμαρτάδα καὶ οὐ τοῦ θεοῦ .
When he heard it, he confessed that the sin was not the god's, but his.


1.91.6
667
κατὰ μὲν δὴ τὴν Κροίσου τε ἀρχὴν καὶ Ἰωνίης τὴν πρώτην καταστροφὴν ἔσχε οὕτω .
And this is the story of Croesus' rule, and of the first overthrow of Ionia.


1.92.1
668
Κροίσῳ δὲ ἐστὶ ἄλλα ἀναθήματα ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι πολλὰ καὶ οὐ τὰ εἰρημένα μοῦνα .
There are many offerings of Croesus' in Greece, and not only those of which I have spoken.


1.92.1
669
ἐν μὲν γὰρ Θήβῃσι τῇσι Βοιωτῶν τρίπους χρύσεος , τὸν ἀνέθηκέ τῷ Ἀπόλλωνι τῷ Ἰσμηνίῳ , ἐν δὲ Ἐφέσῳ αἵ τε βόες αἱ χρύσεαι καὶ τῶν κιόνων αἱ πολλαί , ἐν δὲ Προνηίης τῆς ἐν Δελφοῖσι ἀσπὶς χρυσέη μεγάλη .
There is a golden tripod at Thebes in Boeotia, which he dedicated to Apollo of Ismenus; at Ephesus there are the oxen of gold and the greater part of the pillars; and in the temple of Proneia at Delphi, a golden shield.


1.92.1
670
ταῦτα μὲν καὶ ἔτι ἐς ἐμὲ ἦν περιεόντα , τὰ δ’ ἐξαπόλωλε τῶν ἀναθημάτων ·
All these survived to my lifetime; but other of the offerings were destroyed.


1.92.2
671
τὰ δ’ ἐν Βραγχίδῃσι τῇσι Μιλησίων ἀναθήματα Κροίσῳ , ὡς ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι , ἴσα τε σταθμὸν καὶ ὅμοια τοῖσι ἐν Δελφοῖσι G? τὰ μέν νυν ἔς τε Δελφοὺς καὶ ἐς τοῦ Ἀμφιάρεω ἀνέθηκε οἰκήιά τε ἐόντα καὶ τῶν πατρωίων χρημάτων ἀπαρχήν ·
And the offerings of Croesus at Didyma of the Milesians, as I learn by inquiry, are equal in weight and like those at Delphi.


1.92.2
672
τὰ δὲ ἄλλα ἀναθήματα ἐξ ἀνδρὸς ἐγένετο οὐσίης ἐχθροῦ , ὅς οἱ πρὶν ἢ βασιλεῦσαι ἀντιστασιώτης κατεστήκεε , συσπεύδων Πανταλέοντι γενέσθαι τὴν Λυδῶν ἀρχήν .
Those which he dedicated at Delphi and the shrine of Amphiaraus were his own, the first-fruits of the wealth inherited from his father; the rest came from the estate of an enemy who had headed a faction against Croesus before he became king, and conspired to win the throne of Lydia for Pantaleon.


1.92.3
673
ὁ δὲ Πανταλέων ἦν Ἀλυάττεω μὲν παῖς , Κροίσου δὲ ἀδελφεὸς οὐκ ὁμομήτριος ·
This Pantaleon was a son of Alyattes, and half-brother of Croesus:


1.92.3
674
Κροῖσος μὲν γὰρ ἐκ Καείρης ἦν γυναικὸς Ἀλυάττῃ , Πανταλέων δὲ ἐξ Ἰάδος .
Croesus was Alyattes' son by a Carian and Pantaleon by an Ionian mother.


1.92.4
675
ἐπείτε δὲ δόντος τοῦ πατρὸς ἐκράτησε τῆς ἀρχῆς ὁ Κροῖσος , τὸν ἄνθρωπον τὸν ἀντιπρήσσοντα ἐπὶ κνάφου ἕλκων διέφθειρε , τὴν δὲ οὐσίην αὐτοῦ ἔτι πρότερον κατιρώσας τότε τρόπῳ τῷ εἰρημένῳ ἀνέθηκε ἐς τὰ εἴρηται .
So when Croesus gained the sovereignty by his father's gift, he put the man who had conspired against him to death by drawing him across a carding-comb, and first confiscated his estate, then dedicated it as and where I have said.


1.92.4
676
καὶ περὶ μὲν ἀναθημάτων τοσαῦτα εἰρήσθω .
This is all that I shall say of Croesus' offerings.


1.93.1
677
θώματα δὲ γῆ ἡ Λυδίη ἐς συγγραφὴν οὐ μάλα ἔχει , οἷά τε καὶ ἄλλη χώρη , πάρεξ τοῦ ἐκ τοῦ Τμώλου καταφερομένου ψήγματος .
There are not many marvellous things in  Lydia Lydia    to record, in comparison with other countries, except the gold dust that comes down from Tmolus.


1.93.2
678
ἓν δὲ ἔργον πολλὸν μέγιστον παρέχεται χωρὶς τῶν τε Αἰγυπτίων ἔργων καὶ τῶν Βαβυλωνίων ·
But there is one building to be seen there which is much the greatest of all, except those of Egypt and Babylon.


1.93.2
679
ἔστι αὐτόθι Ἀλυάττεω τοῦ Κροίσου πατρὸς σῆμα , τοῦ ἡ κρηπὶς μὲν ἐστὶ λίθων μεγάλων , τὸ δὲ ἄλλο σῆμα χῶμα γῆς .
In Lydia is the tomb of Alyattes, the father of Croesus, the base of which is made of great stones and the rest of it of mounded earth.


1.93.2
680
ἐξεργάσαντο δέ μιν οἱ ἀγοραῖοι ἄνθρωποι καὶ οἱ χειρώνακτες καὶ αἱ ἐνεργαζόμεναι παιδίσκαι .
It was built by the men of the market and the craftsmen and the prostitutes.


1.93.3
681
οὖροι δὲ πέντε ἐόντες ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἦσαν ἐπὶ τοῦ σήματος ἄνω , καί σφι γράμματα ἐνεκεκόλαπτο τὰ ἕκαστοι ἐξεργάσαντο , καὶ ἐφαίνετο μετρεόμενον τὸ τῶν παιδισκέων ἔργον ἐὸν μέγιστον .
There survived until my time five corner-stones set on the top of the tomb, and in these was cut the record of the work done by each group: and measurement showed that the prostitutes' share of the work was the greatest.


1.93.4
682
τοῦ γὰρ δὴ Λυδῶν δήμου αἱ θυγατέρες πορνεύονται πᾶσαι , συλλέγουσαι σφίσι φερνάς , ἐς ὃ ἂν συνοικήσωσι τοῦτο ποιέουσαι ·
All the daughters of the common people of Lydia ply the trade of prostitutes, to collect dowries, until they can get themselves husbands.


1.93.4
683
ἐκδιδοῦσι δὲ αὐταὶ ἑωυτάς .
They themselves offer themselves in marriage.


1.93.5
684
ἡ μὲν δὴ περίοδος τοῦ σήματός εἰσὶ στάδιοι ἓξ καὶ δύο πλέθρα , τὸ δὲ εὖρος ἐστὶ πλέθρα τρία καὶ δέκα .
Now this tomb has a circumference of thirteen hundred and ninety yards, and its breadth is above four hundred and forty yards.


1.93.5
685
λίμνη δὲ ἔχεται τοῦ σήματος μεγάλη , τὴν λέγουσι Λυδοὶ ἀείναον εἶναι ·
There is a great lake hard by the tomb, which, the Lydians say, is fed by ever-flowing springs;


1.93.5
686
καλέεται δὲ αὕτη Γυγαίη .
it is called the Gygaean lake.


1.93.5
687
τοῦτο μὲν δὴ τοιοῦτο ἐστί .
Such then is this tomb.


1.94.1
688
Λυδοὶ δὲ νόμοισι μὲν παραπλησίοισι χρέωνται καὶ Ἕλληνές , χωρὶς ἢ ὅτι τὰ θήλεα τέκνα καταπορνεύουσι , πρῶτοι δὲ ἀνθρώπων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν νόμισμα χρυσοῦ καὶ ἀργύρου κοψάμενοι ἐχρήσαντο , πρῶτοι δὲ καὶ κάπηλοι ἐγένοντο .
The customs of the Lydians are like those of the Greeks, except that they make prostitutes of their female children. They were the first men whom we know who coined and used gold and silver currency; and they were the first to sell by retail.


1.94.2
689
φασὶ δὲ αὐτοὶ Λυδοὶ καὶ τὰς παιγνίας τὰς νῦν σφίσι τε καὶ Ἕλλησι κατεστεώσας ἑωυτῶν ἐξεύρημα γενέσθαι ·
And, according to what they themselves say, the games now in use among them and the Greeks were invented by the Lydians:


1.94.2
690
ἅμα δὲ ταύτας τε ἐξευρεθῆναι παρὰ σφίσι λέγουσι καὶ Τυρσηνίην ἀποικίσαι , ὧδε περὶ αὐτῶν λέγοντες .
these, they say, were invented among them at the time when they colonized Etruria.


1.94.3
691
ἐπὶ Ἄτυος τοῦ Μάνεω βασιλέος σιτοδείην ἰσχυρὴν ἀνὰ τὴν Λυδίην πᾶσαν γενέσθαι , καὶ τοὺς Λυδοὺς τέως μὲν διάγειν λιπαρέοντας , μετὰ δὲ ὡς οὐ παύεσθαι , ἄκεα δίζησθαι , ἄλλον δὲ ἄλλο ἐπιμηχανᾶσθαι αὐτῶν .
In the reign of Atys son of Manes there was great scarcity of food in all Lydia. For a while the Lydians bore this with what patience they could; presently, when the famine did not abate, they looked for remedies, and different plans were devised by different men.


1.94.3
692
ἐξευρεθῆναι δὴ ὦν τότε καὶ τῶν κύβων καὶ τῶν ἀστραγάλων καὶ τῆς σφαίρης καὶ τῶν ἀλλέων πασέων παιγνιέων τὰ εἴδεα , πλὴν πεσσῶν τούτων γὰρ ὦν τὴν ἐξεύρεσιν οὐκ οἰκηιοῦνται Λυδοί .
Then it was that they invented the games of dice and knuckle-bones and ball and all other forms of game except dice, which the Lydians do not claim to have discovered.


1.94.4
693
ποιέειν δὲ ὧδε πρὸς τὸν λιμὸν ἐξευρόντας , τὴν μὲν ἑτέρην τῶν ἡμερέων παίζειν πᾶσαν , ἵνα δὴ μὴ ζητέοιεν σιτία , τὴν δὲ ἑτέρην σιτέεσθαι παυομένους τῶν παιγνιέων .
Then, using their discovery to lighten the famine, every other day they would play for the whole day, so that they would not have to look for food, and the next day they quit their play and ate.


1.94.4
694
τοιούτῳ τρόπῳ διάγειν ἐπ’ ἔτεα δυῶν δέοντα εἴκοσι .
This was their way of life for eighteen years.


1.94.5
695
ἐπείτε δὲ οὐκ ἀνιέναι τὸ κακὸν ἀλλ’ ἔτι ἐπὶ μᾶλλον βιάζεσθαι οὕτω δὴ τὸν βασιλέα αὐτῶν δύο μοίρας διελόντα Λυδῶν πάντων κληρῶσαι τὴν μὲν ἐπὶ μόνῃ τὴν δὲ ἐπὶ ἐξόδῳ ἐκ τῆς χώρης , καὶ ἐπὶ μὲν τῇ μένειν αὐτοῦ λαγχανούσῃ τῶν μοιρέων ἑωυτὸν τὸν βασιλέα προστάσσειν , ἐπὶ δὲ τῇ ἀπαλλασσομένῃ τὸν ἑωυτοῦ παῖδα , τῷ οὔνομα εἶναι Τυρσηνόν .
But the famine did not cease to trouble them, and instead afflicted them even more. At last their king divided the people into two groups, and made them draw lots, so that the one group should remain and the other leave the country; he himself was to be the head of those who drew the lot to remain there, and his son, whose name was Tyrrhenus, of those who departed.


1.94.6
696
λαχόντας δὲ αὐτῶν τοὺς ἑτέρους ἐξιέναι ἐκ τῆς χώρης καταβῆναι ἐς Σμύρνην καὶ μηχανήσασθαι πλοῖα , ἐς τὰ ἐσθεμένους τὰ πάντα ὅσα σφι ἦν χρηστὰ ἐπίπλοα , ἀποπλέειν κατὰ βίου τε καὶ γῆς ζήτησιν , ἐς ὃ ἔθνεα πολλὰ παραμειψαμένους ἀπικέσθαι ἐς Ὀμβρικούς , ἔνθα σφέας ἐνιδρύσασθαι πόλιας καὶ οἰκέειν τὸ μέχρι τοῦδε .
Then the one group, having drawn the lot, left the country and came down to  Smyrna Smyrna    and built ships, in which they loaded all their goods that could be transported aboard ship, and sailed away to seek a livelihood and a country; until at last, after sojourning with one people after another, they came to the Ombrici, where they founded cities and have lived ever since.


1.94.7
697
ἀντὶ δὲ Λυδῶν μετονομασθῆναι αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τοῦ βασιλέος τοῦ παιδός , ὅς σφεας ἀνήγαγε , ἐπὶ τούτου τὴν ἐπωνυμίην ποιευμένους ὀνομασθῆναι Τυρσηνούς .
They no longer called themselves Lydians, but Tyrrhenians, after the name of the king's son who had led them there.


1.94.7
698
Λυδοὶ μὲν δὴ ὑπὸ Πέρσῃσι ἐδεδούλωντο .
The Lydians, then, were enslaved by the Persians.


1.95.1
699
ἐπιδίζηται δὲ δὴ τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν ἡμῖν ὁ λόγος τόν τε Κῦρον ὅστις ἐὼν τὴν Κροίσου ἀρχὴν κατεῖλε , καὶ τοὺς Πέρσας ὅτεῳ τρόπῳ ἡγήσαντο τῆς Ἀσίης .
But the next business of my history is to inquire who this Cyrus was who took down the power of Croesus, and how the Persians came to be the rulers of Asia.


1.95.1
700
ὡς ὦν Περσέων μετεξέτεροι λέγουσι , οἱ μὴ βουλόμενοι σεμνοῦν τὰ περὶ Κῦρον ἀλλὰ τὸν ἐόντα λέγειν λόγον , κατὰ ταῦτα γράψω , ἐπιστάμενος περὶ Κύρου καὶ τριφασίας ἄλλας λόγων ὁδοὺς φῆναι .
I mean then to be guided in what I write by some of the Persians who desire not to magnify the story of Cyrus but to tell the truth, though there are no less than three other accounts of Cyrus which I could give.


1.95.2
701
Ἀσσυρίων ἀρχόντων τῆς ἄνω Ἀσίης ἐπ’ ἔτεα εἴκοσι καὶ πεντακόσια , πρῶτοι ἀπ’ αὐτῶν Μῆδοι ἤρξαντο ἀπίστασθαι , καὶ κως οὗτοι περὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίης μαχεσάμενοι τοῖσι Ἀσσυρίοισι ἐγένοντο ἄνδρες ἀγαθοί , καὶ ἀπωσάμενοι τὴν δουλοσύνην ἐλευθερώθησαν .
After the Assyrians had ruled Upper Asia for five hundred and twenty years, the Medes were the first who began to revolt from them.


1.95.2
702
μετὰ δὲ τούτους καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ἔθνεα ἐποίεε τ- αὐτὸ τοῖσι Μήδοισι .
These, it would seem, proved their bravery in fighting for freedom against the Assyrians; they cast off their slavery and won freedom. Afterwards, the other subject nations, too, did the same as the Medes.


1.96.1
703
ἐόντων δὲ αὐτονόμων πάντων ἀνὰ τὴν ἤπειρον , ὧδε αὖτις ἐς τυραννίδα περιῆλθον .
All of those on the mainland were now free men; but they came to be ruled by monarchs again, as I will now relate.


1.96.1
704
ἀνὴρ ἐν τοῖσι Μήδοισι ἐγένετο σοφὸς τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Δηιόκης , παῖς δ’ ἦν Φραόρτεω .
There was among the Medes a clever man called Deioces: he was the son of Phraortes.


1.96.2
705
οὗτος ὁ Δηιόκης ἐρασθεὶς τυραννίδος ἐποίεε τοιάδε .
Deioces was infatuated with sovereignty, and so he set about gaining it.


1.96.2
706
κατοικημένων τῶν Μήδων κατὰ κώμας , ἐν τῇ ἑωυτοῦ ἐὼν καὶ πρότερον δόκιμος καὶ μᾶλλόν τι καὶ προθυμότερον δικαιοσύνην ἐπιθέμενος ἤσκεε ·
Already a notable man in his own town (one of the many towns into which Media was divided), he began to profess and practice justice more constantly and zealously than ever,


1.96.2
707
καὶ ταῦτα μέντοι ἐούσης ἀνομίης πολλῆς ἀνὰ πᾶσαν τὴν Μηδικὴν ἐποίεε , ἐπιστάμενος ὅτι τῷ δικαίῳ τὸ ἄδικον πολέμιον ἐστί .
and he did this even though there was much lawlessness throughout the land of Media, and though he knew that injustice is always the enemy of justice.


1.96.2
708
οἱ δ’ ἐκ τῆς αὐτῆς κώμης Μῆδοι ὁρῶντες αὐτοῦ τοὺς τρόπους δικαστήν μιν ἑωυτῶν αἱρέοντο .
Then the Medes of the same town, seeing his behavior, chose him to be their judge,


1.96.2
709
ὁ δὲ δή , οἷα μνώμενος ἀρχήν , ἰθύς τε καὶ δίκαιος ἦν , ποιέων τε ταῦτα ἔπαινον εἶχε οὐκ ὀλίγον πρὸς τῶν πολιητέων , οὕτω ὥστε πυνθανόμενοι οἱ ἐν τῇσι ἄλλῃσι κώμῃσι ὡς Δηιόκης εἴη ἀνὴρ μοῦνος κατὰ τὸ ὀρθὸν δικάζων , πρότερον περιπίπτοντες ἀδίκοισι γνώμῃσι , τότε ἐπείτε ἤκουσαν ἄσμενοι , ἐφοίτων παρὰ τὸν Δηιόκεα καὶ αὐτοὶ δικασόμενοι , τέλος δὲ οὐδενὶ ἄλλῳ ἐπετράποντο .
and he (for he coveted sovereign power) was honest and just.


1.97.1
710
πλεῦνος δὲ αἰεὶ γινομένου τοῦ ἐπιφοιτέοντος , οἷα πυνθανομένων τὰς δίκας ἀποβαίνειν κατὰ τὸ ἐόν , γνοὺς ὁ Δηιόκης ἐς ἑωυτὸν πᾶν ἀνακείμενον οὔτε κατίζειν ἔτι ἤθελε ἔνθα περ πρότερον προκατίζων ἐδίκαζε , οὔτ’ ἔφη δίκαν ἔτι ·
The number of those who came grew ever greater, for they heard that each case turned out in accord with the truth.


1.97.1
711
οὐ γὰρ οἱ λυσιτελέειν τῶν ἑωυτοῦ ἐξημεληκότα τοῖσι πέλας δι’ ἡμέρης δικάζειν .
Then Deioces, seeing that everything now depended on him, would not sit in his former seat of judgment, and said he would give no more decisions; for it was of no advantage to him (he said) to leave his own business and spend all day judging the cases of his neighbors.


1.97.2
712
ἐούσης ὦν ἁρπαγῆς καὶ ἀνομίης ἔτι πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἀνὰ τὰς κώμας ἢ πρότερον ἦν , συνελέχθησαν οἱ Μῆδοι ἐς τ- αὐτὸ καὶ ἐδίδοσαν σφίσι λόγον , λέγοντες περὶ τῶν κατηκόντων .
This caused robbery and lawlessness to increase greatly in the towns; and, gathering together, the Medes conferred about their present affairs, and said


1.97.2
713
ὡς δ’ ἐγὼ δοκέω , μάλιστα ἔλεγον οἱ τοῦ Δηιόκεω φίλοι " οὐ γὰρ δὴ τρόπῳ τῷ παρεόντι χρεώμενοι δυνατοὶ εἰμὲν οἰκέειν τὴν χώρην , φέρε στήσωμεν ἡμέων αὐτῶν βασιλέα ·
(here, as I suppose, the main speakers were Deioces' friends), “Since we cannot go on living in the present way in the land, come, let us set up a king over us;


1.97.3
714
καὶ οὕτω ἥ τε χωρῇ εὐνομήσεται καὶ αὐτοὶ πρὸς ἔργα τρεψόμεθα , οὐδὲ ὑπ’ ἀνομίης ἀνάστατοι ἐσόμεθα " .
in this way the land will be well governed, and we ourselves shall attend to our business and not be routed by lawlessness.”


1.97.3
715
ταῦτά κῃ λέγοντες πείθουσι ἑωυτοὺς βασιλεύεσθαι .
With such words they persuaded themselves to be ruled by a king.


1.98.1
716
αὐτίκα δὲ προβαλλομένων ὅντινα στήσονται βασιλέα , ὁ Δηιόκης ἦν πολλὸς ὑπὸ παντὸς ἀνδρὸς καὶ προβαλλόμενος καὶ αἰνεόμενος , ἐς ὃ τοῦτον καταινέουσι βασιλέα σφίσι εἶναι .
The question was at once propounded: Whom should they make king? Then every man was loud in putting Deioces forward and praising Deioces, until they agreed that he should be their king.


1.98.2
717
ὃ δ’ ἐκέλευε αὐτοὺς οἰκία τε ἑωυτῷ ἄξια τῆς βασιληίης οἰκοδομῆσαι καὶ κρατῦναι αὐτὸν δορυφόροισι ·
He ordered them to build him houses worthy of his royal power, and strengthen him with a bodyguard.


1.98.2
718
ποιεῦσι δὴ ταῦτα οἱ Μῆδοι .
The Medes did so.


1.98.2
719
οἰκοδομέουσί τε γὰρ αὐτῷ οἰκία μεγάλα τε καὶ ἰσχυρά , ἵνα αὐτὸς ἔφρασε τῆς χώρης , καὶ δορυφόρους αὐτῷ ἐπιτρέπουσι ἐκ πάντων Μήδων καταλέξασθαι .
They built him a big and strong house wherever in the land he indicated to them, and let him choose a bodyguard out of all the Medes.


1.98.3
720
ὁ δὲ ὡς ἔσχε τὴν ἀρχήν , τοὺς Μήδους ἠνάγκασε ἓν πόλισμα ποιήσασθαι καὶ τοῦτο περιστέλλοντας τῶν ἄλλων ἧσσον ἐπιμέλεσθαι .
And having obtained power, he forced the Medes to build him one city and to fortify and care for this more strongly than all the rest.


1.98.3
721
πειθομένων δὲ καὶ ταῦτα τῶν Μήδων οἰκοδομέει τείχεα μεγάλα τε καὶ καρτερὰ ταῦτα τὰ νῦν Ἀγβάτανα κέκληται , ἕτερον ἑτέρῳ κύκλῳ ἐνεστεῶτα .
The Medes did this for him, too. So he built the big and strong walls, one standing inside the next in circles, which are now called Ecbatana.


1.98.4
722
μεμηχάνηται δὲ οὕτω τοῦτο τὸ τεῖχος ὥστε ὁ ἕτερος τοῦ ἑτέρου κύκλος τοῖσι προμαχεῶσι μούνοισι ἐστι ὑψηλότερος .
This fortress is so designed that each circle of walls is higher than the next outer circle by no more than the height of its battlements;


1.98.4
723
τὸ μέν κού τι καὶ τὸ χωρίον συμμαχέει κολωνὸς ἐὼν ὥστε τοιοῦτο εἶναι , τὸ δὲ καὶ μᾶλλόν τι ἐπετηδεύθη .
to which plan the site itself, on a hill in the plain, contributes somewhat, but chiefly it was accomplished by skill.


1.98.5
724
κύκλων δ’ ἐόντων τῶν συναπάντων ἑπτά , ἐν δὴ τῷ τελευταίῳ τὰ βασιλήια ἔνεστι καὶ οἱ θησαυροί .
There are seven circles in all; within the innermost circle are the palace and the treasuries;


1.98.5
725
τὸ δ’ αὐτῶν μέγιστον ἐστὶ τεῖχος κατὰ τὸν Ἀθηνέων κύκλον μάλιστά κῃ τὸ μέγαθος .
and the longest wall is about the length of the wall that surrounds the city of Athens.


1.98.5
726
τοῦ μὲν δὴ πρώτου κύκλου οἱ προμαχεῶνες εἰσὶ λευκοί , τοῦ δὲ δευτέρου μέλανες , τρίτου δὲ κύκλου φοινίκεοι , τετάρτου δὲ κυάνεοι , πέμπτου δὲ σανδαράκινοι .
The battlements of the first circle are white, of the second black, of the third circle purple, of the fourth blue, and of the fifth orange:


1.98.6
727
οὕτω τῶν πέντε κύκλων οἱ προμαχεῶνες ἠνθισμένοι εἰσὶ φαρμάκοισι ·
Thus the battlements of five circles are painted with colors;


1.98.6
728
δύο δὲ οἱ τελευταῖοί εἰσὶ ὃ μὲν καταργυρωμένους ὁ δὲ κατακεχρυσωμένους ἔχων τοὺς προμαχεῶνας .
and the battlements of the last two circles are coated, the one with silver and the other with gold.


1.99.1
729
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ ὁ Δηιόκης ἑωυτῷ τε ἐτείχεε καὶ περὶ τὰ ἑωυτοῦ οἰκία , τὸν δὲ ἄλλον δῆμον πέριξ ἐκέλευε τὸ τεῖχος οἰκέειν .
Deioces built these walls for himself and around his own quarters, and he ordered the people to dwell outside the wall.


1.99.1
730
οἰκοδομηθέντων δὲ πάντων κόσμον τόνδε Δηιόκης πρῶτος ἐστὶ ὁ καταστησάμενος , μήτε ἐσιέναι παρὰ βασιλέα μηδένα , δι’ ἀγγέλων δὲ πάντα χρᾶσθαι , ὁρᾶσθαι τε βασιλέα ὑπὸ μηδενός , πρός τε τούτοισι ἔτι γελᾶν τε καὶ ἀντίον πτύειν καὶ ἅπασι εἶναι τοῦτό γε αἰσχρόν .
And when it was all built, Deioces was first to establish the rule that no one should come into the presence of the king, but everything should be done by means of messengers; that the king should be seen by no one; and moreover that it should be a disgrace for anyone to laugh or to spit in his presence.


1.99.2
731
ταῦτα δὲ περὶ ἑωυτὸν ἐσέμνυνε τῶνδε εἵνεκεν , ὅκως ἂν μὴ ὁρῶντες οἱ ὁμήλικες , ἐόντες σύντροφοί τε ἐκείνῳ καὶ οἰκίης οὐ φλαυροτέρης οὐδὲ ἐς ἀνδραγαθίην λειπόμενοι , λυπεοίατο καὶ ἐπιβουλεύοιεν , ἀλλ’ ἑτεροῖός σφι δοκέοι εἶναι μὴ ὁρῶσι .
He was careful to hedge himself with all this so that the men of his own age (who had been brought up with him and were as nobly born as he and his equals in courage), instead of seeing him and being upset and perhaps moved to plot against him, might by reason of not seeing him believe him to be different.


1.100.1
732
ἐπείτε δὲ ταῦτα διεκόσμησε καὶ ἐκράτυνε ἑωυτὸν τῇ τυραννίδι , ἦν τὸ δίκαιον φυλάσσων χαλεπός ·
When he had made these arrangements and strengthened himself with sovereign power, he was a hard man in the protection of justice.


1.100.1
733
καὶ τάς τε δίκας γράφοντες ἔσω παρ’ ἐκεῖνον ἐσπέμπεσκον , καὶ ἐκεῖνος διακρίνων τὰς ἐσφερομένας ἐκπέμπεσκε .
They would write down their pleas and send them in to him; then he would pass judgment on what was brought to him and send his decisions out.


1.100.2
734
ταῦτα μὲν κατὰ τὰς δίκας ἐποίεε , τάδε δὲ ἄλλα ἐκεκοσμέατὸ οἱ ·
This was his manner of deciding cases at law, and he had other arrangements too;


1.100.2
735
εἴ τινα πυνθάνοιτο ὑβρίζοντα , τοῦτον ὅκως μεταπέμψαιτο κατ’ ἀξίην ἑκάστου ἀδικήματος ἐδικαίευ , καὶ οἱ κατάσκοποί τε καὶ κατήκοοι ἦσαν ἀνὰ πᾶσαν τὴν χώρην τῆς ἦρχε .
for when he heard that a man was doing violence he would send for him and punish him as each offense deserved: and he had spies and eavesdroppers everywhere in his domain.


1.101.1
736
Δηιόκης μέν νυν τὸ Μηδικὸν ἔθνος συνέστρεψε μοῦνον καὶ τοῦτον ἦρξε ·
Deioces, then, united the Median nation by itself and ruled it.


1.101.1
737
ἔστι δὲ Μήδων τοσάδε γένεα , Βοῦσαι Παρητακηνοὶ Στρούχατες Ἀριζαντοὶ Βούδιοι Μάγοι .
The Median tribes are these: the Busae, the Paretaceni, the Struchates, the Arizanti, the Budii, the Magi.


1.101.1
738
γένεα μὲν δὴ Μήδων ἐστὶ τοσάδε .
Their tribes are this many.


1.102.1
739
Δηιόκεω δὲ παῖς γίνεται Φραόρτης , ὃς τελευτήσαντος Δηιόκεω , βασιλεύσαντος τρία καὶ πεντήκοντα ἔτεα , παρεδέξατο τὴν ἀρχήν , παραδεξάμενος δὲ οὐκ ἀπεχρᾶτο μούνων Μήδων ἄρχειν , ἀλλὰ στρατευσάμενος ἐπὶ τοὺς Πέρσας πρώτοισί τε τούτοισι ἐπεθήκατο καὶ πρώτους Μήδων ὑπηκόους ἐποίησε .
Deioces had a son, Phraortes, who inherited the throne when Deioces died after a reign of fifty-three years. Having inherited it, he was not content to rule the Medes alone: marching against the Persians, he attacked them first, and they were the first whom he made subject to the Medes.


1.102.2
740
μετὰ δὲ ἔχων δύο ταῦτα ἔθνεα καὶ ἀμφότερα ἰσχυρά , κατεστρέφετο τὴν Ἀσίην ἀπ’ ἄλλου ἐπ’ ἄλλο ἰὼν ἔθνος , ἐς ὃ στρατευσάμενος ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἀσσυρίους καὶ Ἀσσυρίων , τούτους οἳ Νίνον εἶχον καὶ ἦρχον πρότερον πάντων , τότε δὲ ἦσαν μεμουνωμένοι μὲν συμμάχων ἅτε ἀπεστεώτων , ἄλλως μέντοι ἑωυτῶν εὖ ἥκοντες , ἐπὶ τούτους δὴ στρατευσάμενος ὁ Φραόρτης αὐτός τε διεφθάρη , ἄρξας δύο καὶ εἴκοσι ἔτεα , καὶ ὁ στρατὸς αὐτοῦ ὁ πολλός .
Then, with these two strong nations at his back, he subjugated one nation of  Asia Asia    after another, until he marched against the Assyrians; that is, against those of the Assyrians who held  Nineveh Ninus   . These had formerly been rulers of all; but now their allies had deserted them and they were left alone, though well-off themselves. Marching against these Assyrians, then, Phraortes and most of his army perished, after he had reigned twenty-two years.


1.103.1
741
Φραόρτεω δὲ τελευτήσαντος ἐξεδέξατο Κυαξάρης ὁ Φραόρτεω τοῦ Δηιόκεω παῖς .
At his death he was succeeded by his son Cyaxares.


1.103.1
742
οὗτος λέγεται πολλὸν ἔτι γενέσθαι ἀλκιμώτερος τῶν προγόνων , καὶ πρῶτός τε ἐλόχισε κατὰ τέλεα τοὺς ἐν τῇ , Ἀσίῃ καὶ πρῶτος διέταξε χωρὶς ἑκάστους εἶναι , τούς τε αἰχμοφόρους καὶ τοὺς τοξοφόρους καὶ τοὺς ἱππέας ·
He is said to have been a much greater soldier than his ancestors: it was he who first organized the men of Asia in companies and posted each arm apart, the spearmen and archers and cavalry:


1.103.1
743
πρὸ τοῦ δὲ ἀναμὶξ ἦν πάντα ὁμοίως ἀναπεφυρμένα .
before this they were all mingled together in confusion.


1.103.2
744
οὗτος ὁ τοῖσι Λυδοῖσι ἐστὶ μαχεσάμενος ὅτε νὺξ ἡ ἡμέρη ἐγένετό σφι μαχομένοισι , καὶ ὁ τὴν Ἅλυος ποταμοῦ ἄνω Ἀσίην πᾶσαν συστήσας ἑωυτῷ .
This was the king who fought against the Lydians when the day was turned to night in the battle, and who united under his dominion all of Asia that is beyond the river Halys.


1.103.2
745
συλλέξας δὲ τοὺς ὑπ’ ἑωυτῷ ἀρχομένους πάντας ἐστρατεύετο ἐπὶ τὴν Νίνον , τιμωρέων τε τῷ πατρὶ καὶ τὴν πόλιν ταύτην θέλων ἐξελεῖν .
Collecting all his subjects, he marched against Nineveh, wanting to avenge his father and to destroy the city.


1.103.3
746
καί οἱ , ὡς συμβαλὼν ἐνίκησε τοὺς Ἀσσυρίους , περικατημένῳ τὴν Νίνον ἐπῆλθε Σκυθέων στρατὸς μέγας , ἦγε δὲ αὐτοὺς βασιλεὺς ὁ Σκυθέων Μαδύης Προτοθύεω παῖς ·
He defeated the Assyrians in battle; but while he was besieging their city, a great army of Scythians came down upon him, led by their king Madyes son of Protothyes.


1.103.3
747
οἳ ἐσέβαλον μὲν ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην Κιμμερίους ἐκβαλόντες ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης , τούτοισι δὲ ἐπισπόμενοι φεύγουσι οὕτω ἐς τὴν Μηδικὴν χώρην ἀπίκοντο .
They had invaded Asia after they had driven the Cimmerians out of Europe: pursuing them in their flight, the Scythians came to the Median country.


1.104.1
748
ἔστι δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς λίμνης τῆς Μαιήτιδος ἐπὶ Φᾶσιν ποταμὸν καὶ ἐς Κόλχους τριήκοντα ἡμερέων εὐζώνῳ ὁδός , ἐκ δὲ τῆς Κολχίδος οὐ πολλὸν ὑπερβῆναι ἐς τὴν Μηδικήν , ἀλλ’ ἓν τὸ διὰ μέσου ἔθνος αὐτῶν ἐστι , Σάσπειρες , τοῦτο δὲ παραμειβομένοισι εἶναι ἐν τῇ Μηδικῇ .
It is a thirty days' journey for an unencumbered man from the Maeetian lake to the river  Poti Phasis    and the land of the Colchi; from the Colchi it is an easy matter to cross into Media: there is only one nation between, the Saspires; to pass these is to be in Media.


1.104.2
749
οὐ μέντοι οἵ γε Σκύθαι ταύτῃ ἐσέβαλον , ἀλλὰ τὴν κατύπερθε ὁδὸν πολλῷ μακροτέρην ἐκτραπόμενοι , ἐν δεξιῇ ἔχοντες τὸ Καυκάσιον ὄρος .
Nevertheless, it was not by this way that the Scythians entered; they turned aside and came by the upper and much longer way, keeping the Caucasian mountains on their right.


1.104.2
750
ἐνθαῦτα οἱ μὲν Μῆδοι συμβαλόντες τοῖσι Σκύθῃσι καὶ ἑσσωθέντες τῇ μάχῃ τῆς ἀρχῆς κατελύθησαν .
There, the Medes met the Scythians, who defeated them in battle, deprived them of their rule/


1.104.2
751
οἱ δὲ Σκύθαι τὴν Ἀσίην πᾶσαν ἐπέσχον .
The Scythians made themselves masters of all Asia.


1.105.1
752
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ἤισαν ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον .
From there they marched against Egypt:


1.105.1
753
καὶ ἐπείτε ἐγένοντο ἐν τῇ Παλαιστίνῃ Συρίῃ , Ψαμμήτιχος σφέας Αἰγύπτου βασιλεὺς ἀντιάσας δώροισί τε καὶ λιτῇσι ἀποτράπει τὸ προσωτέρω μὴ πορεύεσθαι .
and when they were in the part of Syria called Palestine, Psammetichus king of Egypt met them and persuaded them with gifts and prayers to come no further.


1.105.2
754
οἳ δὲ ἐπείτε ἀναχωρέοντες ὀπίσω ἐγένοντο τῆς Συρίης ἐν Ἀσκάλωνι πόλι , τῶν πλεόνων Σκυθέων παρεξελθόντων ἀσινέων , ὀλίγοι τινὲς αὐτῶν ὑπολειφθέντες ἐσύλησαν τῆς οὐρανίης Ἀφροδίτης τὸ ἱρόν .
So they turned back, and when they came on their way to the city of  Tel Ascalon    in  Syria Syria   , most of the Scythians passed by and did no harm, but a few remained behind and plundered the temple of Heavenly Aphrodite.


1.105.3
755
ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο τὸ ἱρόν , ὡς ἐγὼ πυνθανόμενος εὑρίσκω , πάντων ἀρχαιότατον ἱρῶν ὅσα ταύτης τῆς θεοῦ ·
This temple, I discover from making inquiry, is the oldest of all the temples of the goddess,


1.105.3
756
καὶ γὰρ τὸ ἐν Κύπρῳ ἱρὸν ἐνθεῦτεν ἐγένετο , ὡς αὐτοὶ Κύπριοι λέγουσι , καὶ τὸ ἐν Κυθήροισι Φοίνικές εἰσὶ οἱ ἱδρυσάμενοι ἐκ ταύτης τῆς Συρίης ἐόντες .
for the temple in Cyprus was founded from it, as the Cyprians themselves say; and the temple on Cerigo was founded by Phoenicians from this same land of Syria.


1.105.4
757
τοῖσι δὲ τῶν Σκυθέων συλήσασι τὸ ἱρὸν τὸ ἐν Ἀσκάλωνι καὶ τοῖσι τούτων αἰεὶ ἐκγόνοισι ἐνέσκηψε ὁ θεὸς θήλεαν νοῦσον ·
But the Scythians who pillaged the temple, and all their descendants after them, were afflicted by the goddess with the “female” sickness:


1.105.4
758
ὥστε ἅμα λέγουσί τε οἱ Σκύθαι διὰ τοῦτο σφέας νοσέειν , καὶ ὁρᾶν παρ’ ἑωυτοῖσι τοὺς ἀπικνεομένους ἐς τὴν Σκυθικὴν χώρην ὡς διακέαται τοὺς καλέουσι Ἐνάρεας οἱ Σκύθαι .
and so the Scythians say that they are afflicted as a consequence of this and also that those who visit Scythian territory see among them the condition of those whom the Scythians call “Hermaphrodites”.


1.106.1
759
ἐπὶ μέν νυν ὀκτὼ καὶ εἴκοσι ἔτεα ἦρχον τῆς Ἀσίης οἱ Σκύθαι , καὶ τὰ πάντα σφι ὑπό τε ὕβριος καὶ ὀλιγωρίης ἀνάστατα ἦν ·
The Scythians, then, ruled Asia for twenty-eight years:


1.106.1
760
χωρὶς μὲν γὰρ φόρον ἔπρησσον παρ’ ἑκάστων τὸν ἑκάστοισι ἐπέβαλλον , χωρὶς δὲ τοῦ φόρου ἥρπαζον περιελαύνοντες τοῦτο ὅ τι ἔχοιεν ἕκαστοι .
and the whole land was ruined because of their violence and their pride, for, besides exacting from each the tribute which was assessed, they rode about the land carrying off everyone's possessions.


1.106.2
761
καὶ τούτων μὲν τοὺς πλεῦνας Κυαξάρης τε καὶ Μῆδοι ξεινίσαντες καὶ καταμεθύσαντες κατεφόνευσαν , καὶ οὕτω ἀνεσώσαντο τὴν ἀρχὴν Μῆδοι καὶ ἐπεκράτεον τῶν περ καὶ πρότερον , καὶ τήν τε Νίνον εἷλον ( ὡς δὲ εἷλον ἐν ἑτέροισι λόγοισι δηλώσω ) καὶ τοὺς Ἀσσυρίους ὑποχειρίους ἐποιήσαντο πλὴν τῆς Βαβυλωνίης μοίρης .
Most of them were entertained and made drunk and then slain by Cyaxares and the Medes: so thus the Medes took back their empire and all that they had formerly possessed; and they took  Nineveh Ninus    (how, I will describe in a later part of my history), and brought all Assyria except the province of  Babylon Babylon    under their rule.


1.107.1
762
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Κυαξάρης μέν , βασιλεύσας τεσσεράκοντα ἔτεα σὺν τοῖσι Σκύθαι ἦρξαν , τελευτᾷ , ἐκδέκεται δὲ Ἀστυάγης Κυαξάρεω παῖς τὴν βασιληίην .
Afterwards, Cyaxares died after a reign of forty years (among which I count the years of the Scythian domination) and his son Astyages inherited the sovereignty.


1.107.1
763
Καὶ οἱ ἐγένετο θυγάτηρ τῇ οὔνομα ἔθετο Μανδάνην ·
Astyages had a daughter, whom he called Mandane:


1.107.1
764
τὴν ἐδόκεε Ἀστυάγης ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ οὐρῆσαι τοσοῦτον ὥστε πλῆσαι μὲν τὴν ἑωυτοῦ πόλιν , ἐπικατακλύσαι δὲ καὶ τὴν Ἀσίην πᾶσαν .
he dreamed that she urinated so much that she filled his city and flooded all of Asia.


1.107.1
765
ὑπερθέμενος δὲ τῶν Μάγων τοῖσι ὀνειροπόλοισι τὸ ἐνύπνιον , ἐφοβήθη παρ’ αὐτῶν αὐτὰ ἕκαστα μαθών .
He communicated this vision to those of the Magi who interpreted dreams, and when he heard what they told him he was terrified;


1.107.2
766
μετὰ δὲ τὴν Μανδάνην ταύτην ἐοῦσαν ἤδη ἀνδρὸς ὡραίην Μήδων μὲν τῶν ἑωυτοῦ ἀξίων οὐδενὶ διδοῖ γυναῖκα , δεδοικὼς τὴν ὄψιν ·
and presently, when Mandane was of marriageable age, he feared the vision too much to give her to any Mede worthy to marry into his family,


1.107.2
767
ὁ δὲ Πέρσῃ διδοῖ τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Καμβύσης , τὸν εὕρισκε οἰκίης μὲν ἐόντα ἀγαθῆς τρόπου δὲ ἡσυχίου , πολλῷ ἔνερθε ἄγων αὐτὸν μέσου ἀνδρὸς Μήδου .
but married her to a Persian called Cambyses, a man whom he knew to be wellborn and of a quiet temper: for Astyages held Cambyses to be much lower than a Mede of middle rank.


1.108.1
768
συνοικεούσης δὲ τῷ Καμβύσῃ τῆς Μανδάνης , ὁ Ἀστυάγης τῷ πρώτῳ ἔτεϊ εἶδε ἄλλην ὄψιν , ἐδόκεε δέ οἱ ἐκ τῶν αἰδοίων τῆς θυγατρὸς ταύτης φῦναι ἄμπελον , τὴν δὲ ἄμπελον ἐπισχεῖν τὴν Ἀσίην πᾶσαν .
But during the first year that Mandane was married to Cambyses, Astyages saw a second vision. He dreamed that a vine grew out of the genitals of this daughter, and that the vine covered the whole of  Asia Asia   .


1.108.2
769
ἰδὼν δὲ τοῦτο καὶ ὑπερθέμενος τοῖσι ὀνειροπόλοισι , μετεπέμψατο ἐκ τῶν Περσέων τὴν θυγατέρα ἐπίτεκα ἐοῦσαν , ἀπικομένην δὲ ἐφύλασσε βουλόμενος τὸ γενόμενον ἐξ αὐτῆς διαφθεῖραι ·
Having seen this vision, and communicated it to the interpreters of dreams, he sent to the Persians for his daughter, who was about to give birth, and when she arrived kept her guarded, meaning to kill whatever child she bore:


1.108.2
770
ἐκ γάρ οἱ τῆς ὄψιος οἱ τῶν Μάγων ὀνειροπόλοι ἐσήμαινον ὅτι μέλλοι ὁ τῆς θυγατρὸς αὐτοῦ γόνος βασιλεύσειν ἀντὶ ἐκείνου .
for the interpreters declared that the meaning of his dream was that his daughter's offspring would rule in his place.


1.108.3
771
ταῦτα δὴ ὦν φυλασσόμενος ὁ Ἀστυάγης , ὡς ἐγένετο ὁ Κῦρος , καλέσας Ἅρπαγον ἄνδρα οἰκήιον καὶ πιστότατόν τε Μήδων καὶ πάντων ἐπίτροπον τῶν ἑωυτοῦ , ἔλεγὲ οἱ τοιάδε .
Anxious to prevent this, Astyages, when Cyrus was born, summoned Harpagus, a man of his household who was his most faithful servant among the Medes and was administrator of all that was his, and he said:


1.108.4
772
" Ἅρπαγε , πρῆγμα τὸ ἄν τοι προσθέω , μηδαμῶς παραχρήσῃ , μηδὲ ἐμέ τε παραβάλῃ καὶ ἄλλους ἑλόμενος ἐξ ὑστέρης σοὶ αὐτῷ περιπέσῃς ·
“Harpagus, whatever business I turn over to you, do not mishandle it, and do not leave me out of account and, giving others preference, trip over your own feet afterwards.


1.108.4
773
λάβε τὸν Μανδάνη ἔτεκε παῖδα , φέρων δὲ ἐς σεωυτοῦ ἀπόκτεινον , μετὰ δὲ θάψον τρόπῳ ὅτεῳ αὐτὸς βούλεαι " .
Take the child that Mandane bore, and carry him to your house, and kill him; and then bury him however you like.”


1.108.5
774
ὁ δὲ ἀμείβεται " ὦ βασιλεῦ , οὔτε ἄλλοτε κω παρεῖδες ἀνδρὶ τῷδε ἄχαρι οὐδέν , φυλασσόμεθα δὲ ἐς σὲ καὶ ἐς τὸν μετέπειτα χρόνον μηδὲν ἐξαμαρτεῖν .
“O King,” Harpagus answered, “never yet have you noticed anything displeasing in your man; and I shall be careful in the future, too, not to err in what concerns you.


1.108.5
775
ἀλλ’ εἲ τοι φίλον τοῦτο οὕτω γίνεσθαι , χρὴ δὴ τό γε ἐμὸν ὑπηρετέεσθαι ἐπιτηδέως " .
If it is your will that this be done, then my concern ought to be to attend to it scrupulously.”


1.109.1
776
τούτοισι ἀμειψάμενος ὁ Ἅρπαγος , ὥς οἱ παρεδόθη τὸ παιδίον κεκοσμημένον τὴν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ ἤιε κλαίων ἐς τὰ οἰκία ·
Harpagus answered thus. The child was then given to him, consigned to its death, and he went to his house weeping.


1.109.1
777
παρελθὼν δὲ ἔφραζε τῇ ἑωυτοῦ γυναικὶ τὸν πάντα Ἀστυάγεος ῥηθέντα λόγον .
When he came in, he told his wife the entire speech uttered by Astyages.


1.109.2
778
ἣ δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν λέγει " νῦν ὦν τί σοὶ ἐν νόῳ ἐστὶ ποιέειν " ;
“Now, then,” she said to him, “what do you propose to do?”


1.109.2
779
ὁ δὲ ἀμείβεται " οὐ τῇ ἐνετέλλετο Ἀστυάγης , οὐδ’ εἰ παραφρονήσει τε καὶ μανέεται κάκιον ἢ νῦν μαίνεται , οὔ οἱ ἔγωγε προσθήσομαι τῇ γνώμῃ οὐδὲ ἐς φόνον τοιοῦτον ὑπηρετήσω .
“Not to obey Astyages' instructions,” he answered, “not even if he should lose his mind and be more frantic than he is now: I will not lend myself to his plan or be an accessory to such a murder.


1.109.3
780
πολλῶν δὲ εἵνεκα οὐ φονεύσω μιν , καὶ ὅτι αὐτῷ μοι συγγενής ἐστὶ ὁ παῖς , καὶ ὅτι Ἀστυάγης μὲν ἐστὶ γέρων καὶ ἅπαις ἔρσενος γόνου ·
There are many reasons why I will not kill him: because the child is related to me, and because Astyages is old and has no male children.


1.109.4
781
εἰ δ’ ἐθελήσει τούτου τελευτήσαντος ἐς τὴν θυγατέρα ταύτην ἀναβῆναι ἡ τυραννίς , τῆς νῦν τὸν υἱὸν κτείνει δι’ ἐμεῦ , ἄλλο τι ἢ λείπεται τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν ἐμοὶ κινδύνων ὁ μέγιστος ;
Now if the sovereignty passes to this daughter of his after his death, whose son he is now killing by means of me, what is left for me but the gravest of all dangers?


1.109.4
782
ἀλλὰ τοῦ μὲν ἀσφαλέος εἵνεκα ἐμοὶ δεῖ τοῦτον τελευτᾶν τὸν παῖδα , δεῖ μέντοι τῶν τινα Ἀστυάγεος αὐτοῦ φονέα γενέσθαι καὶ μὴ τῶν ἐμῶν " .
For the sake of my safety this child has to die; but one of Astyages' own people has to be the murderer and not one of mine.”


1.110.1
783
ταῦτα εἶπε καὶ αὐτίκα ἄγγελον ἔπεμπε ἐπὶ τῶν βουκόλων τῶν Ἀστυάγεος τὸν ἠπίστατο νομάς τε ἐπιτηδεοτάτας νέμοντα καὶ ὄρεα θηριωδέστατα ·
So saying, he sent a messenger at once to one of Astyages' cowherds, who he knew pastured his herds in the likeliest spots and where the mountains were most infested with wild beasts.


1.110.1
784
τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Μιτραδάτης , συνοίκεε δὲ ἑωυτοῦ συνδούλῃ , οὔνομα δὲ τῇ γυναικὶ ἦν τῇ συνοίκεε Κυνὼ κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλήνων γλῶσσαν , κατὰ δὲ τὴν Μηδικὴν Σπακώ ·
The man's name was Mitradates, and his wife was a slave like him; her name was in the Greek language Cyno, in the Median Spako:


1.110.1
785
τὴν γὰρ κύνα καλέουσι σπάκα Μῆδοι .
for “spax” is the Median word for dog.


1.110.2
786
αἱ δὲ ὑπώρεαί εἰσὶ τῶν ὀρέων , ἔνθα τὰς νομὰς τῶν βοῶν εἶχε οὗτος δὴ ὁ βουκόλος , πρὸς βορέω τε ἀνέμου τῶν Ἀγβατάνων καὶ πρὸς τοῦ πόντου τοῦ Εὐξείνου ·
The foothills of the mountains where this cowherd pastured his cattle are north of Ecbatana, towards the Black sea;


1.110.2
787
ταύτῃ μὲν γὰρ ἡ Μηδικὴ χωρῇ πρὸς Σασπείρων ὀρεινή ἐστι κάρτα καὶ ὑψηλή τε καὶ ἴδῃσι συνηρεφής , ἡ δὲ ἄλλη Μηδικὴ χωρῇ ἐστὶ πᾶσα ἄπεδος .
for the rest of Media is everywhere a level plain, but here, on the side of the Saspires, the land is very high and mountainous and covered with woods.


1.110.3
788
ἐπεὶ ὦν ὁ βουκόλος σπουδῇ πολλῇ καλεόμενος ἀπίκετο , ἔλεγε ὁ Ἅρπαγος τάδε .
So when the cowherd came in haste at the summons, Harpagus said:


1.110.3
789
" κελεύει σε Ἀστυάγης τὸ παιδίον τοῦτο λαβόντα θεῖναι ἐς τὸ ἐρημότατον τῶν ὀρέων , ὅκως ἂν τάχιστα διαφθαρείη ·
“Astyages wants you to take this child and leave it in the most desolate part of the mountains so that it will perish as quickly as possible.


1.110.3
790
καὶ τάδε τοὶ ἐκέλευσε εἰπεῖν , ἢν μὴ ἀποκτείνῃς αὐτὸ ἀλλὰ τεῷ τρόπῳ περιποιήσῃς , ὀλέθρῳ τῷ κακίστῳ σε διαχρήσεσθαι .
And he wants me to tell you that if you do not kill it, but preserve it somehow, you will undergo the most harrowing death;


1.110.3
791
ἐπορᾶν δὲ ἐκκείμενον τέταγμαι ἐγώ " .
and I am ordered to see it exposed.”


1.111.1
792
ταῦτα ἀκούσας ὁ βουκόλος καὶ ἀναλαβὼν τὸ παιδίον ἤιε τὴν αὐτὴν ὀπίσω ὁδὸν καὶ ἀπικνέεται ἐς τὴν ἔπαυλιν .
Hearing this, the cowherd took the child and went back the same way and came to his dwelling.


1.111.1
793
τῷ δ’ ἄρα καὶ αὐτῷ ἡ γυνή , ἐπίτεξ ἐοῦσα πᾶσαν ἡμέρην , τότε κως κατὰ δαίμονα τίκτει οἰχομένου τοῦ βουκόλου ἐς πόλιν .
Now as it happened his wife too had been on the verge of delivering every day, and as the divinity would have it, she did in fact give birth while the cowherd was away in the city.


1.111.1
794
ἦσαν δὲ ἐν φροντίδι ἀμφότεροι ἀλλήλων πέρι , ὃ μὲν τοῦ τόκου τῆς γυναικὸς ἀρρωδέων , ἡ δὲ γυνὴ ὅ τι οὐκ ἐωθὼς ὁ Ἅρπαγος μεταπέμψαιτο αὐτῆς τὸν ἄνδρα .
Each of them was anxious for the other, the husband being afraid about his wife's labor, and the wife because she did not know why Harpagus had so unexpectedly sent for her husband.


1.111.2
795
ἐπείτε δὲ ἀπονοστήσας ἐπέστη , οἷα ἐξ ἀέλπτου ἰδοῦσα ἡ γυνὴ εἴρετο προτέρη ὅ τι μιν οὕτω προθύμως Ἅρπαγος μετεπέμψατο .
So when he returned and stood before her, she was startled by the unexpected sight and asked him before he could speak why Harpagus had so insistently summoned him.


1.111.2
796
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ὤ γύναι , εἶδόν τε ἐς πόλιν ἐλθὼν καὶ ἤκουσα τὸ μήτε ἰδεῖν ὄφελον μήτε κοτὲ γενέσθαι ἐς δεσπότας τοὺς ἡμετέρους .
“Wife,” he said, “when I came to the city, I saw and heard what I ought never to have seen, and what ought never to have happened to our masters.


1.111.2
797
οἶκος μὲν πᾶς Ἁρπάγου κλαυθμῷ κατείχετο , ἐγὼ δὲ ἐκπλαγεὶς ἤια ἔσω .
Harpagus' whole house was full of weeping; astonished, I went in;


1.111.3
798
ὡς δὲ τάχιστα ἐσῆλθον , ὁρέω παιδίον προκείμενον ἀσπαῖρόν τε καὶ κραυγανόμενον , κεκοσμημένον χρυσῷ τε καὶ ἐσθῆτι ποικίλῃ .
and immediately I saw a child lying there struggling and crying, adorned in gold and embroidered clothing.


1.111.3
799
Ἅρπαγος δὲ ὡς εἶδέ με , ἐκέλευε τὴν ταχίστην ἀναλαβόντα τὸ παιδίον οἴχεσθαι φέροντα καὶ θεῖναι ἔνθα θηριωδέστατον εἴη τῶν ὀρέων , φὰς Ἀστυάγεα εἶναι τὸν ταῦτα ἐπιθέμενόν μοι , πόλλ’ ἀπειλήσας εἰ μή σφεα ποιήσαιμι .
And when Harpagus saw me, he told me to take the child in haste and bring it away and leave it where the mountains are the most infested with wild beasts. It was Astyages, he said, who enjoined this on me, and Harpagus threatened me grievously if I did not do it.


1.111.4
800
καὶ ἐγὼ ἀναλαβὼν ἔφερον , δοκέων τῶν τινος οἰκετέων εἶναι ·
So I took him and brought him away, supposing him to be the child of one of the servants;


1.111.4
801
οὐ γὰρ ἂν κοτὲ κατέδοξα ἔνθεν γε ἦν .
for I could never have guessed whose he was.


1.111.4
802
ἐθάμβεον δὲ ὁρέων χρυσῷ τε καὶ εἵμασι κεκοσμημένον , πρὸς δὲ καὶ κλαυθμὸν κατεστεῶτα ἐμφανέα ἐν Ἁρπάγου .
But I was amazed at seeing him adorned with gold and clothing, and at hearing, too, the evident sound of weeping in the house of Harpagus.


1.111.5
803
καὶ πρόκατε δὴ κατ’ ὁδὸν πυνθάνομαι τὸν πάντα λόγον θεράποντος , ὃς ἐμὲ προπέμπων ἔξω πόλιος ἐνεχείρισε τὸ βρέφος , ὡς ἄρα Μανδάνης τε εἴη παῖς τῆς Ἀστυάγεος θυγατρὸς καὶ Καμβύσεω τοῦ Κύρου , καί μιν Ἀστυάγης ἐντέλλεται ἀποκτεῖναι .
Very soon on the way I learned the whole story from the servant who brought me out of the city and gave the child into my custody:


1.111.5
804
νῦν τε ὅδε ἐστί " .
namely, that it was the son of Mandane the king's daughter and Cambyses the son of Cyrus, and that Astyages gave the command to kill him. And now, here he is.”


1.112.1
805
ἅμα δὲ ταῦτα ἔλεγε ὁ βουκόλος καὶ ἐκκαλύψας ἀπεδείκνυε .
And as he said this the cowherd uncovered it and showed it.


1.112.1
806
ἣ δὲ ὡς εἶδε τὸ παιδίον μέγα τε καὶ εὐειδὲς ἐόν , δακρύσασα καὶ λαβομένη τῶν γουνάτων τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἐχρήιζε μηδεμιῇ τέχνῃ ἐκθεῖναί μιν .
But when the woman saw how fine and fair the child was, she began to cry and laid hold of the man's knees and begged him by no means to expose him.


1.112.2
807
ὁ δὲ οὐκ ἔφη οἷός τ’ εἶναι ἄλλως αὐτὰ ποιέειν ·
But the husband said he could not do otherwise;


1.112.2
808
ἐπιφοιτήσειν γὰρ κατασκόπους ἐξ Ἁρπάγου ἐποψομένους , ἀπολέεσθαί τε κάκιστα ἢν μὴ σφεα ποιήσῃ .
for, he said, spies would be coming from Harpagus to see what was done, and he would have to die a terrible death if he did not obey.


1.112.2
809
ὡς δὲ οὐκ ἔπειθε ἄρα τὸν ἄνδρα , δευτέρα λέγει ἡ γυνὴ τάδε .
Being unable to move her husband, the woman then said:


1.112.2
810
" ἐπεὶ τοίνυν οὐ δύναμαί σε πείθειν μὴ ἐκθεῖναι , σὺ δὲ ὧδε ποίησον , εἰ δὴ πᾶσα ἀνάγκη ὀφθῆναι ἐκκείμενον .
“Since I cannot convince you not to expose it, then, if a child has to be seen exposed, do this:


1.112.2
811
τέτοκα γὰρ καὶ ἐγώ , τέτοκα δὲ τεθνεός .
I too have borne a child, but I bore it dead.


1.112.3
812
τοῦτο μὲν φέρων πρόθες , τὸν δὲ τῆς Ἀστυάγεος θυγατρὸς παῖδα ὡς ἐξ ἡμέων ἐόντα τρέφωμεν .
Take this one and put it out, but the child of the daughter of Astyages let us raise as if it were our own;


1.112.3
813
καὶ οὕτω οὔτε σὺ ἁλώσεαι ἀδικέων τοὺς δεσπότας οὔτε ἡμῖν κακῶς βεβουλευμένα ἔσται ·
this way, you won't be caught disobeying our masters, and we will not have plotted badly.


1.112.3
814
ὅ τε γὰρ τεθνεὼς βασιληίης ταφῆς κυρήσει καὶ ὁ περιεὼν οὐκ ἀπολέει τὴν ψυχήν " .
For the dead child will have royal burial, and the living will not lose his life.”


1.113.1
815
κάρτα τε ἔδοξε τῷ , βουκόλῳ πρὸς τὰ παρεόντα εὖ λέγειν ἡ γυνή , καὶ αὐτίκα ἐποίεε ταῦτα ·
Thinking that his wife advised him excellently in his present strait, the cowherd immediately did as she said.


1.113.1
816
τὸν μὲν ἔφερε θανατώσων παῖδα , τοῦτον μὲν παραδιδοῖ τῇ ἑωυτοῦ γυναικί , τὸν δὲ ἑωυτοῦ ἐόντα νεκρὸν λαβὼν ἔθηκε ἐς τὸ ἄγγος ἐν τῷ ἔφερε τὸν ἕτερον ·
He gave his wife the child whom he had brought to kill, and his own dead child he put into the chest in which he carried the other,


1.113.2
817
κοσμήσας δὲ τῷ κόσμῳ παντὶ τοῦ ἑτέρου παιδός , φέρων ἐς τὸ ἐρημότατον τῶν ὀρέων τίθει .
and dressed it with all the other child's finery and left it out in the most desolate part of the mountains.


1.113.2
818
ὡς δὲ τρίτη ἡμέρη τῷ παιδίῳ ἐκκειμένῳ ἐγένετο , ἤιε ἐς πόλιν ὁ βουκόλος , τῶν τινα προβοσκῶν φύλακον αὐτοῦ καταλιπών , ἐλθὼν δὲ ἐς τοῦ Ἁρπάγου ἀποδεικνύναι ἔφη ἕτοιμος εἶναι τοῦ παιδίου τὸν νέκυν .
Then on the third day after leaving the child out, the cowherd left one of his herdsmen to watch it and went to the city, where he went to Harpagus' house and said he was ready to show the child's dead body.


1.113.3
819
πέμψας δὲ ὅ Ἅρπαγος τῶν ἑωυτοῦ δορυφόρων τοὺς πιστοτάτους εἶδέ τε διὰ τούτων καὶ ἔθαψε τοῦ βουκόλου τὸ παιδίον , καὶ τὸ μὲν ἐτέθαπτο , τὸν δὲ ὕστερον τούτων Κῦρον ὀνομασθέντα παραλαβοῦσα ἔτρεφε ἡ γυνὴ τοῦ βουκόλου , οὔνομα ἄλλο κού τι καὶ οὐ Κῦρον θεμένη .
Harpagus sent the most trusted of his bodyguard, and these saw for him and buried the cowherd's child. So it was buried: and the cowherd's wife kept and raised the boy who was afterwards named Cyrus; but she did not give him that name, but another.


1.114.1
820
καὶ ὅτε ἦν δεκαέτης ὁ παῖς , πρῆγμα ἐς αὑτὸν τοιόνδε γενόμενον ἐξέφηνέ μιν .
Now when the boy was ten years old, the truth about him was revealed in some such way as this.


1.114.1
821
ἔπαιζε ἐν τῇ κώμῃ ταύτῃ ἐν τῇ ἦσαν καὶ αἱ βουκολίαι αὗται , ἔπαιζε δὲ μετ’ ἄλλων ἡλίκων ἐν ὁδῷ .
He was playing in the village where these herdsmen's quarters were, playing in the road with others of his age.


1.114.1
822
καὶ οἱ παῖδες παίζοντες εἵλοντο ἑωυτῶν βασιλέα εἶναι τοῦτον δὴ τὸν τοῦ βουκόλου ἐπίκλησιν παῖδα .
The boys while playing chose to be their king this one who was supposed to be the son of the cowherd.


1.114.2
823
ὁ δὲ αὐτῶν διέταξε τοὺς μὲν οἰκίας οἰκοδομέειν , τοὺς δὲ δορυφόρους εἶναι , τὸν δέ κου τινὰ αὐτῶν ὀφθαλμὸν βασιλέος εἶναι , τῷ δὲ τινὶ τὰς ἀγγελίας φέρειν ἐδίδου γέρας , ὡς ἑκάστῳ ἔργον προστάσσων .
Then he assigned some of them to the building of houses, some to be his bodyguard, one doubtless to be the King's Eye; to another he gave the right of bringing him messages; to each he gave his proper work.


1.114.3
824
εἷς δὴ τούτων τῶν παίδων συμπαίζων , ἐὼν Ἀρτεμβάρεος παῖς ἀνδρὸς δοκίμου ἐν Μήδοισι , οὐ γὰρ δὴ ἐποίησε τὸ προσταχθὲν ἐκ τοῦ Κύρου , ἐκέλευε αὐτὸν τοὺς ἄλλους παῖδας διαλαβεῖν , πειθομένων δὲ τῶν παίδων ὁ Κῦρος τὸν παῖδα τρηχέως κάρτα περιέσπε μαστιγέων .
Now one of these boys playing with him was the son of Artembares, a notable Mede; when he did not perform his assignment from Cyrus, Cyrus told the other boys to seize him, and when they did so he handled the boy very roughly and whipped him.


1.114.4
825
ὁ δὲ ἐπείτε μετείθη τάχιστα , ὡς γε δὴ ἀνάξια ἑωυτοῦ παθών , μᾶλλόν τι περιημέκτεε , κατελθὼν δὲ ἐς πόλιν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα ἀποικτίζετο τῶν ὑπὸ Κύρου ἤντησε , λέγων δὲ οὐ Κύρου ( οὐ γάρ κω ἦν τοῦτο τ- ὄνομα ) , ἀλλὰ πρὸς τοῦ βουκόλου τοῦ Ἀστυάγεος παιδός .
As soon as he was let go, very upset about the indignity he had suffered, he went down to his father in the city and complained of what he had received at the hands of the son of Astyages' cowherd — not calling him Cyrus, for that name had not yet been given.


1.114.5
826
ὁ δὲ Ἀρτεμβάρης ὀργῇ ὡς εἶχε ἐλθὼν παρὰ τὸν Ἀστυάγεα καὶ ἅμα ἀγόμενος τὸν παῖδα ἀνάρσια πρήγματα ἔφη πεπονθέναι , λέγων " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ὑπὸ τοῦ σοῦ δούλου , βουκόλου δὲ παιδὸς ὧδε περιυβρίσμεθα , " δεικνὺς τοῦ παιδὸς τοὺς ὤμους .
Artembares, going just as angry as he was to Astyages and bringing his son along, announced that an impropriety had been committed, saying, “O King, by your slave, the son of a cowherd, we have been outraged thus”: and with that he bared his son's shoulders.


1.115.1
827
ἀκούσας δὲ καὶ ἰδὼν Ἀστυάγης , θέλων τιμωρῆσαι τῷ παιδὶ τιμῆς τῆς Ἀρτεμβάρεος εἵνεκα , μετεπέμπετο τόν τε βουκόλον καὶ τὸν παῖδα .
When Astyages heard and saw, he was ready to avenge the boy in view of Artembares' rank: so he sent for the cowherd and his son.


1.115.1
828
ἐπείτε δὲ παρῆσαν ἀμφότεροι , βλέψας πρὸς τὸν Κῦρον ὁ Ἀστυάγης ἔφη " σὺ δὴ ἐὼν τοῦδε τοιούτου ἐόντος παῖς ἐτόλμησας τὸν τοῦδε παῖδα ἐόντος πρώτου παρ’ ἐμοὶ ἀεικείῃ τοιῇδε περισπεῖν " ;
When they were both present, Astyages said, fixing his eyes on Cyrus,


1.115.2
829
ὁ δὲ ἀμείβετο ὧδε .
“Is it you, then, the child of one such as this, who have dared to lay hands on the son of the greatest of my courtiers?”


1.115.2
830
" ὦ δέσποτα , ἐγὼ ταῦτα τοῦτον ἐποίησα σὺν δίκῃ .
Cyrus answered, “Master, what I did to him I did with justice.


1.115.2
831
οἱ γάρ με ἐκ τῆς κώμης παῖδες , τῶν καὶ ὅδε ἦν , παίζοντες σφέων αὐτῶν ἐστήσαντο βασιλέα ·
The boys of the village, of whom he was one, chose me while playing to be their king,


1.115.2
832
ἐδόκεον γὰρ σφι εἶναι ἐς τοῦτο ἐπιτηδεότατος .
for they thought me the most fit for this.


1.115.3
833
οἱ μέν νυν ἄλλοι παῖδες τὰ ἐπιτασσόμενα ἐπετέλεον , οὗτος δὲ ἀνηκούστεέ τε καὶ λόγον εἶχε οὐδένα , ἐς ὃ ἔλαβὲ τὴν δίκην .
The other boys then did as assigned: but this one was disobedient and cared nothing for me, for which he got what he deserved.


1.115.3
834
εἰ ὦν δὴ τοῦδε εἵνεκα ἄξιός τευ κακοῦ εἰμί , ὅδε τοὶ πάρειμι " .
Now, if I deserve punishment for this, here I am to take it.”


1.116.1
835
ταῦτα λέγοντος τοῦ παιδὸς τὸν Ἀστυάγεα ἐσήιε ἀνάγνωσις αὐτοῦ , καὶ οἱ ὅ τε χαρακτὴρ τοῦ προσώπου προσφέρεσθαι ἐδόκεε ἐς ἑωυτὸν καὶ ἡ ὑπόκρισις ἐλευθερωτέρη εἶναι , ὅ τε χρόνος τῆς ἐκθέσιος τῇ ἡλικίῃ τοῦ παιδὸς ἐδόκεε συμβαίνειν .
While the boy spoke, it seemed to Astyages that he recognized him; the character of his face was like his own, he thought, and his manner of answering was freer than customary: and the date of the exposure seemed to agree with the boy's age.


1.116.2
836
ἐκπλαγεὶς δὲ τούτοισι ἐπὶ χρόνον ἄφθογγος ἦν ·
Astonished at this, he sat a while silent;


1.116.2
837
μόγις δὲ δή κοτε ἀνενειχθεὶς εἶπε , θέλων ἐκπέμψαι τὸν Ἀρτεμβάρεα , ἵνα τὸν βουκόλον μοῦνον λαβὼν βασανίσῃ , " Ἀρτέμβαρες , ἐγὼ ταῦτα ποιήσω ὥστε σὲ καὶ τὸν παῖδα τὸν σὸν μηδὲν ἐπιμέμφεσθαι " .
but when at last with difficulty he could collect his wits, he said (for he wanted to be rid of Artembares and question the cowherd with no one present), “I shall act in such a way, Artembares, that you and your son shall have no cause of complaint.”


1.116.3
838
τὸν μὲν δὴ Ἀρτεμβάρεα πέμπει , τὸν δὲ Κῦρον ἦγον ἔσω οἱ θεράποντες κελεύσαντος τοῦ Ἀστυάγεος , ἐπεὶ δὲ ὑπελέλειπτο ὁ βουκόλος μοῦνος μουνόθεν , τάδε αὐτὸν εἴρετο ὁ Ἀστυάγεος , κόθεν λάβοι τὸν παῖδα καὶ τίς εἴη ὁ παραδούς .
So he sent Artembares away, and the attendants led Cyrus inside at Astyages' bidding. When the cowherd was left quite alone, Astyages asked him where he had got the boy and who had been the giver.


1.116.4
839
ὁ δὲ ἐξ ἑωυτοῦ τε ἔφη γεγονέναι καὶ τὴν τεκοῦσαν αὐτὸν εἶναι ἔτι παρ’ ἑωυτῷ .
The cowherd answered that Cyrus was his own son and that the mother was still with him.


1.116.4
840
Ἀστυάγης δὲ μιν οὐκ εὖ βουλεύεσθαι ἔφη ἐπιθυμέοντα ἐς ἀνάγκας μεγάλας ἀπικνέεσθαι , ἅμα τε λέγων ταῦτα ἐσήμαινε τοῖσι δορυφόροισι λαμβάνειν αὐτόν .
Astyages said that he was not well advised if he wished to find himself in a desperate situation, and as he said this made a sign to the spearbearers to seize him.


1.116.5
841
ὁ δὲ ἀγόμενος ἐς τὰς ἀνάγκας οὕτω δὴ ἔφαινε τὸν ἐόντα λόγον ·
Then, under stress of necessity, the cowherd disclosed to him the whole story,


1.116.5
842
ἀρχόμενος δὲ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς διεξήιε τῇ ἀληθείῃ χρεώμενος , καὶ κατέβαινε ἐς λιτάς τε καὶ συγγνώμην ἑωυτῷ κελεύων ἔχειν αὐτόν .
telling everything exactly as it had happened from the beginning, and at the end fell to entreaty and urged the king to pardon him.


1.117.1
843
Ἀστυάγης δὲ τοῦ μὲν βουκόλου τὴν ἀληθείην ἐκφήναντος λόγον ἤδη καὶ ἐλάσσω ἐποιέετο , Ἁρπάγῳ δὲ καὶ μεγάλως μεμφόμενος καλέειν αὐτὸν τοὺς δορυφόρους ἐκέλευε .
When the cowherd had disclosed the true story, Astyages took less interest in him, but he was very angry with Harpagus and had the guards summon him.


1.117.2
844
ὡς δέ οἱ παρῆν ὁ Ἅρπαγος , εἴρετό μιν ὁ Ἀστυάγης " Ἅρπαγε , τέῳ δὴ μόρῳ τὸν παῖδα κατεχρήσαο τόν τοι παρέδωκα ἐκ θυγατρὸς γεγονότα τῆς ἐμῆς " ;
Harpagus came, and Astyages asked him “Harpagus, how did you kill the boy, my daughter's son, whom I gave you?”


1.117.2
845
ὁ δὲ Ἅρπαγος ὡς εἶδε τὸν βουκόλον ἔνδον ἐόντα , οὐ τρέπεται ἐπὶ ψευδέα ὁδόν , ἵνα μὴ ἐλεγχόμενος ἁλίσκηται , ἀλλὰ λέγει τάδε .
Harpagus, when he saw the cowherd was there, did not take the way of falsehood, lest he be caught and confuted:


1.117.3
846
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἐπείτε παρέλαβον τὸ παιδίον , ἐβούλευον σκοπέων ὅκως σοί τε ποιήσω κατὰ νόον , καὶ ἐγὼ πρὸς σὲ γινόμενος ἀναμάρτητος μήτε θυγατρὶ τῇ σῇ μήτε αὐτῷ σοὶ εἴην αὐθέντης .
“O King,” he said,” when I took the boy, I thought and considered how to do what you wanted and not be held a murderer by your daughter or by you even though I was blameless toward you.


1.117.4
847
ποιέω δὴ ὧδε ·
So I did this:


1.117.4
848
καλέσας τὸν βουκόλον τόνδε παραδίδωμι τὸ παιδίον , φὰς σέ τε εἶναι τὸν κελεύοντα ἀποκτεῖναι αὐτό .
I summoned this cowherd here, and gave the child to him, telling him that it was you who gave the command to kill it.


1.117.4
849
καὶ λέγων τοῦτό γε οὐκ ἐψευδόμην ·
And that was the truth;


1.117.4
850
σὺ γὰρ ἐνετέλλεο οὕτω .
for such was your command.


1.117.4
851
παραδίδωμι μέντοι τῷδε κατὰ τάδε ἐντειλάμενος , θεῖναὶ μιν ἐς ἔρημον ὄρος καὶ παραμένοντα φυλάσσειν ἄχρι οὗ τελευτήσῃ , ἀπειλήσας παντοῖα τῷδε ἢν μὴ τάδε ἐπιτελέα ποιήσῃ .
But I gave the child with the instructions that the cowherd was to lay it on a desolate mountainside and wait there and watch until it was dead; and I threatened all sorts of things if he did not accomplish this.


1.117.5
852
ἐπείτε δὲ ποιήσαντος τούτου τὰ κελευόμενα ἐτελεύτησε τὸ παιδίον , πέμψας τῶν εὐνούχων τοὺς πιστοτάτους καὶ εἶδον δι’ ἐκείνων καὶ ἔθαψά μιν .
Then, when he had done what he was told, and the child was dead, I sent the most trusted of my eunuchs and had the body viewed and buried.


1.117.5
853
οὕτω ἔσχε ὦ βασιλεῦ περὶ τοῦ πρήγματος τούτου , καὶ τοιούτῳ μόρῳ ἐχρήσατο ὁ παῖς " .
This, O king, is the story, and such was the end of the boy.”


1.118.1
854
ἅρπαγος μὲν δὴ τὸν ἰθὺν ἔφαινε λόγον ·
Harpagus told the story straight,


1.118.1
855
Ἀστυάγης δὲ κρύπτων τὸν οἱ ἐνεῖχε χόλον διὰ τὸ γεγονός , πρῶτα μέν , κατά περ ἤκουσε αὐτὸς πρὸς τοῦ βουκόλου τὸ πρῆγμα , πάλιν ἀπηγέετο τῷ Ἁρπάγῳ , μετὰ δὲ ὣς οἱ ἐπαλιλλόγητο , κατέβαινε λέγων ὡς περίεστί τε ὁ παῖς καὶ τὸ γεγονὸς ἔχει καλῶς ·
while Astyages, hiding the anger that he felt against him for what had been done, first repeated the story again to Harpagus exactly as he had heard it from the cowherd, then, after repeating it, ended by saying that the boy was alive and that the matter had turned out well.


1.118.2
856
" τῷ τε γὰρ πεποιημένῳ " ἔφη λέγων " ἐς τὸν παῖδα τοῦτον ἔκαμνον μεγάλως , καὶ θυγατρὶ τῇ ἐμῇ διαβεβλημένος οὐκ ἐν ἐλαφρῷ ἐποιεύμην .
“For,” he said, “I was greatly afflicted by what had been done to this boy, and it weighed heavily on me that I was estranged from my daughter.


1.118.2
857
ὡς ὦν τῆς τύχης εὖ μετεστεώσης , τοῦτο μὲν τὸν σεωυτοῦ παῖδα ἀπόπεμψον παρὰ τὸν παῖδα τὸν νεήλυδα , τοῦτο δὲ ( σῶστρα γὰρ τοῦ παιδὸς μέλλω θύειν τοῖσι θεῶν τιμὴ αὕτη προσκέεται ) πάρισθί μοι ἐπὶ δεῖπνον " .
Now, then, in this good turn of fortune, send your own son to this boy newly come, and (since I am about to sacrifice for the boy's safety to the gods to whom this honor is due) come here to dine with me.”


1.119.1
858
ἅρπαγος μὲν ὡς ἤκουσε ταῦτα , προσκυνήσας καὶ μεγάλα ποιησάμενος ὅτι τε ἡ ἁμαρτὰς οἱ ἐς δέον ἐγεγόνεε καὶ ὅτι ἐπὶ τύχῃσι χρηστῇσι ἐπὶ δεῖπνον ἐκέκλητο , ἤιε ἐς τὰ οἰκία .
When Harpagus heard this, he bowed and went to his home, very pleased to find that his offense had turned out for the best and that he was invited to dinner in honor of this fortunate day.


1.119.2
859
ἐσελθὼν δὲ τὴν ταχίστην , ἦν γὰρ οἱ παῖς εἷς μοῦνος ἔτεα τρία καὶ δέκα κου μάλιστα γεγονώς , τοῦτον ἐκπέμπεν ἰέναι τε κελεύων ἐς Ἀστυάγεος καὶ ποιέειν ὅ τι ἂν ἐκεῖνος κελεύῃ , αὐτὸς δὲ περιχαρὴς ἐὼν φράζει τῇ γυναικὶ τὰ συγκυρήσαντα .
Coming in, he told his only son, a boy of about thirteen years of age, to go to Astyages' palace and do whatever the king commanded, and in his great joy he told his wife everything that had happened.


1.119.3
860
Ἀστυάγης δέ , ὥς οἱ ἀπίκετο ὁ Ἁρπάγου παῖς , σφάξας αὐτὸν καὶ κατὰ μέλεα διελὼν τὰ μὲν ὤπτησε τὰ δὲ ἥψησε τῶν κρεῶν , εὔτυκα δὲ ποιησάμενος εἶχε ἕτοιμα .
But when Harpagus' son came, Astyages cut his throat and tore him limb from limb, roasted some of the flesh and boiled some, and kept it ready after he had prepared it.


1.119.4
861
ἐπείτε δὲ τῆς ὥρης γινομένης τοῦ δείπνου παρῆσαν οἵ τε ἄλλοι δαιτυμόνες καὶ ὁ Ἅρπαγος , τοῖσι μὲν ἄλλοισι καὶ αὐτῷ Ἀστυάγεϊ παρετιθέατο τράπεζαι ἐπίπλεαι μηλέων κρεῶν , Ἁρπάγῳ δὲ τοῦ παιδὸς τοῦ ἑωυτοῦ , πλὴν κεφαλῆς τε καὶ ἄκρων χειρῶν τε καὶ ποδῶν , τ- ἄλλα πάντα ·
So when the hour for dinner came and the rest of the guests and Harpagus were present, Astyages and the others were served dishes of lamb's meat, but Harpagus that of his own son, all but the head and hands and feet, which lay apart covered up in a wicker basket.


1.119.4
862
ταῦτα δὲ χωρὶς ἔκειτο ἐπὶ κανέῳ κατακεκαλυμμένα , ὡς δὲ τῷ Ἁρπάγῳ ἐδόκεε ἅλις ἔχειν τῆς βορῆς , Ἀστυάγης εἴρετό μιν εἰ ἡσθείη τι τῇ θοίνῃ .
And when Harpagus thought he had eaten enough, Astyages asked him if he was pleased with his meal.


1.119.5
863
φαμένου δὲ Ἁρπάγου καὶ κάρτα ἡσθῆναι , παρέφερον τοῖσι προσέκειτο τὴν κεφαλὴν τοῦ παιδὸς κατακεκαλυμμένην καὶ τὰς χεῖρας καὶ τοὺς πόδας , Ἅρπαγον δὲ ἐκέλευον προσστάντες ἀποκαλύπτειν τε καὶ λαβεῖν τὸ βούλεται αὐτῶν .
And when Harpagus seemed to have eaten his fill, Astyages asked him, “Did you like your meal, Harpagus?” “Exceedingly,” Harpagus answered. Then those whose job it was brought him the head of his son and hands and feet concealed in the basket, and they stood before Harpagus and told him to open and take what he liked.


1.119.6
864
πειθόμενος δὲ ὁ Ἅρπαγος καὶ ἀποκαλύπτων ὁρᾷ τοῦ παιδὸς τὰ λείμματα , ἰδὼν δὲ οὔτε ἐξεπλάγη ἐντός τε ἑωυτοῦ γίνεται .
Harpagus did; he opened and saw what was left of his son: he saw this, but mastered himself and did not lose his composure.


1.119.6
865
εἴρετο δὲ αὐτὸν ὁ Ἀστυάγης εἰ γινώσκοι ὅτευ θηρίου κρέα βεβρώκοι .
Astyages asked him, “Do you know what beast's meat you have eaten?”


1.119.7
866
ὁ δὲ καὶ γινώσκειν ἔφη καὶ ἀρεστὸν εἶναι πᾶν τὸ ἂν βασιλεὺς ἔρδῃ .
“I know,” he said, “and all that the king does is pleasing.”


1.119.7
867
τούτοισι δὲ ἀμειψάμενος καὶ ἀναλαβὼν τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν κρεῶν ἤιε ἐς τὰ οἰκία , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ἔμελλε , ὡς ἐγὼ δοκέω , ἁλίσας θάψειν τὰ πάντα .
With that answer he took the remains of the meat and went home. There he meant, I suppose, after collecting everything, to bury it.


1.120.1
868
Ἁρπάγῳ μὲν Ἀστυάγης δίκην ταύτην ἐπέθηκε , Κύπου δὲ πέρι βουλεύων ἐκάλεε τοὺς αὐτοὺς τῶν Μάγων οἳ τὸ ἐνύπνιὸν οἱ ταύτῃ ἔκριναν .
Thus Astyages punished Harpagus. But, to help him to decide about Cyrus, he summoned the same Magi who had interpreted his dream as I have said:


1.120.1
869
ἀπικομένους δὲ εἴρετο ὁ Ἁστυάγης τῇ ἔκρινάν οἱ τὴν ὄψιν .
and when they came, Astyages asked them how they had interpreted his dream.


1.120.1
870
οἳ δὲ κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ εἶπαν λέγοντες ὡς βασιλεῦσαι χρῆν τὸν παῖδα , εἰ ἐπέζωσε καὶ μὴ ἀπέθανε πρότερον .
They answered as before, and said that the boy must have been made king had he lived and not died first.


1.120.2
871
ὁ δὲ ἀμείβεται αὐτοὺς τοῖσιδε .
Then Astyages said,


1.120.2
872
" ἔστι τε ὁ παῖς καὶ περίεστι , καί μιν ἐπ’ ἀγροῦ διαιτώμενον οἱ ἐκ τῆς κώμης παῖδες ἐστήσαντο βασιλέα .
“The boy is safe and alive, and when he was living in the country the boys of his village made him king,


1.120.2
873
ὁ δὲ πάντα ὅσα περ οἱ ἀληθέι λόγῳ βασιλέες ἐτελέωσε ποιήσας ·
and he duly did all that is done by true kings:


1.120.2
874
καὶ γὰρ δορυφόρους καὶ θυρωροὺς καὶ ἀγγελιηφόρους καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ πάντα διατάξας ἦρχε .
for he assigned to each individually the roles of bodyguards and sentinels and messengers and everything else, and so ruled.


1.120.3
875
καὶ νῦν ἐς τί ὑμῖν ταῦτα φαίνεται φέρειν " ;
And what do you think is the significance of this?”


1.120.3
876
εἶπαν οἱ Μάγοι " εἰ μὲν περίεστί τε καὶ ἐβασίλευσε ὁ παῖς μὴ ἐκ προνοίης τινός , θάρσεέ τε τούτου εἵνεκα καὶ θυμὸν ἔχε ἀγαθόν ·
“If the boy is alive,” said the Magi, “and has been made king without premeditation, then be confident on this score and keep an untroubled heart:


1.120.3
877
οὐ γὰρ ἔτι τὸ δεύτερον ἄρχει .
he will not be made king a second time.


1.120.3
878
παρὰ σμικρὰ γὰρ καὶ τῶν λογίων ἡμῖν ἔνια κεχώρηκε , καὶ τά γε τῶν ὀνειράτων ἐχόμενα τελέως ἐς ἀσθενὲς ἔρχεται " .
Even in our prophecies, it is often but a small thing that has been foretold and the consequences of dreams come to nothing in the end.”


1.120.4
879
ἀμείβεται ὁ Ἀστυάγης τοῖσιδε .
Astyages answered.


1.120.4
880
" καὶ αὐτὸς ὦ Μάγοι ταύτῃ πλεῖστος γνώμην εἰμί , βασιλέος ὀνομασθέντος τοῦ παιδὸς ἐξήκειν τε τὸν ὄνειρον καί μοι τὸν παῖδα τοῦτον εἶναι δεινὸν ἔτι οὐδέν .
“I too, Magi, am very much of your opinion: that the dream came true when the boy was called king, and that I have no more to fear from him.


1.120.4
881
ὅμως μέν γέ τοι συμβουλεύσατέ μοι εὖ περισκεψάμενοι τὰ μέλλει ἀσφαλέστατα εἶναι οἴκῳ τε τῷ ἐμῷ καὶ ὑμῖν " .
Nevertheless consider well and advise me what will be safest both for my house and for you.”


1.120.5
882
εἶπαν πρὸς ταῦτα οἱ Μάγοι " ὦ βασιλεῦ , καὶ αὐτοῖσι ἡμῖν περὶ πολλοῦ ἐστι κατορθοῦσθαι ἀρχὴν τὴν σήν .
The Magi said, “O King, we too are very anxious that your sovereignty prosper:


1.120.5
883
κείνως μὲν γὰρ ἀλλοτριοῦται ἐς τὸν παῖδα τοῦτον περιιοῦσα ἐόντα Πέρσην , καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐόντες Μῆδοι δουλούμεθά τε καὶ λόγου οὐδενὸς γινόμεθα πρὸς Περσέων , ἐόντες ξεῖνοι ·
for otherwise, it passes from your nation to this boy who is a Persian, and so we Medes are enslaved and held of no account by the Persians, as we are of another blood,


1.120.5
884
σέο δ’ ἐνεστεῶτος βασιλέος , ἐόντος πολιήτεω , καὶ ἄρχομεν τὸ μέρος καὶ τιμὰς πρὸς σέο μεγάλας ἔχομεν .
but while you, our countryman, are established king, we have our share of power, and great honor is shown us by you.


1.120.6
885
οὕτω ὦν πάντως ἡμῖν σέο καὶ τῆς σῆς ἀρχῆς προοπτέον ἐστί .
Thus, then, we ought by all means to watch out for you and for your sovereignty.


1.120.6
886
καὶ νῦν εἰ φοβερόν τι ἐνωρῶμεν , πᾶν ἂν σοὶ προεφράζομεν .
And if at the present time we saw any danger we would declare everything to you:


1.120.6
887
νῦν δὲ ἀποσκήψαντος τοῦ ἐνυπνίου ἐς φαῦλον , αὐτοί τε θαρσέομεν καὶ σοὶ ἕτερα τοιαῦτα παρακελευόμεθα .
but now the dream has had a trifling conclusion, and we ourselves are confident and advise you to be so also.


1.120.6
888
τὸν δὲ παῖδα τοῦτον ἐξ ὀφθαλμῶν ἀπόπεμψαι ἐς Πέρσας τε καὶ τοὺς γειναμένους " .
As for this boy, send him out of your sight to the Persians and to his parents.”


1.121.1
889
ἀκούσας ταῦτα ὁ Ἀστυάγης ἐχάρη τε καὶ καλέσας τὸν Κῦρον ἔλεγέ οἱ τάδε .
Hearing this, Astyages was glad, and calling Cyrus, said,


1.121.1
890
" ὦ παῖ , σὲ γὰρ ἐγὼ δι’ ὄψιν ὀνείρου οὐ τελέην ἠδίκεον , τῇ σεωυτοῦ δὲ μοίρῃ περίεις ·
“My boy, I did you wrong because of a vision I had in a dream, that meant nothing, but by your own destiny you still live;


1.121.1
891
νῦν ὦν ἴθι χαίρων ἐς Πέρσας , πομποὺς δὲ ἐγὼ ἅμα πέμψω .
now therefore, go to the Persians, and good luck go with you; I will send guides with you.


1.121.1
892
ἐλθὼν δὲ ἐκεῖ πατέρα τε καὶ μητέρα εὑρήσεις οὐ κατὰ Μιτραδάτην τε τὸν βουκόλον καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα αὐτοῦ " .
When you get there you will find a father and mother unlike the cowherd, Mitradates, and his wife.”


1.122.1
893
ταῦτα εἶπας ὁ Ἀστυάγης ἀποπέμπει τὸν Κῦρον .
After saying this, Astyages sent Cyrus away.


1.122.1
894
νοστήσαντα δέ μιν ἐς τοῦ Καμβύσεω τὰ οἰκία ἐδέξαντο οἱ γεινάμενοι , καὶ δεξάμενοι ὡς ἐπύθοντο , μεγάλως ἀσπάζοντο οἷα δὴ ἐπιστάμενοι αὐτίκα τότε τελευτῆσαι , ἱστόρεόν τε ὅτεῳ τρόπῳ περιγένοιτο .
When he returned to Cambyses' house, his parents received him there, and learning who he was they welcomed him enthusiastically, for they had supposed that long ago he had been killed, and they asked him how his life had been saved.


1.122.2
895
ὁ δέ σφι ἔλεγε , φὰς πρὸ τοῦ μὲν οὐκ εἰδέναι ἀλλ’ ἡμαρτηκέναι πλεῖστον , κατ’ ὁδὸν δὲ πυθέσθαι πᾶσαν τὴν ἑωυτοῦ πάθην ·
Then he told them, and said that until now he had known nothing but been very deceived, but that on the way he had heard the whole story of his misfortune;


1.122.2
896
ἐπίστασθαι μὲν γὰρ ὡς βουκόλου τοῦ Ἀστυάγεος εἴη παῖς , ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς κεῖθεν ὁδοῦ τὸν πάντα λόγον τῶν πομπῶν πυθέσθαι .
for he had thought, he said, that Astyages' cowherd was his father, but in his journey from the city his escort had told him the whole story.


1.122.3
897
τραφῆναι δὲ ἔλεγε ὑπὸ τῆς τοῦ βουκόλου γυναικός , ἤιέ τε ταύτην αἰνέων διὰ παντός , ἦν τέ οἱ ἐν τῷ λόγῳ τὰ πάντα ἡ Κυνώ .
And he had been raised, he said, by the cowherd's wife, and he was full of her praises, and in his tale he was constantly speaking of Cyno.


1.122.3
898
οἱ δὲ τοκέες παραλαβόντες τὸ οὔνομα τοῦτο , ἵνα θειοτέρως δοκέῃ τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι περιεῖναί σφι ὁ παῖς , κατέβαλον φάτιν ὡς ἐκκείμενον Κῦρον κύων ἐξέθρεψε .
Hearing this name, his parents circulated a story that Cyrus was suckled by a dog when exposed, thinking in this way to make the story of his salvation seem more marvellous to the Persians.


1.123.1
899
ἐνθεῦτεν μὲν ἡ φάτις αὕτη κεχώρηκε .
This then was the beginning of that legend.


1.123.1
900
Κύρῳ δὲ ἀνδρευμένῳ καὶ ἐόντι τῶν ἡλίκων ἀνδρηιοτάτῳ καὶ προσφιλεστάτῳ προσέκειτο ὁ Ἅρπαγος δῶρα πέμπων , τίσασθαι Ἀστυάγεα ἐπιθυμέων ·
But as Cyrus grew up to be the manliest and best loved of his peers, Harpagus courted him and sent him gifts, wishing to be avenged on Astyages;


1.123.1
901
ἀπ’ ἑωυτοῦ γὰρ ἐόντος ἰδιώτεω οὐκ ἐνώρα τιμωρίην ἐσομένην ἐς Ἀστυάγεα , Κῦρον δὲ ὁρέων ἐπιτρεφόμενον ἐποιέετο σύμμαχον , τὰς πάθας τὰς Κύρου τῇσι ἑωυτοῦ ὁμοιούμενος .
for he saw no hope for a private man like himself of punishing Astyages, but as he saw Cyrus growing up, he tried to make him an ally, for he likened Cyrus' misfortune to his own.


1.123.2
902
πρὸ δ’ ἔτι τούτου τάδε οἱ κατέργαστο ·
Even before this the following had been done by him:


1.123.2
903
ἐόντος τοῦ Ἀστυάγεος πικροῦ ἐς τοὺς Μήδους , συμμίσγων ἑνὶ ἑκάστῳ ὁ Ἅρπαγος τῶν πρώτων Μήδων ἀνέπειθε ὡς χρὴ Κῦρον προστησαμένους Ἀστυάγεα παῦσαι τῆς βασιληίης .
since Astyages was harsh toward the Medes, he associated with each of the chief Medes and persuaded them to make Cyrus their leader and depose Astyages.


1.123.3
904
κατεργασμένου δέ οἱ τούτου καὶ ἐόντος ἑτοίμου , οὕτω δὴ τῷ Κύρῳ διαιτωμένῳ ἐν Πέρσῃσι βουλόμενος Ἅρπαγος δηλῶσαι τὴν ἑωυτοῦ γνώμην ἄλλως μὲν οὐδαμῶς εἶχε ἅτε τῶν ὁδῶν φυλασσομενέων , ὁ δὲ ἐπιτεχνᾶται τοιόνδε ·
So much being ready and done, Harpagus wanted to reveal his intent to Cyrus, who then lived among the Persians. But the roads were guarded, and he had no plan for sending a message but this:


1.123.4
905
λαγὸν μηχανησάμενος , καὶ ἀνασχίσας τούτου τὴν γαστέρα καὶ οὐδὲν ἀποτίλας , ὡς δὲ εἶχε οὕτω ἐσέθηκε βυβλίον , γράψας τά οἱ ἐδόκεε ·
he carefully slit the belly of a hare, and then leaving it as it was without further harm he put into it a paper on which he wrote what he thought best.


1.123.4
906
ἀπορράψας δὲ τοῦ λαγοῦ τὴν γαστέρα , καὶ δίκτυα δοὺς ἅτε θηρευτῇ τῶν οἰκετέων τῷ πιστοτάτῳ , ἀπέστελλε ἐς τοὺς Πέρσας , ἐντειλάμενὸς οἱ ἀπὸ γλώσσης διδόντα τὸν λαγὸν Κύρῳ ἐπειπεῖν αὐτοχειρίῃ μιν διελεῖν καὶ μηδένα οἱ ταῦτα ποιεῦντι παρεῖναι .
Then he sewed up the hare's belly, and sent it to Persia by the most trusted of his servants, giving him nets to carry as if he were a huntsman. The messenger was instructed to give Cyrus the hare and tell him by word of mouth to cut it open with his own hands, with no one else present.


1.124.1
907
ταῦτά τε δὴ ὦν ἐπιτελέα ἐγίνετο καὶ ὁ Κῦρος παραλαβὼν τὸν λαγὸν ἀνέσχισε ·
All this was done. Cyrus took the hare and slit it.


1.124.1
908
εὑρὼν δὲ ἐν αὐτῷ τὸ βυβλίον ἐνεὸν λαβὼν ἐπελέγετο , τὰ δὲ γράμματα ἔλεγε τάδε .
He read the paper which was in it; the writing was as follows:


1.124.1
909
" ὦ παῖ Καμβύσεω , σὲ γὰρ θεοὶ ἐπορῶσι ·
“Son of Cambyses, since the gods watch over you


1.124.1
910
οὐ γὰρ ἂν κοτὲ ἐς τοσοῦτο τύχης ἀπίκευ ·
(otherwise you would not have prospered so).


1.124.1
911
σύ νυν Ἀστυάγεα τὸν σεωυτοῦ φονέα τῖσαι .
Avenge yourself now on Astyages, your murderer;


1.124.2
912
κατὰ μὲν γὰρ τὴν τούτου προθυμίην τέθνηκας , τὸ δὲ κατὰ θεούς τε καὶ ἐμὲ περίεις ·
for thanks to his intention you are dead, while thanks to the gods, and me, you live.


1.124.2
913
τά σε καὶ πάλαι δοκέω πάντα ἐκμεμαθηκέναι , σέο τε αὐτοῦ περὶ ὡς ἐπρήχθη , καὶ οἷα ἐγὼ ὑπὸ Ἀστυάγεος πέπονθα , ὅτι σε οὐκ ἀπέκτεινα ἀλλὰ ἔδωκα τῷ βουκόλῳ .
I expect that long ago you heard the story of what was done concerning you and how Astyages treated me because I did not kill you but gave you to the cowherd.


1.124.2
914
σύ νυν , ἢν βούλῃ ἐμοὶ πείθεσθαι , τῆς περ Ἀστυάγης ἄρχει χώρης , ταύτης ἁπάσης ἄρξεις .
If, then, you will listen to me, you shall rule all the country which is now ruled by Astyages.


1.124.2
915
Πέρσας γὰρ ἀναπείσας ἀπίστασθαι στρατηλάτεε ἐπὶ Μήδους ·
Persuade the Persians to rebel, and lead their army against the Medes;


1.124.3
916
καὶ ἤν τε ἐγὼ ὑπὸ Ἀστυάγεος ἀποδεχθέω στρατηγὸς ἀντία σεῦ , ἔστι τοι τὰ σὺ βούλεαι , ἤν τε τῶν τις δοκίμων ἄλλος Μήδων ·
then you have your wish, whether I am appointed to command the army against you or some other notable man among the Medes:


1.124.3
917
πρῶτοι γὰρ οὗτοι ἀποστάντες ἀπ’ ἐκείνου καὶ γενόμενοι πρὸς σέο Ἀστυάγεα καταιρέειν πειρήσονται .
for they will of themselves revolt from Astyages and join you and try to pull him down.


1.124.3
918
ὡς ὦν ἑτοίμου τοῦ γε ἐνθάδε ἐόντος , ποίεε ταῦτα καὶ ποίεε κατὰ τάχος " .
Seeing then that all is ready here, do as I say and do it quickly.”


1.125.1
919
ἀκούσας ταῦτα ὁ Κῦρος ἐφρόντιζε ὅτεῳ τρόπῳ σοφωτάτῳ Πέρσας ἀναπείσει ἀπίστασθαι , φροντίζων δὲ εὑρίσκεται ταῦτα καιριώτατα εἶναι ·
When Cyrus read this, he deliberated as to what was the shrewdest way to persuade the Persians to revolt;


1.125.1
920
ἐποίεε δὴ ταῦτα .
and what he thought to be most effective, he did:


1.125.2
921
γράψας ἐς βυβλίον τὰ ἐβούλετο , ἁλίην τῶν Περσέων ἐποιήσατο , μετὰ δὲ ἀναπτύξας τὸ βυβλίον καὶ ἐπιλεγόμενος ἔφη Ἀστυάγεά μιν στρατηγὸν Περσέων ἀποδεικνύναι .
writing what he liked on a paper, he assembled the Persians, and then unfolded the paper and declared that in it Astyages appointed him leader of the Persian armies.


1.125.2
922
" νῦν τε , " ἔφη λέγων , " ὦ Πέρσαι , προαγορεύω ὑμῖν παρεῖναι ἕκαστον ἔχοντα δρέπανον .
“Now," he spoke, "I command you, men of Persia, to come, each provided with a sickle.”


1.125.2
923
Κῦρος μὲν ταῦτα προηγόρευσε .
Cyrus addressed the following things to them.


1.125.2
924
ἔστι δὲ Πέρσεων συχνὰ γένεα , καὶ τὰ μὲν αὐτῶν ὁ Κῦρος συνάλισε καὶ ἀνέπεισε ἀπίστασθαι ἀπὸ Μήδων .
Now there are many tribes in Persia. Some of them Cyrus assembled and persuaded to revolt from the Medes.


1.125.3
925
ἔστι δὲ τάδε , ἐξ ὧν ὧλλοι πάντες ἀρτέαται Πέρσαι , Πασαργάδαι Μαράφιοι Μάσπιοι .
These were the following from whom the Persians are drawn: the Pasargadae, the Maraphii, and the Maspii.


1.125.3
926
τούτων Πασαργάδαι εἰσὶ ἄριστοι , ἐν τοῖσι καὶ Ἀχαιμενίδαι εἰσὶ φρήτρη , ἔνθεν οἱ βασιλέες οἱ Περσεῖδαι γεγόνασι .
On these all the other Persians depend. The chief tribe is that of the Pasargadae; to them belongs the clan of the Achaemenidae, the royal house of Persia.


1.125.4
927
ἄλλοι δὲ Πέρσαι εἰσὶ οἵδε , Πανθιαλαῖοι Δηρουσιαῖοι Γερμάνιοι .
The other Persian tribes are the Panthialaei, the Derusiaei, and the Germanii, all tillers of the soil,


1.125.4
928
οὗτοι μὲν πάντες ἀροτῆρες εἰσί , οἱ δὲ ἄλλοι νομάδες , Δάοι Μάρδοι Δροπικοὶ Σαγάρτιοι " .
and the Dai, the Mardi, the Dropici, the Sagartii, all wandering herdsmen.


1.126.1
929
ὡς δὲ παρῆσαν ἅπαντες ἔχοντες τὸ προειρημένον , ἐνθαῦτα ὁ Κῦρος , ἦν γάρ τις χῶρος τῆς Περσικῆς ἀκανθώδης ὅσον τε ἐπὶ ὀκτωκαίδεκα σταδίους ἢ εἴκοσι πάντῃ , τοῦτον σφι τὸν χῶρον προεῖπε ἐξημερῶσαι ἐν ἡμέρῃ .
So when they all came with sickles as ordered, Cyrus commanded them to reclaim in one day a thorny tract of   Persia   , of two and one quarter or two and one half miles each way in extent.


1.126.2
930
ἐπιτελεσάντων δὲ τῶν Περσέων τὸν προκείμενον ἄεθλον , δεύτερα σφι προεῖπε ἐς τὴν ὑστεραίην παρεῖναι λελουμένους .
The Persians accomplished the task appointed; Cyrus then commanded them to wash themselves and come the next day;


1.126.2
931
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τά τε αἰπόλια καὶ τὰς ποίμνας καὶ τὰ βουκόλια ὁ Κῦρος πάντα τοῦ πατρὸς συναλίσας ἐς τ- αὐτὸ ἔθυσε καὶ παρεσκεύαζε ὡς δεξόμενος τὸν Περσέων στρατόν , πρὸς δὲ οἴνῳ τε καὶ σιτίοισι ὡς ἐπιτηδεοτάτοισι .
meanwhile, collecting his father's goats and sheep and oxen in one place, he slaughtered and prepared them as a feast for the Persian host, providing also wine and all the foods that were most suitable.


1.126.3
932
ἀπικομένους δὲ τῇ ὑστεραίῃ τοὺς Πέρσας κατακλίνας ἐς λειμῶνα εὐώχεε .
When the Persians came on the next day he had them sit and feast in a meadow.


1.126.3
933
ἐπείτε δὲ ἀπὸ δείπνου ἦσαν , εἴρετο σφέας ὁ Κῦρος κότερα τὰ τῇ προτεραίῃ εἶχον ἢ τὰ παρεόντα σφι εἴη αἱρετώτερα .
After dinner he asked them which they liked more: their task of yesterday or their present pastime.


1.126.4
934
οἳ δὲ ἔφασαν πολλὸν εἶναι αὐτῶν τὸ μέσον ·
They answered that the difference was great:


1.126.4
935
τὴν μὲν γὰρ προτέρην ἡμέρην πάντα σφι κακὰ ἔχειν , τὴν δὲ τότε παρεοῦσαν πάντα ἀγαθά .
all yesterday they had had nothing but evil, to-day nothing but good.


1.126.4
936
παραλαβὼν δὲ τοῦτο τὸ ἔπος ὁ Κῦρος παρεγύμνου τὸν πάντα λόγον , λέγων " ἄνδρες Πέρσαι , οὕτω ὑμῖν ἔχει .
Then, taking up their word, Cyrus laid bare his whole purpose, and said: “This is your situation, men of   Persia   :


1.126.5
937
βουλομένοισι μὲν ἐμέο πείθεσθαί ἔστι τάδε τε καὶ ἄλλα μυρία ἀγαθά , οὐδένα πόνον δουλοπρεπέα ἔχουσι , μὴ βουλομένοισι δὲ ἐμέο πείθεσθαι εἰσὶ ὑμῖν πόνοι τῷ χθιζῷ παραπλήσιοι ἀναρίθμητοι .
 obey me and you shall have these good things and ten thousand others besides with no toil and slavery; but if you will not obey me, you will have labors unnumbered like your toil of yesterday.


1.126.6
938
νῦν ὦν ἐμέο πειθόμενοι γίνεσθε ἐλεύθεροι .
Now, then, do as I tell you, and win your freedom.


1.126.6
939
αὐτός τε γὰρ δοκέω θείῃ τύχῃ γεγονὼς τάδε ἐς χεῖρας ἄγεσθαι , καὶ ὑμέας ἥγημαι ἄνδρας Μήδων εἶναι οὐ φαυλοτέρους οὔτε τ- ἄλλα οὔτε τὰ πολέμια .
For I think that I myself was born by a divine chance to undertake this work; and I hold you fully as good men as the Medes in war and in everything else.


1.126.6
940
ὡς ὦν ἐχόντων ὧδε , ἀπίστασθε ἀπ’ Ἀστυάγεος τὴν ταχίστην " .
All this is true; therefore revolt from Astyages quickly now!”


1.127.1
941
πέρσαι μέν νυν προστάτεω ἐπιλαβόμενοι ἄσμενοὶ ἐλευθεροῦντο , καὶ πάλαι δεινὸν ποιεύμενοι ὑπὸ Μήδων ἄρχεσθαι .
The Persians had long been discontent that the Medes ruled them, and now having got a champion they were glad to win their freedom.


1.127.1
942
Ἀστυάγης δὲ ὡς ἐπύθετο Κῦρον ταῦτα πρήσσοντα , πέμψας ἄγγελον ἐκάλεε αὐτόν .
But when Astyages heard that Cyrus was about this business, he sent a messenger to summon him;


1.127.2
943
ὁ δὲ Κῦρος ἐκέλευε τὸν ἄγγελον ἀπαγγέλλειν ὅτι πρότερον ἥξοι παρ’ ἐκεῖνον ἢ Ἀστυάγης αὐτὸς βουλήσεται .
Cyrus told the messenger to take back word that Astyages would see him sooner than he liked.


1.127.2
944
ἀκούσας δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Ἀστυάγης Μήδους τε ὥπλισε πάντας , καὶ στρατηγὸν αὐτῶν ὥστε θεοβλαβὴς ἐὼν Ἅρπαγον ἀπέδεξε , λήθην ποιεύμενος τά μιν ἐόργεε .
Hearing this, Astyages armed all his Medes, and was distracted by Providence so that he forgot what he had done to Harpagus, and appointed him to command the army.


1.127.3
945
ὡς δὲ οἱ Μῆδοι στρατευσάμενοι τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι συνέμισγον , οἳ μέν τινὲς αὐτῶν ἐμάχοντο , ὅσοι μὴ τοῦ λόγου μετέσχον , οἳ δὲ αὐτομόλεον πρὸς τοὺς Πέρσας , οἱ δὲ πλεῖστοι ἐθελοκάκεόν τε καὶ ἔφευγον .
So when the Medes marched out and engaged with the Persians, those who were not in on the plan fought, while others deserted to the enemy, and most were deliberate cowards and ran.


1.128.1
946
διαλυθέντος δὲ τοῦ Μηδικοῦ στρατεύματος αἰσχρῶς , ὡς ἐπύθετο τάχιστα ὁ Ἀστυάγης , ἔφη ἀπειλέων τῷ Κύρῳ " ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ὣς Κῦρός γε χαιρήσει " .
Thus the Median army was shamefully scattered. As soon as Astyages heard, he sent a threatening message to Cyrus: “Nevertheless, Cyrus shall not rejoice”;


1.128.2
947
τοσαῦτα εἶπας πρῶτον μὲν τῶν Μάγων τοὺς ὀνειροπόλους , οἵ μιν ἀνέγνωσαν μετεῖναι τὸν Κῦρον , τούτους ἀνεσκολόπισε , μετὰ δὲ ὥπλισε τοὺς ὑπολειφθέντας ἐν τῷ ἄστεϊ τῶν Μήδων , νέους τε καὶ πρεσβύτας ἄνδρας .
and with that he took the Magi who interpreted dreams, who had persuaded him to let Cyrus go free, and impaled them; then he armed the Medes who were left in the city, the very young and very old men.


1.128.3
948
ἐξαγαγὼν δὲ τούτους καὶ συμβαλὼν τοῖσι Πέρῃσι ἑσσώθη , καὶ αὐτός τε Ἀστυάγης ἐζωγρήθη καὶ τοὺς ἐξήγαγε τῶν Μήδων ἀπέβαλε .
Leading these out, and engaging the Persians, he was beaten: Astyages himself was taken prisoner, and lost the Median army which he led.


1.129.1
949
ἐόντι δὲ αἰχμαλώτῳ τῷ Ἀστυάγεϊ προσστὰς ὁ Ἅρπαγος κατέχαιρέ τε καὶ κατεκερτόμεε , καὶ ἄλλα λέγων ἐς αὐτὸν θυμαλγέα ἔπεα , καὶ δὴ καὶ εἴρετό μιν πρὸς τὸ ἑωυτοῦ δεῖπνον , τὸ μιν ἐκεῖνος σαρξὶ τοῦ παιδὸς ἐθοίνησε , ὅ τι εἴη ἡ ἐκείνου δουλοσύνη ἀντὶ τῆς βασιληίης .
When Astyages was a captive, Harpagus came and exulted over him and taunted him, and besides much other bitter mockery he recalled his banquet, when Astyages had fed Harpagus his son's flesh, and asked Astyages what it was like to be a slave after having been a king.


1.129.2
950
ὁ δέ μιν προσιδὼν ἀντείρετο εἰ ἑωυτοῦ ποιέεται τὸ Κύρου ἔργον .
Fixing his gaze on Harpagus, Astyages asked, “Do you imagine that this, which Cyrus has done, is your work?”


1.129.2
951
Ἅρπαγος δὲ ἔφη , αὐτὸς γὰρ γράψαι , τὸ πρῆγμα ἑωυτοῦ δὴ δικαίως εἶναι .
“It was I,” said the other, “who wrote the letter; the accomplishment of the work is rightly mine.”


1.129.3
952
Ἀστυάγης δέ μιν ἀπέφαινε τῷ λόγῳ σκαιότατόν τε καὶ ἀδικώτατον ἐόντα πάντων ἀνθρώπων , σκαιότατον μέν γε , εἰ παρεὸν αὐτῷ βασιλέα γενέσθαι , εἰ δὴ δι’ ἑωυτοῦ γε ἐπρήχθη τὰ παρεόντα , ἄλλῳ περιέθηκε τὸ κράτος , ἀδικώτατον δέ , ὅτι τοῦ δείπνου εἵνεκεν Μήδους κατεδούλωσε .
“Then,” said Astyages, “you stand confessed the most foolish and most unjust man on earth; most foolish, in giving another the throne which you might have had for yourself, if the present business is indeed your doing; most unjust, in enslaving the Medes because of that banquet.


1.129.4
953
εἰ γὰρ δὴ δεῖν πάντως περιθεῖναι ἄλλῳ τεῷ τὴν βασιληίην καὶ μὴ αὐτὸν ἔχειν , δικαιότερον εἶναι Μήδων τεῷ περιβαλεῖν τοῦτο τὸ ἀγαθὸν ἢ Περσέων .
For if in any event another and not you had to possess the royal power, then in justice some Mede should have had it, not a Persian:


1.129.4
954
νῦν δὲ Μήδους μὲν ἀναιτίους τούτου ἐόντας δούλους ἀντὶ δεσποτέων γεγονέναι , Πέρσας δὲ δούλους ἐόντας τὸ πρὶν Μήδων νῦν γεγονέναι δεσπότας .
but now you have made the Medes, who did you no harm, slaves instead of masters and the Persians, who were the slaves, are now the masters of the Medes.”


1.130.1
955
Ἀστυάγης μέν νυν βασιλεύσας ἐπ’ ἔτεα πέντε καὶ τριήκοντα οὕτω τῆς βασιληίης κατεπαύσθη , Μῆδοι δὲ ὑπέκυψαν Πέρσῃσι διὰ τὴν τούτου πικρότητα , ἄρξαντες τῆς ἄνω Ἅλυος ποταμοῦ Ἀσίης ἐπ’ ἔτεα τριήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν δυῶν δέοντα , πάρεξ ἢ ὅσον οἱ Σκύθαι ἦρχον .
Thus Astyages was deposed from his sovereignty after a reign of thirty-five years: and the Medes had to bow down before the Persians because of Astyages' cruelty. They had ruled all  Asia Asia    beyond the  Halys Halys    for one hundred and twenty-eight years, from which must be subtracted the time when the Scythians held sway.


1.130.2
956
ὑστέρῳ μέντοι χρόνῳ μετεμέλησέ τέ σφι ταῦτα ποιήσασι καὶ ἀπέστησαν ἀπὸ Δαρείου , ἀποστάντες δὲ ὀπίσω κατεστράφθησαν μάχῃ νικηθέντες .
At a later time they repented of what they now did, and rebelled against Darius; but they were defeated in battle and brought back into subjection.


1.130.2
957
τότε δὲ ἐπὶ Ἀστυάγεος οἱ Πέρσαι τε καὶ ὁ Κῦρος ἐπαναστάντες τοῖσι Μήδοισι ἦρχον τὸ ἀπὸ τούτου τῆς Ἀσίης .
But now, in Astyages' time, Cyrus and the Persians rose in revolt against the Medes, and from this time ruled Asia.


1.130.3
958
Ἀστυάγεα δὲ Κῦρος κακὸν οὐδὲν ἄλλο ποιήσας εἶχε παρ’ ἑωυτῷ , ἐς ὃ ἐτελεύτησε .
As for Astyages, Cyrus did him no further harm, and kept him in his own house until Astyages died.


1.130.3
959
οὕτω δὴ Κῦρος γενόμενός τε καὶ τραφεὶς ἐβασίλευσε καὶ Κροῖσον ὕστερον τούτων ἄρξαντα ἀδικίης κατεστρέψατο , ὡς εἴρηταί μοι πρότερον , τοῦτον δὲ καταστρεψάμενος οὕτω πάσης τῆς Ἀσίης ἦρξε .
This is the story of the birth and upbringing of Cyrus, and of how he became king; and afterwards, as I have already related, he subjugated Croesus in punishment for the unprovoked wrong done him; and after this victory he became sovereign of all Asia.


1.131.1
960
Πέρσας δὲ οἶδα νόμοισι τοιοῖσιδε χρεωμένους , ἀγάλματα μὲν καὶ νηοὺς καὶ βωμοὺς οὐκ ἐν νόμῳ ποιευμένους ἱδρύεσθαι , ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖσι ποιεῦσι μωρίην ἐπιφέρουσι , ὡς μὲν ἐμοὶ δοκέειν , ὅτι οὐκ ἀνθρωποφυέας ἐνόμισαν τοὺς θεοὺς κατά περ οἱ Ἕλληνες εἶναι ·
As to the customs of the Persians, I know them to be these. It is not their custom to make and set up statues and temples and altars, but those who do such things they think foolish, because, I suppose, they have never believed the gods to be like men, as the Greeks do;


1.131.2
961
οἳ δὲ νομίζουσι Διὶ μὲν ἐπὶ τὰ ὑψηλότατα τῶν ὀρέων ἀναβαίνοντες θυσίας ἔρδειν , τὸν κύκλον πάντα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ Δία καλέοντες ·
but they call the whole circuit of heaven Zeus, and to him they sacrifice on the highest peaks of the mountains;


1.131.2
962
θύουσι δὲ ἡλίῳ τε καὶ σελήνῃ καὶ γῇ καὶ πυρὶ καὶ ὕδατι καὶ ἀνέμοισι .
they sacrifice also to the sun and moon and earth and fire and water and winds.


1.131.3
963
τούτοισι μὲν δὴ θύουσι μούνοισι ἀρχῆθεν , ἐπιμεμαθήκασι δὲ καὶ τῇ Οὐρανίῃ θύειν , παρά τε Ἀσσυρίων μαθόντες καὶ Ἀραβίων .
From the beginning, these are the only gods to whom they have ever sacrificed;


1.131.3
964
καλέουσι δὲ Ἀσσύριοι τὴν Ἀφροδίτην Μύλιττα , Ἀράβιοι δὲ Ἀλιλάτ , Πέρσαι δὲ Μίτραν .
they learned later to sacrifice to the “heavenly” Aphrodite from the Assyrians and Arabians. She is called by the Assyrians Mylitta, by the Arabians Alilat, by the Persians Mitra.


1.132.1
965
θυσίη δὲ τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι περὶ τοὺς εἰρημένους θεοὺς ἥδε κατέστηκε ·
And this is their method of sacrifice to the aforesaid gods:


1.132.1
966
οὔτε βωμοὺς ποιεῦνται οὔτε πῦρ ἀνακαίουσι μέλλοντες θύειν , οὐ σπονδῇ χρέωνται , οὐκὶ αὐλῷ , οὐ στέμμασι , οὐκὶ οὐλῇσι ·
when about to sacrifice, they do not build altars or kindle fire, employ libations, or music, or fillets, or barley meal:


1.132.1
967
τῶν δὲ ὡς ἑκάστῳ θύειν θέλῃ , ἐς χῶρον καθαρὸν ἀγαγὼν τὸ κτῆνος καλέει τὸν θεόν , ἐστεφανωμένος τὸν τιάραν μυρσίνῃ μάλιστα .
when a man wishes to sacrifice to one of the gods, he leads a beast to an open space and then, wearing a wreath on his tiara, of myrtle usually, calls on the god.


1.132.2
968
ἑωυτῷ μὲν δὴ τῷ θύοντι ἰδίῃ μούνῳ οὔ οἱ ἐγγίνεται ἀρᾶσθαι ἀγαθά , ὁ δὲ τοῖσι πᾶσι Πέρσῃσι κατεύχεται εὖ γίνεσθαι καὶ τῷ βασιλέι ·
To pray for blessings for himself alone is not lawful for the sacrificer;


1.132.2
969
ἐν γὰρ δὴ τοῖσι ἅπασι Πέρσῃσι καὶ αὐτὸς γίνεται .
rather, he prays that the king and all the Persians be well; for he reckons himself among them.


1.132.2
970
ἐπεὰν δὲ διαμιστύλας κατὰ μέλεα τὸ ἱρήιον ἑψήσῃ τὰ κρέα ὑποπάσας ποίην ὡς ἁπαλωτάτην , μάλιστα δὲ τὸ τρίφυλλον , ἐπὶ ταύτης ἔθηκε ὦν πάντα τὰ κρέα .
He then cuts the victim limb from limb into portions, and, after boiling the flesh, spreads the softest grass, trefoil usually, and places all of it on this.


1.132.3
971
διαθέντος δὲ αὐτοῦ Μάγος ἀνὴρ παρεστεὼς ἐπαείδει θεογονίην , οἵην δὴ ἐκεῖνοι λέγουσι εἶναι τὴν ἐπαοιδήν ·
When he has so arranged it, a Magus comes near and chants over it the song of the birth of the gods, as the Persian tradition relates it;


1.132.3
972
ἄνευ γὰρ δὴ Μάγου οὔ σφι νόμος ἐστὶ θυσίας ποιέεσθαι .
for no sacrifice can be offered without a Magus.


1.132.3
973
ἐπισχὼν δὲ ὀλίγον χρόνον ἀποφέρεται ὁ θύσας τὰ κρέα καὶ χρᾶται ὅ τι μιν λόγος αἱρέει .
Then after a little while the sacrificer carries away the flesh and uses it as he pleases.


1.133.1
974
ἡμέρην δὲ ἁπασέων μάλιστα ἐκείνην τιμᾶν νομίζουσι τῇ ἕκαστος ἐγένετο .
The day which every man values most is his own birthday.


1.133.1
975
ἐν ταύτῃ δὲ πλέω δαῖτα τῶν ἀλλέων δικαιεῦσι προτίθεσθαι ·
On this day, he thinks it right to serve a more abundant meal than on other days:


1.133.1
976
ἐν τῇ οἱ εὐδαίμονες αὐτῶν βοῦν καὶ ἵππον καὶ κάμηλον καὶ ὄνον προτιθέαται ὅλους ὀπτοὺς ἐν καμίνοισι , οἱ δὲ πένητες αὐτῶν τὰ λεπτὰ τῶν προβάτων προτιθέαται .
oxen or horses or camels or asses, roasted whole in ovens, are set before the rich; the poorer serve the lesser kinds of cattle.


1.133.2
977
σίτοισι δὲ ὀλίγοισι χρέωνται , ἐπιφορήμασι δὲ πολλοῖσι καὶ οὐκ ἁλέσι ·
Their courses are few, the dainties that follow many, and not all served together.


1.133.2
978
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο φασὶ Πέρσαι τοὺς Ἕλληνας σιτεομένους πεινῶντας παύεσθαι , ὅτι σφι ἀπὸ δείπνου παραφορέεται οὐδὲν λόγου ἄξιον ·
This is why the Persians say of Greeks that they rise from table still hungry, because not much dessert is set before them:


1.133.2
979
εἰ δέ τι παραφέροιτο , ἐσθίοντας ἂν οὐ παύεσθαι .
were this too given to Greeks (the Persians say) they would never stop eating.


1.133.3
980
οἴνῳ δὲ κάρτα προσκέαται , καί σφι οὐκ ἐμέσαι ἔξεστι , οὐκὶ οὐρῆσαι ἀντίον ἄλλου .
They are very partial to wine.


1.133.3
981
ταῦτα μέν νυν οὕτω φυλάσσεται , μεθυσκόμενοι δὲ ἐώθασι βουλεύεσθαι τὰ σπουδαιέστατα τῶν πρηγμάτων ·
No one may vomit or urinate in another's presence: this is prohibited among them. Moreover, it is their custom to deliberate about the gravest matters when they are drunk;


1.133.4
982
τὸ δ’ ἂν ἅδῃ σφι βουλευομένοισι , τοῦτο τῇ ὑστεραίῃ νήφουσι προτιθεῖ ὁ στέγαρχος , ἐν τοῦ ἂν ἐόντες βουλεύωνται , καὶ ἢν μὲν ἅδῃ καὶ νήφουσι , χρέωνται αὐτῷ , ἢν δὲμὴ ἅδῃ , μετιεῖσι .
and what they approve in their deliberations is proposed to them the next day, when they are sober, by the master of the house where they deliberate;


1.133.4
983
τὰ δ’ ἂν νήφοντες προβουλεύσωνται , μεθυσκόμενοι ἐπιδιαγινώσκουσι .
and if, being sober, they still approve it, they act on it, but if not, they drop it. And if they have deliberated about a matter when sober, they decide upon it when they are drunk.


1.134.1
984
ἐντυγχάνοντες δ’ ἀλλήλοισι ἐν τῇσι ὁδοῖσι , τῷδε ἄν τις διαγνοίη εἰ ὅμοιοί εἰσὶ οἱ συντυγχάνοντες ·
When one man meets another on the road, it is easy to see if the two are equals;


1.134.1
985
ἀντὶ γὰρ τοῦ προσαγορεύειν ἀλλήλους φιλέουσι τοῖσι στόμασι ·
for, if they are, they kiss each other on the lips without speaking;


1.134.1
986
ἢν δὲ ᾖ οὕτερος ὑποδεέστερος ὀλίγῳ , τὰς παρειὰς φιλέονται ·
if the difference in rank is small, the cheek is kissed;


1.134.1
987
ἢν δὲ πολλῷ ᾖ οὕτερος ἀγεννέστερος , προσπίπτων προσκυνέει τὸν ἕτερον .
if it is great, the humbler bows and does obeisance to the other.


1.134.2
988
τιμῶσι δὲ ἐκ πάντων τοὺς ἄγχιστα ἑωυτῶν οἰκέοντας μετά γε ἑωυτούς , δευτέρα δὲ τοὺς δευτέρους ·
They honor most of all those who live nearest them, next those who are next nearest, and so going ever onwards they assign honor by this rule:


1.134.2
989
μετὰ δὲ κατὰ λόγον προβαίνοντες τιμῶσι ·
those who dwell farthest off they hold least honorable of all;


1.134.2
990
ἥκιστα δὲ τοὺς ἑωυτῶν ἑκαστάτω οἰκημένους ἐν τιμῇ ἄγονται , νομίζοντες ἑωυτοὺς εἶναι ἀνθρώπων μακρῷ τὰ πάντα ἀρίστους , τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους κατὰ λόγον τῆς ἀρετῆς ἀντέχεσθαι , τοὺς δὲ ἑκαστάτω οἰκέοντας ἀπὸ ἑωυτῶν κακίστους εἶναι .
for they think that they are themselves in all regards by far the best of all men, that the rest have only a proportionate claim to merit, until those who live farthest away have least merit of all.


1.134.3
991
ἐπὶ δὲ Μήδων ἀρχὸν τῶν καὶ ἦρχε τὰ ἔθνεα ἀλλήλων , συναπάντων μὲν Μῆδοι καὶ τῶν ἄγχιστα οἰκεόντων σφίσι , οὗτοι δὲ καὶ τῶν ὁμούρων , οἳ δὲ μάλα τῶν ἐχομένων , κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν δὴ λόγον καὶ οἱ Πέρσαι τιμῶσι ·
Under the rule of the Medes, one tribe would even govern another; the Medes held sway over all alike and especially over those who lived nearest to them;


1.134.3
992
προέβαινε γὰρ δὴ τὸ ἔθνος ἄρχον τε καὶ ἐπιτροπεῦον .
these ruled their neighbors, and the neighbors in turn those who came next to them, on the same scheme by which the Persians assign honor; for the nation kept advancing its rule and dominion.


1.135.1
993
ξεινικὰ δὲ νόμαια Πέρσαι προσίενται ἀνδρῶν μάλιστα .
But the Persians more than all men welcome foreign customs.


1.135.1
994
καὶ γὰρ δὴ τὴν Μηδικὴν ἐσθῆτα νομίσαντες τῆς ἑωυτῶν εἶναι καλλίω φορέουσι , καὶ ἐς τοὺς πολέμους τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους θώρηκας ·
They wear the Median dress, thinking it more beautiful than their own, and the Egyptian cuirass in war.


1.135.1
995
καὶ εὐπαθείας τε παντοδαπὰς πυνθανόμενοι ἐπιτηδεύουσι , καὶ δὴ καὶ ἀπ’ Ἑλλήνων μαθόντες παισὶ μίσγονται .
Their luxurious practices are of all kinds, and all borrowed: the Greeks taught them pederasty.


1.135.1
996
γαμέουσι δὲ ἕκαστος αὐτῶν πολλὰς μὲν κουριδίας γυναῖκας , πολλῷ δ’ ἔτι πλεῦνας παλλακὰς κτῶνται .
Every Persian marries many lawful wives, and keeps still more concubines.


1.136.1
997
ἀνδραγαθίη δὲ αὕτη ἀποδέδεκται , μετὰ τὸ μάχεσθαι εἶναι ἀγαθόν , ὃς ἂν πολλοὺς ἀποδέξῃ παῖδας ·
After valor in battle it is accounted noble to father the greatest number of sons:


1.136.1
998
τῷ δὲ τοὺς πλείστους ἀποδεικνύντι δῶρα ἐκπέμπει βασιλεὺς ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος .
the king sends gifts yearly to him who gets most.


1.136.1
999
τὸ πολλὸν δ’ ἡγέαται ἰσχυρὸν εἶναι .
Strength, they believe, is in numbers.


1.136.2
1000
παιδεύουσι δὲ τοὺς παῖδας ἀπὸ πενταέτεος ἀρξάμενοι μέχρι εἰκοσαέτεος τρία μοῦνα , ἰχνεύειν καὶ τοξεύειν καὶ ἀληθίζεσθαι .
They educate their boys from five to twenty years old, and teach them only three things: riding and archery and honesty.


1.136.2
1001
πρὶν δὲ ἢ πενταέτης γένηται , οὐκ ἀπικνέεται ἐς ὄψιν τῷ πατρί , ἀλλὰ παρὰ τῇσι γυναιξὶ δίαιταν ἔχει .
A boy is not seen by his father before he is five years old, but lives with the women:


1.136.2
1002
τοῦδε δὲ εἵνεκα τοῦτο οὕτω ποιέεται , ἵνα ἢν ἀποθάνῃ τρεφόμενος , μηδεμίαν ἄσην τῷ πατρὶ προσβάλῃ .
the point of this is that, if the boy should die in the interval of his rearing, the father would suffer no grief.


1.137.1
1003
αἰνέω μέν νυν τόνδε τὸν νόμον , αἰνέω δὲ καὶ τόνδε , τὸ μὴ μιῆς αἰτίης εἵνεκα μήτε αὐτὸν τὸν βασιλέα μηδένα φονεύειν , μήτε τῶν ἄλλων Περσέων μηδένα τῶν ἑωυτοῦ οἰκετέων ἐπὶ μιῇ αἰτίῃ ἀνήκεστον πάθος ἔρδειν ·
This is a law which I praise; and it is a praiseworthy law, too, which does not allow the king himself to slay any one for a single offense, or any other Persian to do incurable harm to one of his servants for one offense.


1.137.1
1004
ἀλλὰ λογισάμενος ἢν εὑρίσκῃ πλέω τε καὶ μέζω τὰ ἀδικήματα ἐόντα τῶν ὑπουργημάτων , οὕτω τῷ θυμῷ χρᾶται .
Not until an accounting shows that the offender's wrongful acts are more and greater than his services may a man give rein to his anger.


1.137.2
1005
ἀποκτεῖναι δὲ οὐδένα κω λέγουσι τὸν ἑωυτοῦ πατέρα οὐδὲ μητέρα , ἀλλὰ ὁκόσα ἤδη τοιαῦτα ἐγένετο , πᾶσαν ἀνάγκην φασὶ ἀναζητεόμενα ταῦτα ἀνευρεθῆναι ἤτοι ὑποβολιμαῖα ἐόντα ἢ μοιχίδια ·
They say that no one has ever yet killed his father or mother; when such a thing has been done, it always turns out on inquest that the doer is shown to be a changeling or the fruit of adultery;


1.137.2
1006
οὐ γὰρ δή φασι οἰκὸς εἶναι τόν γε ἀληθέως τοκέα ὑπὸ τοῦ , ἑωυτοῦ παιδὸς ἀποθνήσκειν .
for it is not to be believed (say they) that a son should kill his true parent.


1.138.1
1007
ἅσσα δέ σφι ποιέειν οὐκ ἔξεστι , ταῦτα οὐδὲ λέγειν ἔξεστι .
Furthermore, of what they may not do, they may not speak, either.


1.138.1
1008
αἴσχιστον δὲ αὐτοῖσι τὸ ψεύδεσθαι νενόμισται , δεύτερα δὲ τὸ ὀφείλειν χρέος , πολλῶν μὲν καὶ ἄλλων εἵνεκα , μάλιστα δὲ ἀναγκαίην φασὶ εἶναι τὸν ὀφείλοντα καί τι ψεῦδος λέγειν .
They hold lying to be the most disgraceful thing of all and next to that debt; for which they have many other reasons, but this in particular: it is inevitable (so they say) that the debtor also speak some falsehood.


1.138.1
1009
ὃς ἂν δὲ τῶν ἀστῶν λέπρην ἢ λεύκην ἔχῃ , ἐς πόλιν οὗτος οὐ κατέρχεται οὐδὲ συμμίσγεται τοῖσι ἄλλοισι Πέρσῃσι ·
The citizen who has leprosy or the white sickness may not come into town or mingle with other Persians.


1.138.1
1010
φασὶ δέ μιν ἐς τὸν ἥλιον ἁμαρτόντα τι ταῦτα ἔχειν .
They say that he is so afflicted because he has sinned in some way against the sun.


1.138.2
1011
ξεῖνον δὲ πάντα τὸν λαμβανόμενον ὑπὸ τουτέων πολλοὶ ἐξελαύνουσι ἐκ τῆς χώρης , καὶ τὰς λευκὰς περιστεράς , τὴν αὐτὴν αἰτίην ἐπιφέροντες .
Every stranger who gets such a disease, many drive out of the country; and they do the same to white doves, for the reason given.


1.138.2
1012
ἐς ποταμὸν δὲ οὔτε ἐνουρέουσι οὔτε ἐμπτύουσι , οὐ χεῖρας ἐναπονίζονται , οὐδὲ ἄλλον οὐδένα περιορῶσι , ἀλλὰ σέβονται ποταμοὺς μάλιστα .
Rivers they especially revere; they will neither urinate nor spit nor wash their hands in them, nor let anyone else do so.


1.139.1
1013
καὶ τόδε ἄλλο σφι ὧδε συμπέπτωκε γίνεσθαι , τὸ Πέρσας μὲν αὐτοὺς λέληθε , ἡμέας μέντοι οὔ ·
There is another thing that always happens among them; we have noted it although the Persians have not:


1.139.1
1014
τὰ οὐνόματά σφι ἐόντα ὅμοια τοῖσι σώμασι καὶ τῇ μεγαλοπρεπείῃ τελευτῶσι πάντα ἐς τ- αὐτὸ γράμμα , τὸ Δωριέες μὲν σὰν καλέουσι , Ἴωνες δὲ σίγμα ·
their names, which agree with the nature of their persons and their nobility, all end in the same letter, that which the Dorians call san, and the Ionians sigma;


1.139.1
1015
ἐς τοῦτο διζήμενος εὑρήσεις τελευτῶντα τῶν Περσέων τὰ οὐνόματα , οὐ τὰ μὲν τὰ δ’ οὔ , ἀλλὰ πάντα ὁμοίως .
you will find, if you search, that not some but all Persian names alike end in this letter.


1.140.1
1016
ταῦτα μὲν ἀτρεκέως ἔχω περὶ αὐτῶν εἰδὼς εἰπεῖν ·
So much I can say of them from my own certain knowledge.


1.140.1
1017
τάδε μέντοι ὡς κρυπτόμενα λέγεται καὶ οὐ σαφηνέως περὶ τοῦ ἀποθανόντος , ὡς οὐ πρότερον θάπτεται ἀνδρὸς Πέρσεω ὁ νέκυς πρὶν ἂν ὑπ’ ὄρνιθος ἢ κυνὸς ἑλκυσθῇ .
But there are other matters concerning the dead which are secretly and obscurely told: how the dead bodies of Persians are not buried before they have been mangled by birds or dogs.


1.140.2
1018
Μάγους μὲν γὰρ ἀτρεκέως οἶδα ταῦτα ποιέοντας ·
That this is the way of the Magi, I know for certain;


1.140.2
1019
ἐμφανέως γὰρ δὴ ποιεῦσι .
for they do not conceal the practice.


1.140.2
1020
κατακηρώσαντες δὲ ὦν τὸν νέκυν Πέρσαι γῆ κρύπτουσι .
But this is certain, that before the Persians bury the body in earth they embalm it in wax.


1.140.2
1021
Μάγοι δὲ κεχωρίδαται πολλὸν τῶν τε ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων καὶ τῶν ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἱρέων .
These Magi are as unlike the priests of Egypt as they are unlike all other men:


1.140.3
1022
οἳ μὲν γὰρ ἁγνεύουσι ἔμψυχον μηδὲν κτείνειν , εἰ μὴ ὅσα θύουσι ·
for the priests consider it sacrilege to kill anything that lives, except what they sacrifice;


1.140.3
1023
οἱ δὲ δὴ Μάγοι αὐτοχειρίῃ πάντα πλὴν κυνὸς καὶ ἀνθρώπου κτείνουσι , καὶ ἀγώνισμα μέγα τοῦτο ποιεῦνται , κτείνοντες ὁμοίως μύρμηκάς τε καὶ ὄφις καὶ τ- ἄλλα ἑρπετὰ καὶ πετεινά .
but the Magi kill with their own hands every creature, except dogs and men; they kill all alike, ants and snakes, creeping and flying things, and take great pride in it.


1.140.3
1024
καὶ ἀμφὶ μὲν τῷ νόμῳ τούτῳ ἐχέτω ὡς καὶ ἀρχὴν ἐνομίσθη , ἄνειμι δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν πρότερον λόγον .
Leaving this custom to be such as it has been from the first, I return now to my former story.


1.141.1
1025
Ἴωνες δὲ καὶ Αἰολέες , ὡς οἱ Λυδοὶ τάχιστα κατεστράφατο ὑπὸ Περσέων , ἔπεμπον ἀγγέλους ἐς Σάρδις παρὰ Κῦρον , ἐθέλοντες ἐπὶ τοῖσι αὐτοῖσι εἶναι τοῖσι καὶ Κροίσῳ ἦσαν κατήκοοι .
As soon as the Lydians had been subjugated by the Persians, the Ionians and Aeolians sent messengers to Cyrus, offering to be his subjects on the same terms as those which they had under Croesus.


1.141.1
1026
ὁ δὲ ἀκούσας αὐτῶν τὰ προΐσχοντο ἔλεξέ σφι λόγον , ἄνδρα φὰς αὐλητὴν ἰδόντα ἰχθῦς ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ αὐλέειν , δοκέοντα σφέας ἐξελεύσεσθαι ἐς γῆν ·
After hearing what they proposed, Cyrus told them a story. Once, he said, there was a flute-player who saw fish in the sea and played upon his flute, thinking that they would come out on to the land.


1.141.2
1027
ὡς δὲ ψευσθῆναι τῆς ἐλπίδος , λαβεῖν ἀμφίβληστρον καὶ περιβαλεῖν τε πλῆθος πολλὸν τῶν ἰχθύων καὶ ἐξειρύσαι , ἰδόντα δὲ παλλομένους εἰπεῖν ἄρα αὐτὸν πρὸς τοὺς ἰχθῦς " παύεσθέ μοι ὀρχεόμενοι , ἐπεῖ οὐδ’ ἐμέο αὐλέοντος ἠθέλετε ἐκβαίνειν ὀρχεόμενοι " .
Disappointed of his hope, he cast a net and gathered it in and took out a great multitude of fish; and seeing them leaping, “You had best,” he said, “stop your dancing now; you would not come out and dance before, when I played to you.”


1.141.3
1028
Κῦρος μὲν τοῦτον τὸν λόγον τοῖσι Ἴωσι καὶ τοῖσι Αἰολεῦσι τῶνδε εἵνεκα ἔλεξε , ὅτι δὴ οἱ Ἴωνες πρότερον αὐτοῦ Κύρου δεηθέντος δι’ ἀγγέλων ἀπίστασθαι σφέας ἀπὸ Κροίσου οὐκ ἐπείθοντο , τότε δὲ κατεργασμένων τῶν πρηγμάτων ἦσαν ἕτοιμοι πείθεσθαι Κύρῳ .
The reason why Cyrus told the story to the Ionians and Aeolians was that the Ionians, who were ready to obey him when the victory was won, had before refused when he sent a message asking them to revolt from Croesus.


1.141.4
1029
ὃ μὲν δὴ ὀργῇ ἐχόμενος ἔλεγέ σφι τάδε ·
So he answered them in anger.


1.141.4
1030
Ἴωνες δὲ ὡς ἤκουσαν τούτων ἀνενειχθέντων ἐς τὰς πόλιας , τείχεά τε περιεβάλοντο ἕκαστοι καὶ συνελέγοντο ἐς Πανιώνιον οἱ ἄλλοι , πλὴν Μιλησίων ·
But when the message came to the Ionians in their cities, they fortified themselves with walls, and assembled in the Panionion, all except the Milesians.


1.141.4
1031
πρὸς μούνους γὰρ τούτους ὅρκιον Κῦρος ἐποιήσατο ἐπ’ οἷσί περ ὁ Λυδός .
With them alone Cyrus made a treaty on the same terms as that which they had with the Lydians.


1.141.4
1032
τοῖσι δὲ λοιποῖσι Ἴωσι ἔδοξε κοινῷ λόγῳ πέμπειν ἀγγέλους ἐς Σπάρτην δεησομένους Ἴωσι τιμωρέειν .
The rest of the Ionians resolved to send envoys in the name of them all to Sparta, to ask help for the Ionians.


1.142.1
1033
οἱ δὲ Ἴωνες οὗτοι , τῶν καὶ τὸ Πανιώνιον ἐστί , τοῦ μὲν οὐρανοῦ καὶ τῶν ὡρέων ἐν τῷ καλλίστῳ ἐτύγχανον ἱδρυσάμενοι πόλιας πάντων ἀνθρώπων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν ·
Now these Ionians possessed the  Panionion Panionion   , and of all men whom we know, they happened to found their cities in places with the loveliest of climate and seasons.


1.142.2
1034
οὔτε γὰρ τὰ ἄνω αὐτῆς χωρία τ- αὐτὸ ποιέει τῇ Ἰωνίῃ οὔτε τὰ κάτω οὔτε τὰ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ οὔτε τὰ πρὸς τὴν ἑσπέρην , τὰ μὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ ψυχροῦ τε καὶ ὑγροῦ πιεζόμενα , τὰ δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ θερμοῦ τε καὶ αὐχμώδεος .
For neither to the north of them nor to the south does the land effect the same thing as in  Ionia Ionia    [nor to the east nor to the west], affected here by the cold and wet, there by the heat and drought.


1.142.3
1035
γλῶσσαν δὲ οὐ τὴν αὐτὴν οὗτοι νενομίκασι , ἀλλὰ τρόπους τέσσερας παραγωγέων .
They do not all have the same speech but four different dialects.


1.142.3
1036
Μίλητος μὲν αὐτέων πρώτη κέεται πόλις πρὸς μεσαμβρίην , μετὰ δὲ Μυοῦς τε καὶ Πριήνη .
Miletus lies farthest south among them, and next to it come Myous and Priene;


1.142.4
1037
αὗται μὲν ἐν τῇ Καρίῃ κατοίκηνται κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ διαλεγόμεναι σφίσι , αἵδε δὲ ἐν τῇ Λυδίῃ , Ἔφεσος Κολοφὼν Λέβεδος Τέως Κλαζομεναὶ Φώκαια ·
These are settlements in Caria, and they have a common language; Ephesus, Colophon, Lebedos, Teos, Klazomenai, Foca, all of them in Lydia,


1.142.4
1038
αὗται δὲ αἱ πόλιες τῇσι πρότερον λεχθείσῃσι ὁμολογέουσι κατὰ γλῶσσαν οὐδέν , σφισι δὲ ὁμοφωνέουσι .
have a language in common which is wholly different from the speech of the three former cities.


1.142.4
1039
ἔτι δὲ τρεῖς ὑπόλοιποι Ἰάδες πόλιες , τῶν αἱ δύο μὲν νήσους οἰκέαται , Σάμον τε καὶ Χίον , ἡ δὲ μία ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ ἵδρυται , Ἐρυθραί .
There are yet three Ionian cities, two of them situated on the islands of Samos and Chios, and one, Erythrae, on the mainland;


1.142.4
1040
Χῖοι μέν νυν καὶ Ἐρυθραῖοι κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ διαλέγονται , Σάμιοι δὲ ἐπ’ ἑωυτῶν μοῦνοι .
the Chians and Erythraeans speak alike, but the Samians have a language which is their own and no one else's.


1.142.4
1041
οὗτοι χαρακτῆρες γλώσσης τέσσερες γίνονται .
It is thus seen that there are four modes of speech.


1.143.1
1042
τούτων δὴ ὦν τῶν Ἰώνων οἱ Μιλήσιοι μὲν ἦσαν ἐν σκέπῃ τοῦ φόβου , ὅρκιον ποιησάμενοι , τοῖσι δὲ αὐτῶν νησιώτῃσι ἦν δεινὸν οὐδέν ·
Among these Ionians, the Milesians were safe from the danger (for they had made a treaty), and the islanders among them had nothing to fear:


1.143.1
1043
οὔτε γὰρ Φοίνικες ἦσαν κω Περσέων κατήκοοι οὔτε αὐτοὶ οἱ Πέρσαι ναυβάται .
for the Phoenicians were not yet subjects of the Persians, nor were the Persians themselves mariners.


1.143.2
1044
ἀπεσχίσθησαν δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ἄλλων Ἰώνων οὗτοι κατ’ ἄλλο μὲν οὐδέν , ἀσθενέος δὲ ἐόντος τοῦ παντὸς τότε Ἑλληνικοῦ γένεος , πολλῷ δὴ ἦν ἀσθενέστατον τῶν ἐθνέων τὸ Ἰωνικὸν καὶ λόγου ἐλαχίστου ·
But those of Asia were cut off from the rest of the Ionians only in the way that I shall show.


1.143.2
1045
ὅτι γὰρ μὴ Ἀθῆναι , ἦν οὐδὲν ἄλλο πόλισμα λόγιμον .
The whole Hellenic stock was then small, and the last of all its branches and the least regarded was the Ionian; for it had no considerable city except Athens.


1.143.3
1046
οἱ μέν νυν ἄλλοι Ἴωνες καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἔφυγον τὸ οὔνομα , οὐ βουλόμενοι Ἴωνες κεκλῆσθαι , ἀλλὰ καὶ νῦν φαίνονταί μοι οἱ πολλοὶ αὐτῶν ἐπαισχύνεσθαι τῷ οὐνόματι ·
Now the Athenians and the rest would not be called Ionians, but spurned the name; even now the greater number of them seem to me to be ashamed of it;


1.143.3
1047
αἱ δὲ δυώδεκα πόλιες αὗται τῷ τε οὐνόματι ἠγάλλοντο καὶ ἱρὸν ἱδρύσαντο ἐπὶ σφέων αὐτέων , τῷ οὔνομα ἔθεντο Πανιώνιον , ἐβουλεύσαντο δὲ αὐτοῦ μεταδοῦναι μηδαμοῖσι ἄλλοισι Ἰώνων ( οὐδ’ ἐδεήθησαν δὲ οὐδαμοὶ μετασχεῖν ὅτι μὴ Σμυρναῖοι ) ·
but the twelve cities aforesaid gloried in this name, and founded a holy place for themselves which they called the Panionion, and agreed among themselves to allow no other Ionians to use it (nor in fact did any except the men of Smyrna ask to be admitted);


1.144.1
1048
κατά περ οἱ ἐκ τῆς πενταπόλιος νῦν χώρης Δωριέες , πρότερον δὲ ἑξαπόλιος τῆς αὐτῆς ταύτης καλεομένης , φυλάσσονται ὦν μηδαμοὺς ἐσδέξασθαι τῶν προσοίκων Δωριέων ἐς τὸ Τριοπικὸν ἱρόν , ἀλλὰ καὶ σφέων αὐτῶν τοὺς περὶ τὸ ἱρόν ἀνομήσαντας ἐξεκλήισαν τῆς μετοχῆς , ἐν γὰρ τῷ ἀγῶνι τοῦ Τριοπίου Ἀπόλλωνος ἐτίθεσαν τὸ πάλαι τρίποδας χαλκέους τοῖσι νικῶσι , καὶ τούτους χρῆν τοὺς λαμβάνοντας ἐκ τοῦ ἱροῦ μὴ ἐκφέρειν ἀλλ’ αὐτοῦ ἀνατιθέναι τῷ θεῷ .
just as the Dorians of what is now the country of the “Five Cities” — formerly the country of the “Six Cities” — forbid admitting any of the neighboring Dorians to the Triopian temple, and even barred from using it those of their own group who had broken the temple law.


1.144.3
1049
ἀνὴρ ὦν Ἁλικαρνησσεύς , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Ἀγασικλέης , νικήσας τὸν νόμον κατηλόγησε , φέρων δὲ πρὸς τὰ ἑωυτοῦ οἰκία προσεπασσάλευσε τὸν τρίποδα .
Now when a man of Halicarnassus called Agasicles won, he disregarded this law, and, carrying the tripod away, nailed it to the wall of his own house.


1.144.3
1050
διὰ ταύτην τὴν αἰτίην αἱ πέντε πόλιες , Λίνδος καὶ Ἰήλυσός τε καὶ Κάμειρος καὶ Κῶς τε καὶ Κνίδος ἐξεκλήισαν τῆς μετοχῆς τὴν ἕκτην πόλιν Ἁλικαρνησσόν .
For this offense the five cities — Lindos, Ialysus, Camirus, Kos, and Cnidus — forbade the sixth city — Halicarnassus — to share in the use of the temple.


1.144.3
1051
τούτοισι μέν νυν οὗτοι ταύτην τὴν ζημίην ἐπέθηκαν .
Such was the penalty imposed on the Halicarnassians.


1.145.1
1052
δυώδεκα δὲ μοι δοκέουσι πόλιας ποιήσασθαι οἱ Ἴωνες καὶ οὐκ ἐθελῆσαι πλεῦνας ἐσδέξασθαι τοῦδε εἵνεκα , ὅτι καὶ ὅτε ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ οἴκεον , δυώδεκα ἦν αὐτῶν μέρεα , κατά περ νῦν Ἀχαιῶν τῶν ἐξελασάντων Ἴωνας δυώδεκα ἐστὶ μέρεα , Πελλήνη μέν γε πρώτη πρὸς Σικυῶνος , μετὰ δὲ Αἴγειρα καὶ Αἰγαί , ἐν τῇ Κρᾶθις ποταμὸς ἀείναος ἐστί , ἀπ’ ὅτευ ὁ ἐν Ἰταλίῃ ποταμὸς τὸ οὔνομα ἔσχε , καὶ Βοῦρα καὶ Ἑλίκη , ἐς τὴν κατέφυγον Ἴωνες ὑπὸ Ἀχαιῶν μάχῃ ἑσσωθέντες , καὶ Αἴγίον καὶ Ῥύπες καὶ Πατρέες καὶ Φαρέες καὶ Ὤλενος , ἐν τῷ Πεῖρος ποταμὸς μέγας ἐστί , καὶ Δύμη καὶ Τριταιέες , οἳ μοῦνοι τούτων μεσόγαιοι οἰκέουσι .
As for the Ionians, the reason why they made twelve cities and would admit no more was in my judgment this: there were twelve divisions of them when they dwelt in the Peloponnese, just as there are twelve divisions of the Achaeans who drove the Ionians out — Pellene nearest to Sicyon; then Aegira and Aegae, where is the never-failing river Crathis, from which the river in Italy took its name; Bura and Helike, where the Ionians fled when they were worsted in battle by the Achaeans; Aegion; Rhype; Patrae; Phareae; and Olenus, where is the great river Pirus; Dyme and Tritaeae, the only inland city of all these —


1.145.1
1053
ταῦτα δυώδεκα μέρεα νῦν Ἀχαιῶν ἐστὶ καὶ τότε γε Ἰώνων ἦν .
these were the twelve divisions of the Ionians, as they are now of the Achaeans.


1.146.1
1054
τούτων δὴ εἵνεκα καὶ οἱ Ἴωνες δυώδεκα πόλιας ἐποιήσαντο ·
For this reason, and for no other, the Ionians too made twelve cities;


1.146.1
1055
ἐπεὶ ὥς γέ τι μᾶλλον οὗτοι Ἴωνες εἰσὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ἰώνων ἢ κάλλιόν τι γεγόνασι , μωρίη πολλὴ λέγειν ·
for it would be foolishness to say that these are more truly Ionian or better born than the other Ionians;


1.146.1
1056
τῶν Ἄβαντες μὲν ἐξ Εὐβοίες εἰσὶ οὐκ ἐλαχίστη μοῖρα , τοῖσι Ἰωνίης μέτα οὐδὲ τοῦ οὐνόματος οὐδέν , Μινύαι δὲ Ὀρχομένιοί σφι ἀναμεμίχαται καὶ Καδμεῖοι καὶ Δρύοπες καὶ Φωκέες ἀποδάσμιοι καὶ Μολοσσοὶ καὶ Ἀρκάδες Πελασγοὶ καὶ Δωριέες Ἐπιδαύριοι , ἄλλα τε ἔθνεα πολλὰ ἀναμεμίχαται ·
since not the least part of them are Abantes from Euboea, who are not Ionians even in name, and there are mingled with them Minyans of Orchomenus, Cadmeans, Dryopians, Phocian renegades from their nation, Molossians, Pelasgian Arcadians, Dorians of Epidaurus, and many other tribes;


1.146.2
1057
οἱ δὲ αὐτῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ πρυτανηίου τοῦ Ἀθηναίων ὁρμηθέντες καὶ νομίζοντες γενναιότατοι εἶναι Ἰώνων , οὗτοι δὲ οὐ γυναῖκας ἠγάγοντο ἐς τὴν ἀποικίην ἀλλὰ Καείρας ἔσχον , τῶν ἐφόνευσαν τοὺς γονέας .
and as for those who came from the very town-hall of  Athens Athens    and think they are the best born of the Ionians, these did not bring wives with them to their settlements, but married Carian women whose parents they had put to death.


1.146.3
1058
διὰ τοῦτὸν δὲ τὸν φόνον αἱ γυναῖκες αὗται νόμον θέμεναι σφίσι αὐτῇσι ὅρκους ἐπήλασαν καὶ παρέδοσαν τῇσι θυγατράσι , μή κοτε ὁμοσιτῆσαι τοῖσι ἀνδράσι μηδὲ οὐνόματι βῶσαι τὸν ἑωυτῆς ἄνδρα , τοῦδε εἵνεκα ὅτι ἐφόνευσαν σφέων τοὺς πατέρας καὶ ἄνδρας καὶ παῖδας καὶ ἔπειτα ταῦτα ποιήσαντες αὐτῇσι συνοίκεον .
For this slaughter, these women made a custom and bound themselves by oath (and enjoined it on their daughters) that no one would sit at table with her husband or call him by his name, because the men had married them after slaying their fathers and husbands and sons.


1.146.3
1059
ταῦτα δὲ ἦν γινόμενα ἐν Μιλήτῳ .
This happened at  Miletus Miletus.


1.147.1
1060
βασιλέας δὲ ἐστήσαντο οἳ μὲν αὐτῶν Λυκίους ἀπὸ Γλαύκου τοῦ Ἱππολόχου γεγονότας , οἳ δὲ Καύκωνας Πυλίους ἀπὸ Κόδρου τοῦ Μελάνθου , οἳ δὲ καὶ συναμφοτέρους .
And as kings, some of them chose Lycian descendants of Glaucus son of Hippolochus, and some Caucones of Pylus, descendants of Codrus son of Melanthus, and some both.


1.147.1
1061
ἀλλὰ γὰρ περιέχονται τοῦ οὐνόματος μᾶλλόν τι τῶν ἄλλων Ἰώνων , ἔστωσαν δὴ καὶ οἱ καθαρῶς γεγονότες Ἴωνες .
Yet since they set more store by the name than the rest of the Ionians, let it be granted that those of pure birth are Ionians;


1.147.2
1062
εἰσὶ δὲ πάντες Ἴωνες ὅσοι ἀπ’ Ἀθηνέων γεγόνασι καὶ Ἀπατούρια ἄγουσι ὁρτήν .
All are Ionians who are of Athenian descent and keep the feast Apaturia.


1.147.2
1063
ἄγουσι δὲ πάντες πλὴν Ἐφεσίων καὶ Κολοφωνίων ·
All do keep it, except the men of Ephesus and Colophon;


1.147.2
1064
οὗτοι γὰρ μοῦνοι Ἰώνων οὐκ ἄγουσι Ἀπατούρια , καὶ οὗτοι κατὰ φόνου τινὰ σκῆψιν .
these are the only Ionians who do not keep it, and these because, they say, of a certain pretext of murder.


1.148.1
1065
τὸ δὲ Πανιώνιον ἐστὶ τῆς Μυκάλης χῶρος ἱρὸς πρὸς ἄρκτον τετραμμένος , κοινῇ ἐξαραιρημένος ὑπὸ Ἰώνων Ποσειδέωνι Ἑλικωνίῳ .
The Panionion is a sacred ground in Mykale, facing north; it was set apart for Poseidon of Helicon by the joint will of the Ionians.


1.148.1
1066
ἡ δὲ Μυκάλη ἐστὶ τῆς ἠπείρου ἄκρη πρὸς ζέφυρον ἄνεμον κατήκουσα Σάμῳ καταντίον , ἐς τὴν συλλεγόμενοι ἀπὸ τῶν πολίων Ἴωνες ἄγεσκον ὁρτὴν τῇ ἔθεντο οὔνομα Πανιώνια .
Mykale is a western promontory of the mainland opposite Samos; the Ionians used to assemble there from their cities and keep the festival to which they gave the name of Panionia.


1.148.2
1067
πεπόνθασι δὲ οὔτι μοῦναι αἱ Ἰώνων ὁρταὶ τοῦτο , ἀλλὰ καὶ Ἑλλήνων πάντων ὁμοίως πᾶσαι ἐς τ- αὐτὸ γράμμα τελευτῶσι , κατά περ τῶν Περσέων τὰ οὐνόματα .
Not only the Ionian festivals, but all those of all the Greeks alike, end in the same letter, just as do the names of the Persians.


1.149.1
1068
αὗται μὲν αἱ Ἰάδες πόλιες εἰσί , αἵδε δὲ αἱ Αἰολίδες , Κύμη ἡ Φρικωνὶς καλεομένη , Λήρισαι , Νέον τεῖχος , Τῆμνος , Κίλλα , Νότιον , Αἰγιρόεσσα , Πιτάνη , Αἰγαῖαι , Μύρινα , Γρύνεια .
Those are the Ionian cities, and these are the Aeolian: Cyme (called “Phriconian”), Lerisae, Neon Teichos, Temnos, Cilla, Notion, Aegiroessa, Pitane, Aegaeae, Myrina, Gryneia.


1.149.1
1069
αὗται ἕνδεκα Αἰολέων πόλιες αἱ ἀρχαῖαι ·
These are the ancient Aeolian cities, eleven in number;


1.149.1
1070
μία γὰρ σφέων παρελύθη Σμύρνη ὑπὸ Ἰώνων ·
but one of them, Smyrna, was taken away by the Ionians;


1.149.1
1071
ἦσαν γὰρ καὶ αὗται δυώδεκα αἱ ἐν τῆ ἠπείρῳ .
for these too were once twelve, on the mainland.


1.149.2
1072
οὗτοι δὲ οἱ Αἰολέες χώρην μὲν ἔτυχον κτίσαντες ἀμείνω Ἰώνων , ὡρέων δὲ ἥκουσαν οὐκ ὁμοίως .
These Aeolians had settled where the land was better than the Ionian territory, but the climate was not so good.


1.150.1
1073
σμύρνην δὲ ὧδε ἀπέβαλον Αἰολέες .
Now this is how the Aeolians lost Smyrna.


1.150.1
1074
Κολοφωνίους ἄνδρας στάσι ἑσσωθέντας καὶ ἐκπεσόντας ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος ὑπεδέξαντο .
Some men of Colophon, the losers in civil strife and exiles from their country, had been received by them into the town.


1.150.1
1075
μετὰ δὲ οἱ φυγάδες τῶν Κολοφωνίων φυλάξαντες τοὺς Σμυρναίους ὁρτὴν ἔξω τείχεος ποιευμένους Διονύσῳ , τὰς πύλας ἀποκληίσαντες ἔσχον τὴν πόλιν .
These Colophonian exiles waited for the time when the men of Smyrna were holding a festival to Dionysus outside the walls; then they shut the gates and so got the city.


1.150.2
1076
βοηθησάντων δὲ πάντων Αἰολέων , ὁμολογίῃ ἐχρήσαντο τὰ ἔπιπλα ἀποδόντων τῶν Ἰώνων ἐκλιπεῖν Σμύρνην Αἰολέας .
Then all the Aeolians came to recover it; and an agreement was made, whereby the Aeolians would receive back their movable goods from the Ionians, and leave the city.


1.150.2
1077
ποιησάντων δὲ ταῦτα Σμυρναίων ἐπιδιείλοντο σφέας αἱ ἕνδεκα πόλιες καὶ ἐποιήσαντο σφέων αὐτέων πολιήτας .
After this was done, the other eleven cities divided the Smyrnaeans among themselves and made them citizens of their own.


1.151.1
1078
αὗται μέν νυν αἱ ἠπειρώτιδες Αἰολίδες πόλιες , ἔξω τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἴδῃ οἰκημενέων ·
These then are the Aeolian cities on the mainland, besides those that are situated on Ida.


1.151.1
1079
κεχωρίδαται γὰρ αὗται .
These are separate.


1.151.2
1080
αἱ δὲ τὰς νήσους ἔχουσαι πέντε μὲν πόλιες τὴν Λέσβον νέμονται ( τὴν γὰρ ἕκτην ἐν τῇ Λέσβῳ οἰκημένην Ἀρίσβαν ἠνδραπόδισαν Μηθυμναῖοι ἐόντας ὁμαίμους ) , ἐν Τενέδῳ δὲ μία οἴκηται πόλις , καὶ ἐν τῇσι Ἑκατὸν νήσοισι καλεομένῃσι ἄλλη μία .
Among those on the islands, five divide  Lesbos Lesbos    among them (there was a sixth on  Lesbos Lesbos   , Arisba, but its people were enslaved by their kinfolk of  Methymna Methymna   ); there is one on  Tenedos Tenedos   , and one again in the “Hundred Isles,” as they are called.


1.151.3
1081
Λεσβίοισι μέν νῦν καὶ Τενεδίοισι , κατά περ Ἰώνων τοῖσι τὰς νήσους ἔχουσι , ἦν δεινὸν οὐδέν ·
The men of Lesbos and Tenedos, then, like the Ionian islanders, had nothing to fear.


1.151.3
1082
τῇσι δὲ λοιπῇσι πόλισι ἕαδε κοινῇ Ἴωσι ἕπεσθαι τῇ ἂν οὗτοι ἐξηγέωνται .
The rest of the cities deliberated together and decided to follow the Ionians' lead.


1.152.1
1083
ὡς δὲ ἀπίκοντο ἐς τὴν Σπάρτην τῶν Ἰώνων καὶ Αἰολέων οἱ ἄγγελοι ( κατὰ γὰρ δὴ τάχος ἦν ταῦτα πρησσόμενα ) , εἵλοντο πρὸ πάντων λέγειν τὸν Φωκαέα , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Πύθερμος .
So when the envoys of the Ionians and Aeolians came to Sparta (for they set about this in haste) they chose a Phocaean, whose name was Pythennos, to speak for all.


1.152.1
1084
ὁ δὲ πορφύρεόν τε εἷμα περιβαλόμενος , ὡς ἂν πυνθανόμενοι πλεῖστοι συνέλθοιεν Σπαρτιητέων , καὶ καταστὰς ἔλεγε πολλὰ τιμωρέειν ἑωυτοῖσι χρηίζων .
He then put on a purple cloak, so that as many Spartans as possible might assemble to hear him, and stood up and made a long speech asking aid for his people.


1.152.2
1085
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ οὔ κως ἐσήκουον , ἀλλ’ ἀπέδοξέ σφι μὴ τιμωρέειν Ἴωσι .
But the Lacedaemonians would not listen to him and refused to help the Ionians.


1.152.2
1086
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἀπαλλάσσοντο , Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ ἀπωσάμενοι τῶν Ἰώνων τοὺς ἀγγέλους ὅμως ἀπέστειλαν πεντηκοντέρῳ ἄνδρας , ὡς μὲν ἐμοὶ δοκέει , κατασκόπους τῶν τε Κύρου πρηγμάτων καὶ Ἰωνίης .
So the Ionians departed; but the Lacedaemonians, though they had rejected their envoys, did nevertheless send men in a ship of fifty oars to see (as I suppose) the situation with Cyrus and Ionia.


1.152.3
1087
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ οὗτοι ἐς Φώκαιαν ἔπεμπον ἐς Σάρδις σφέων αὐτῶν τὸν δοκιμώτατον , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Λακρίνης , ἀπερέοντα Κύρῳ Λακεδαιμονίων ῥῆσιν , γῆς τῆς Ἑλλάδος μηδεμίαν πόλιν σιναμωρέειν , ὡς αὐτῶν οὐ περιοψομένων .
These, after coming to  Foca Phocaea   , sent Lacrines, who was the most esteemed among them, to  Sardis Sardis   , to repeat there to Cyrus a proclamation of the Lacedaemonians, that he was to harm no city on Greek territory, or else the Lacedaemonians would punish him.


1.153.1
1088
ταῦτα εἰπόντος τοῦ κήρυκος , λέγεται Κῦρον ἐπειρέσθαι τοὺς παρεόντας οἱ Ἑλλήνων τινες ἐόντες ἄνθρωποι Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ κόσοι πλῆθος ταῦτα ἑωυτῷ προαγορεύουσι ·
When the herald had proclaimed this, Cyrus is said to have asked the Greeks who were present who and how many in number these Lacedaemonians were who made this declaration.


1.153.1
1089
πυνθανόμενον δέ μιν εἰπεῖν ἄνθρωποι Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ κόσοι " οὐκ ἔδεισά κω ἄνδρας τοιούτους , τοῖσι ἐστι χῶρος ἐν μέση τῇ πόλι ἀποδεδεγμένος ἐς τὸν συλλεγόμενοι ἀλλήλους ὀμνύντες ἐξαπατῶσι ·
When he was told, he said to the Spartan herald, “I never yet feared men who set apart a place in the middle of their city where they perjure themselves and deceive each other.


1.153.1
1090
τοῖσι , ἢν ἐγὼ ὑγιαίνω , οὐ τὰ Ἰώνων πάθεα ἔσται ἔλλεσχα ἀλλὰ τὰ οἰκήια " .
They, if I keep my health, shall talk of their own misfortunes, not those of the Ionians.”


1.153.2
1091
ταῦτα ἐς τοὺς πάντας Ἕλληνας ἀπέρριψε ὁ Κῦρος τὰ ἔπεα , ὅτι ἀγορὰς στησάμενοι ὠνῇ τε καὶ πρήσι χρέωνται ·
He uttered this threat against all the Greeks, because they have markets and buy and sell there;


1.153.2
1092
αὐτοὶ γὰρ οἱ Πέρσαι ἀγορῇσι οὐδὲν ἐώθασι χρᾶσθαι , οὐδέ σφι ἐστὶ τὸ παράπαν ἀγορή .
for the Persians themselves were not used to resorting to markets at all, nor do they even have a market of any kind.


1.153.3
1093
μετὰ ταῦτα ἐπιτρέψας τὰς μὲν Σάρδις Ταβάλῳ ἀνδρὶ Πέρσῃ , τὸν δὲ χρυσὸν τόν τε Κροίσου καὶ τὸν τῶν ἄλλων Λυδῶν Πακτύῃ ἀνδρὶ Λυδῷ κομίζειν , ἀπήλαυνε αὐτὸς ἐς Ἀγβάτανα , Κροῖσόν τε ἅμα ἀγόμενος καὶ τοὺς Ἴωνας ἐν οὐδενὶ λόγῳ ποιησάμενος τὴν πρώτην εἶναι .
Presently, entrusting  Sardis Sardis    to a Persian called Tabalus, and instructing Pactyes, a Lydian, to take charge of the gold of Croesus and the Lydians, he himself marched away to  Hamadan Ecbatana   , taking Croesus with him, and at first taking no notice of the Ionians.


1.153.4
1094
ἡ τε γὰρ Βαβυλών οἱ ἦν ἐμπόδιος καὶ τὸ Βάκτριον ἔθνος καὶ Σάκαι τε καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι , ἐπ’ οὓς ἐπεῖχέ τε στρατηλατέειν αὐτός , ἐπὶ δὲ Ἴωνας ἄλλον πέμπειν στρατηγόν .
For he had  Babylon Babylon    on his hands and the Bactrian nation and the Sacae and Egyptians; he meant to lead the army against these himself, and to send another commander against the Ionians.


1.154.1
1095
ὡς δὲ ἀπήλασε ὁ Κῦρος ἐκ τῶν Σαρδίων , τοὺς Λυδοὺς ἀπέστησε ὁ Πακτύης ἀπό τε Ταβάλου καὶ Κύρου , καταβὰς δὲ ἐπὶ θάλασσαν , ἅτε τὸν χρυσὸν ἔχων πάντα τὸν ἐκ τῶν Σαρδίων , ἐπικούρους τε ἐμισθοῦτο καὶ τοὺς ἐπιθαλασσίους ἀνθρώπους ἔπειθε σὺν ἑωυτῷ στρατεύεσθαι .
But no sooner had Cyrus marched away from Sardis than Pactyes made the Lydians revolt from Tabalus and Cyrus;


1.154.1
1096
ἐλάσας δὲ ἐπὶ τὰς Σάρδις ἐπολιόρκεε Τάβαλον ἀπεργμένον ἐν τῇ ἀκροπόλι .
and he went down to the sea, where, as he had all the gold of Sardis, he hired soldiers and persuaded the men of the coast to join his undertaking. Then, marching to Sardis, he penned Tabalus in the acropolis and besieged him there.


1.155.1
1097
πυθόμενος δὲ κατ’ ὁδὸν ταῦτα ὁ Κῦρος εἶπε πρὸς Κροῖσον τάδε .
When Cyrus heard of this on his journey, he said to Croesus,


1.155.1
1098
" Κροῖσε , τί ἔσται τέλος τῶν γινομένων τούτων ἐμοί ;
“What end to this business, Croesus?


1.155.1
1099
οὐ παύσονται Λυδοί , ὡς οἴκασι , πρήγμάτα παρέχοντες καὶ αὐτοὶ ἔχοντες .
It seems that the Lydians will never stop making trouble for me and for themselves.


1.155.1
1100
φροντίζω μὴ ἄριστον ᾖ ἐξανδραποδίσασθαι σφέας .
It occurs to me that it may be best to make slaves of them;


1.155.1
1101
ὁμοίως γὰρ μοι νῦν γε φαίνομαι πεποιηκέναι ὡς εἴ τις πατέρα ἀποκτείνας τῶν παίδων αὐτοῦ φείσατο ·
for it seems I have acted like one who slays the father and spares the children.


1.155.2
1102
ὡς δὲ καὶ ἐγὼ Λυδῶν τὸν μὲν πλέον τι ἢ πατέρα ἐόντα σὲ λαβὼν ἄγω , αὐτοῖσι δὲ Λυδοῖσι τὴν πόλιν παρέδωκα , καὶ ἔπειτα θωμάζω εἰ μοι ἀπεστᾶσι " .
So likewise I have taken with me you who were more than a father to the Lydians, and handed the city over to the Lydians themselves; and then indeed I marvel that they revolt!”


1.155.2
1103
ὃ μὲν δὴ τά περ ἐνόεε ἔλεγε , ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε , δείσας μὴ ἀναστάτους ποιήσῃ τὰς Σάρδις .
So Cyrus uttered his thought; but Croesus feared that he would destroy Sardis, and answered him thus:


1.155.3
1104
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , τὰ μὲν οἰκότα εἴρηκας , σὺ μέντοι μὴ πάντα θυμῷ χρέο , μηδὲ πόλιν ἀρχαίην ἐξαναστήσῃς ἀναμάρτητον ἐοῦσαν καὶ τῶν πρότερον καὶ τῶν νῦν ἑστεώτων .
“O King, what you say is reasonable. But do not ever yield to anger, or destroy an ancient city that is innocent both of the former and of the present offense.


1.155.3
1105
τὰ μὲν γὰρ πρότερον ἐγώ τε ἔπρηξα καὶ ἐγὼ κεφαλῇ ἀναμάξας φέρω ·
For the former I am responsible, and bear the punishment on my head;


1.155.3
1106
τὰ δὲ νῦν παρεόντα Πακτύης γὰρ ἐστὶ ὁ ἀδικέων , τῷ σὺ ἐπέτρεψας Σάρδις , οὗτος δότω τοι δίκην .
while Pactyes, in whose charge you left Sardis, does this present wrong; let him, then, pay the penalty.


1.155.4
1107
Λυδοῖσι δὲ συγγνώμην ἔχων τάδε αὐτοῖσι ἐπίταξον , ὡς μήτε ἀποστέωσι μήτε δεινοί τοι ἔωσι ·
But pardon the Lydians, and give them this command so that they not revolt or pose a danger to you:


1.155.4
1108
ἄπειπε μέν σφι πέμψας ὅπλα ἀρήια μὴ ἐκτῆσθαι , κέλευε δὲ σφέας κιθῶνάς τε ὑποδύνειν τοῖσι εἵμασι καὶ κοθόρνους ὑποδέεσθαι , πρόειπε δ’ αὐτοῖσι κιθαρίζειν τε καὶ ψάλλειν καὶ καπηλεύειν παιδεύειν τοὺς παῖδας .
send and forbid them to possess weapons of war, and order them to wear tunics under their cloaks and knee-boots on their feet, and to teach their sons lyre-playing and song and dance and shop-keeping.


1.155.4
1109
καὶ ταχέως σφέας ὦ βασιλεῦ γυναῖκας ἀντ’ ἀνδρῶν ὄψεαι γεγονότας , ὥστε οὐδὲν δεινοί τοι ἔσονται μὴ ἀποστέωσι " .
And quickly, O king, you shall see them become women instead of men, so that you need not fear them, that they might revolt.”


1.156.1
1110
Κροῖσος μὲν δὴ ταῦτά οἱ ὑπετίθετο , αἱρετώτερα ταῦτα εὑρίσκων Λυδοῖσι ἢ ἀνδραποδισθέντας πρηθῆναι σφέας , ἐπιστάμενος ὅτι ἢν μὴ ἀξιόχρεον πρόφασιν προτείνῃ , οὐκ ἀναπείσει μιν μεταβουλεύσασθαι , ἀρρωδέων δὲ μὴ καὶ ὕστερον κοτὲ οἱ Λυδοί , ἢν τὸ παρεὸν ὑπεκδράμωσι , ἀποστάντες ἀπὸ τῶν Περσέων ἀπόλωνται .
Croesus proposed this to him, because he thought this was better for the Lydians than to be sold as slaves; he knew that without some reasonable plea he could not change the king's mind, and feared that even if the Lydians should escape this time they might later revolt and be destroyed by the Persians.


1.156.2
1111
Κῦρος δὲ ἡσθεὶς τῇ ὑποθήκῃ καὶ ὑπεὶς τῆς ὀργῆς ἔφη οἱ πείθεσθαι .
Cyrus was pleased by this counsel; he relented in his anger and said he would follow Croesus' advice.


1.156.2
1112
καλέσας δὲ Μαζάρεα ἄνδρα Μῆδον , ταῦτά τέ οἱ ἐνετείλατο προειπεῖν Λυδοῖσι τὰ ὁ Κροῖσος ὑπετίθετο , καὶ πρὸς ἐξανδραποδίσασθαι τοὺς ἄλλους πάντας οἳ μετὰ Λυδῶν ἐπὶ Σάρδις ἐστρατεύσαντο , αὐτὸν δὲ Πακτύην πάντως ζῶντα ἀγαγεῖν παρ’ ἑωυτόν .
Then calling Mazares, a Mede, he told him to give the Lydians the commands that Croesus advised; further, to enslave all the others who had joined the Lydians in attacking Sardis; and as for Pactyes himself, by all means to bring him into his presence alive.


1.157.1
1113
ὃ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἐκ τῆς ὁδοῦ ἐντειλάμενος ἀπήλαυνε ἐς ἤθεα τὰ Περσέων , Πακτύης δὲ πυθόμενος ἀγχοῦ εἶναι στρατὸν ἐπ’ ἑωυτὸν ἰόντα δείσας οἴχετο φεύγων ἐς Κύμην .
After giving these commands on his journey, he marched away into the Persian country. But Pactyes, learning that an army sent against him was approaching, was frightened and fled to  Kyme Cyme   .


1.157.2
1114
Μαζάρης δὲ ὁ Μῆδος ἐλάσας ἐπὶ τὰς Σάρδις τοῦ Κύρου στρατοῦ μοῖραν ὅσην δή κοτε ἔχων , ὡς οὐκ εὗρε ἔτι ἐόντας τοὺς ἀμφὶ Πακτύην ἐν Σάρδισι , πρῶτα μὲν τοὺς Λυδοὺς ἠνάγκασε τὰς Κύρου ἐντολὰς ἐπιτελέειν , ἐκ τούτου δὲ κελευσμοσύνης Λυδοὶ τὴν πᾶσαν δίαιταν τῆς ζόης μετέβαλον .
Mazares the Mede, when he came to  Sardis Sardis    with the part that he had of Cyrus' host and found Pactyes' followers no longer there, first of all compelled the Lydians to carry out Cyrus' commands; and by his order they changed their whole way of life.


1.157.3
1115
Μαζάρης δὲ μετὰ τοῦτο ἔπεμπε ἐς τὴν Κύμην ἀγγέλους ἐκδιδόναι κελεύων Πακτύην .
After this, he sent messengers to Kyme demanding that Pactyes be surrendered.


1.157.3
1116
οἱ δὲ Κυμαῖοι ἔγνωσαν συμβουλῆς περὶ ἐς θεὸν ἀνοῖσαι τὸν ἐν Βραγχίδῃσι ·
The Cymaeans resolved to make the god at Didyma their judge as to what course they should take;


1.157.3
1117
ἦν γὰρ αὐτόθι μαντήιον ἐκ παλαιοῦ ἱδρυμένον , τῷ Ἴωνές τε πάντες καὶ Αἰολέες ἐώθεσαν χρᾶσθαι .
for there was an ancient place of divination there, which all the Ionians and Aeolians used to consult;


1.157.3
1118
ὁ δὲ χῶρος οὗτος ἐστὶ τῆς Μιλησίης ὑπὲρ Πανόρμου λιμένος .
the place is in the land of Miletus, above the harbor of Panormus.


1.158.1
1119
πέμψαντες ὦν οἱ Κυμαῖοι ἐς τοὺς Βραγχίδας θεοπρόπους εἰρώτευν περὶ Πακτύην ὁκοῖόν τι ποιέοντες θεοῖσι μέλλοιεν χαριεῖσθαι .
The men of Kyme, then, sent to Didyma to inquire of the shrine what they should do in the matter of Pactyes that would be most pleasing to the gods;


1.158.1
1120
ἐπειρωτῶσι δέ σφι ταῦτα χρηστήριον ἐγένετο ἐκδιδόναι Πακτύην Πέρσῃσι .
and the oracle replied that they must surrender Pactyes to the Persians.


1.158.1
1121
ταῦτα δὲ ὡς ἀπενειχθέντα ἤκουσαν οἱ Κυμαῖοι , ὁρμέατο ἐκδιδόναι ·
When the message came to the Ionians in their cities, they fortified themselves with walls, and assembled in the Panionion, all except the Milesians, with whom alone Cyrus made a treaty on the same terms as that which they had with the Lydians. The rest of the Ionians resolved to send envoys in the name of them all to Sparta, to ask help for the Ionians.


1.158.2
1122
ὁρμημένου δὲ ταύτῃ τοῦ πλήθεος , Ἀριστόδικος ὁ Ἡρακλείδεω ἀνὴρ τῶν ἀστῶν ἐὼν δόκιμος ἔσχε μὴ ποιῆσαι ταῦτα Κυμαίους , ἀπιστέων τε τῷ χρησμῷ καὶ δοκέων τοὺς θεοπρόπους οὐ λέγειν ἀληθέως , ἐς ὃ τὸ δεύτερον περὶ Πακτύεω ἐπειρησόμενοι ἤισαν ἄλλοι θεοπρόποι , τῶν καὶ Ἀριστόδικος ἦν .
When this answer came back to them, they set about surrendering him. But while the greater part were in favor of doing this, Aristodicus son of Heraclides, a notable man among the citizens, stopped the men of  Kyme Cyme    from doing it; for he did not believe the oracle and thought that those who had inquired of the god spoke falsely; until at last a second band of inquirers was sent to inquire concerning Pactyes, among whom was Aristodicus.


1.159.1
1123
ἀπικομένων δὲ ἐς Βραγχίδας ἐχρηστηριάζετο ἐκ πάντων Ἀριστόδικος ἐπειρωτῶν τάδε .
When they came to Didyma, Aristodicus, speaking for all, put this question to the oracle:


1.159.1
1124
" ὦναξ , ἦλθε παρ’ ἡμέας ἱκέτης Πακτύης ὁ Λυδός , φεύγων θάνατον βίαιον πρὸς Περσέων ·
“Lord, Pactyes the Lydian has come to us a suppliant fleeing a violent death at the hands of the Persians;


1.159.1
1125
οἳ δέ μιν ἐξαιτέονται , προεῖναι Κυμαίους κελεύοντες .
and they demand him of us, telling the men of Kyme to surrender him.


1.159.2
1126
ἡμεῖς δὲ δειμαίνοντες τὴν Περσέων δύναμιν τὸν ἱκέτην ἐς τόδε οὐ τετολμήκαμεν ἐκδιδόναι , πρὶν ἂν τὸ ἀπὸ σεῦ ἡμῖν δηλωθῇ ἀτρεκέως ὁκότερα ποιέωμεν " .
But we, as much as we fear the Persian power, have not dared give up this suppliant of ours until it is clearly made known to us by you whether we are to do this or not.”


1.159.2
1127
ὃ μὲν ταῦτα ἐπειρώτα , ὃ δ’ αὖτις τὸν αὐτόν σφι χρησμὸν ἔφαινε , κελεύων ἐκδιδόναι Πακτύην Πέρσῃσι .
Thus Aristodicus inquired; and the god again gave the same answer, that Pactyes should be surrendered to the Persians.


1.159.3
1128
πρὸς ταῦτα ὁ Ἀριστόδικος ἐκ προνοίης ἐποίεε τάδε ·
With that Aristodicus did as he had already decided; he went around the temple, and took away the sparrows and all the families of nesting birds that were in it.


1.159.3
1129
περιιὼν τὸν νηὸν κύκλῳ ἐξαίρεε τοὺς στρουθοὺς καὶ ἄλλα ὅσα ἦν νενοσσευμένα ὀρνίθων γένεα ἐν τῷ νηῷ .
But while he was doing so, a voice (they say) came out of the inner shrine calling to Aristodicus, and saying,


1.159.3
1130
ποιέοντος δὲ αὐτοῦ ταῦτα λέγεται φωνὴν ἐκ τοῦ ἀδύτου γενέσθαι φέρουσαν μὲν πρὸς τὸν Ἀριστόδικον , λέγουσαν δὲ τάδε " ἀνοσιώτατε ἀνθρώπων , τί τάδε τολμᾷς ποιέειν ;
“Vilest of men, how dare you do this?


1.159.3
1131
τοὺς ἱκέτας μου ἐκ τοῦ νηοῦ κεραΐζεις " ;
Will you rob my temple of those that take refuge with me?”


1.159.4
1132
Ἀριστόδικον δὲ οὐκ ἀπορήσαντα πρὸς ταῦτα εἰπεῖν " ὦναξ , αὐτὸς μὲν οὕτω τοῖσι ἱκέτῃσι βοηθέεις , Κυμαίους δὲ κελεύεις τὸν ἱκέτην ἐκδιδόναι " ;
Then Aristodicus had his answer ready: “Lord,” he said, “will you save your own suppliants, yet tell the men of Kyme to deliver up theirs?”


1.159.4
1133
τὸν δὲ αὖτις ἀμείψασθαι τοῖσιδε " ναὶ κελεύω , ἵνα γε ἀσεβήσαντες θᾶσσον ἀπόλησθε , ὡς μὴ τὸ λοιπὸν περὶ ἱκετέων ἐκδόσιος ἔλθητε ἐπὶ τὸ χρηστήριον " .
But the god replied, “Yes, I do command them, so that you may perish all the sooner for your impiety, and never again come to inquire of my oracle about giving up those that seek refuge with you.”


1.160.1
1134
ταῦτα ὡς ἀπενειχθέντα ἤκουσαν οἱ Κυμαῖοι , οὐ βουλόμενοι οὔτε ἐκδόντες ἀπολέσθαι οὔτε παρ’ ἑωυτοῖσι ἔχοντες πολιορκέεσθαι , ἐκπέμπουσι αὐτὸν ἐς Μυτιλήνην .
When the Cymaeans heard this answer, they sent Pactyes away to  Mytilene Mytilene   ; for they were anxious not to perish for delivering him up or to be besieged for keeping him with them.


1.160.2
1135
οἱ δὲ Μυτιληναῖοι ἐπιπέμποντος τοῦ Μαζάρεος ἀγγελίας ἐκδιδόναι τὸν Πακτύην παρεσκευάζοντο ἐπὶ μισθῷ ὅσῳ δή ·
Then Mazares sent a message to Mytilene demanding the surrender of Pactyes, and the Mytilenaeans prepared to give him, for a price;


1.160.2
1136
οὐ γὰρ ἔχω τοῦτό γε εἰπεῖν ἀτρεκέως ·
I cannot say exactly how much it was, for the bargain was never fulfilled;


1.160.2
1137
οὐ γὰρ ἐτελεώθη .
for when the Cymaeans learned what the Mytilenaeans were about, they sent a ship to Lesbos and took Pactyes away to Chios.


1.160.3
1138
Κυμαῖοι γὰρ ὡς ἔμαθον ταῦτα πρησσόμενα ἐκ τῶν Μυτιληναίων , πέμψαντες πλοῖον ἐς Λέσβον ἐκκομίζουσι Πακτύην ἐς Χίον .
for when the Cymaeans learned what the Mytilenaeans were about, they sent a ship to Lesbos and took Pactyes away to Chios.


1.160.3
1139
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ἐξ ἱροῦ Ἀθηναίης πολιούχου ἀποσπασθεὶς ὑπὸ Χίων ἐξεδόθη ·
From there he was dragged out of the temple of City-guarding Athena and delivered up by the Chians,


1.160.3
1140
ἐξέδοσαν δὲ οἱ Χῖοι ἐπὶ τῷ Ἀταρνέι μισθῷ ·
who received in return Atarneus, which is a district in Mysia opposite Lesbos. The Persians thus received Pactyes and kept him guarded, so that they might show him to Cyrus;


1.160.4
1141
τοῦ δὲ Ἀταρνέος τούτου ἐστὶ χῶρος τῆς Μυσίης , Λέσβου ἀντίος .
who received in return Atarneus, which is a district in Mysia opposite Lesbos.


1.160.4
1142
Πακτύην μέν νυν παραδεξάμενοι οἱ Πέρσαι εἶχον ἐν φυλακῇ , θέλοντες Κύρῳ ἀποδέξαι .
The Persians thus received Pactyes and kept him guarded, so that they might show him to Cyrus;


1.160.5
1143
ἦν δὲ χρόνος οὗτος οὐκ ὀλίγος γινόμενος , ὅτε Χίων οὐδεὶς ἐκ τοῦ Ἀταρνέος τούτου οὔτε οὐλὰς κριθέων πρόχυσιν ἐποιέετο θεῶν οὐδενὶ οὔτε πέμματα ἐπέσσετο καρποῦ τοῦ ἐνθεῦτεν , ἀπείχετο τε τῶν πάντων ἱρῶν τὰ πάντα ἐκ τῆς χώρης ταύτης γινόμενα .
and for a long time no one would use barley meal from this land of  Atarneus Atarneus    in sacrifices to any god, or make sacrificial cakes of what grew there; everything that came from that country was kept away from any sacred rite.


1.161.1
1144
Χῖοι μέν νυν Πακτύην ἐξέδοσαν .
The Chians, then, surrendered Pactyes,


1.161.1
1145
Μαζάρης δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα ἐστρατεύετο ἐπὶ τοὺς συμπολιορκήσαντας Τάβαλον , καὶ τοῦτο μὲν Πριηνέας ἐξηνδραποδίσατο , τοῦτο δὲ Μαιάνδρου πεδίον πᾶν ἐπέδραμε ληίην ποιεύμενος τῷ στρατῷ , Μαγνησίην τε ὡσαύτως .
and afterwards Mazares led his army against those who had helped to besiege Tabalus, and he enslaved the people of Priene,


1.161.1
1146
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα αὐτίκα νούσῳ τελευτᾷ .
and overran the plain of the Maeandrus, giving it to his army to pillage and Magnesia likewise. Immediately after this he died of an illness.


1.162.1
1147
ἀποθανόντος δὲ τούτου , Ἅρπαγος κατέβη διάδοχος τῆς στρατηγίης , γένος καὶ αὐτὸς ἐὼν Μῆδος , τὸν ὁ Μήδων βασιλεὺς Ἀστυάγης ἀνόμῳ τραπέζῃ ἔδαισε , ὁ τῷ Κύρῳ τὴν βασιληίην συγκατεργασάμενος .
After his death, Harpagus, a Mede like Mazares, came down to succeed him in his command; this is the Harpagus who was entertained by Astyages the king of the Medes at that unnatural feast, and who helped win the kingship for Cyrus.


1.162.2
1148
οὗτος ὡνὴρ τότε ὑπὸ Κύρου στρατηγὸς ἀποδεχθεὶς ὡς ἀπίκετο ἐς τὴν Ἰωνίην , αἵρεε τὰς πόλιας χώμασι ·
This man was now made general by Cyrus. When he came to Ionia, he took the cities by means of earthworks;


1.162.2
1149
ὅκως γὰρ τειχήρεας ποιήσειε , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν χώματα χῶν πρὸς τὰ τείχεα ἐπόρθεε .
he would drive the men within their walls and then build earthworks against the walls and so take the cities.


1.163.1
1150
πρώτῃ δὲ Φωκαίῃ Ἰωνίης ἐπεχείρησε .
Phocaea was the first Ionian town that he attacked.


1.163.1
1151
οἱ δὲ Φωκαιέες οὗτοι ναυτιλίῃσι μακρῇσι πρῶτοι Ἑλλήνων ἐχρήσαντο , καὶ τὸν τε Ἀδρίην καὶ τὴν Τυρσηνίην καὶ τὴν Ἰβηρίην καὶ τὸν Ταρτησσὸν οὗτοι εἰσὶ οἱ καταδέξαντες ·
These Phocaeans were the earliest of the Greeks to make long sea-voyages, and it was they who discovered the Adriatic, and Tyrrhenia, and Iberia, and Tartessus,


1.163.2
1152
ἐναυτίλλοντο δὲ οὐ στρογγύλῃσι νηυσὶ ἀλλὰ πεντηκοντέροισι .
not sailing in round freightships but in fifty-oared vessels.


1.163.2
1153
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ ἐς τὸν Ταρτησσὸν προσφιλέες ἐγένοντο τῷ βασιλέι τῶν Ταρτησσίων , τῷ οὔνομα μὲν ἦν , Ἀργανθώνιος , ἐτυράννευσε δὲ Ταρτησσοῦ ὀγδώκοντα ἔτεα , ἐβίωσε δὲ πάντα εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατόν .
When they came to Tartessus they made friends with the king of the Tartessians, whose name was Arganthonius; he ruled Tartessus for eighty years and lived a hundred and twenty.


1.163.3
1154
τούτῳ δὴ τῷ ἀνδρὶ προσφιλέες οἱ Φωκαιέες οὕτω δή τι ἐγένοντο ὡς τὰ μὲν πρῶτα σφέας ἐκλιπόντας Ἰωνίην ἐκέλευε τῆς ἑωυτοῦ χώρης οἰκῆσαι ὅκου βούλονται ·
The Phocaeans won this man's friendship to such a degree that he invited them to leave Ionia and settle in his country wherever they liked;


1.163.3
1155
μετὰ δέ , ὡς τοῦτό γε οὐκ ἔπειθε τοὺς Φωκαιέας , ὁ δὲ πυθόμενος τὸν Μῆδον παρ’ αὐτῶν ὡς αὔξοιτο , ἐδίδου σφι χρήματα τεῖχος περιβαλέσθαι τὴν πόλιν , ἐδίδου δὲ ἀφειδέως ·
and then, when he could not persuade them to, and learned from them how the Median power was increasing, he gave them money to build a wall around their city.


1.163.4
1156
καὶ γὰρ καὶ ἡ περίοδος τοῦ τείχεος οὐκ ὀλίγοι στάδιοι εἰσί , τοῦτο δὲ πᾶν λίθων μεγάλων καὶ εὖ συναρμοσμένων .
He gave it generously: for the circuit of the wall is of not a few stades, and all this is made of great stones well fitted together.


1.164.1
1157
τὸ μὲν δὴ τεῖχος τοῖσι Φωκαιεῦσι τρόπῳ τοιῶδε ἐξεποιήθη .
In such a manner the Phocaeans' wall was built.


1.164.1
1158
ὁ δὲ Ἅρπαγος ὡς ἐπήλασε τὴν στρατιήν , ἐπολιόρκεε αὐτούς , προισχόμενος ἔπεα ὥς οἱ καταχρᾷ εἰ βούλονται Φωκαιέες προμαχεῶνα ἕνα μοῦνον τοῦ τείχεος ἐρεῖψαι καὶ οἴκημα ἓν κατιρῶσαι .
Harpagus marched against the city and besieged it, but he made overtures, and said that it would suffice him if the Phocaeans would demolish one rampart of the wall and dedicate one house.


1.164.2
1159
οἱ δὲ Φωκαιέες περιημεκτέοντες τῇ δουλοσύνη ἔφασαν θέλειν βουλεύσασθαι ἡμέρην μίαν καὶ ἔπειτα ὑποκρινέεσθαι ·
But the Phocaeans, very indignant at the thought of slavery, said they wanted to deliberate for a day, and then they would answer; but while they were deliberating, Harpagus must withdraw his army from the walls, they said. Harpagus said that he well knew what they intended to do, but that nevertheless he would allow them to deliberate.


1.164.3
1160
ἐν ᾧ δὲ βουλεύονται αὐτοί , ἀπαγαγεῖν ἐκεῖνον ἐκέλευον τὴν στρατιὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχεος .
So when Harpagus withdrew his army from the walls, the Phocaeans launched their fifty-oared ships,


1.164.3
1161
ὁ δ’ Ἅρπαγος ἔφη εἰδέναι μὲν εὖ τὰ ἐκεῖνοι μέλλοιεν ποιέειν , ὅμως δὲ σφι παριέναι βουλεύσασθαι .
embarked their children and women and all their movable goods, besides the statues from the temples and everything dedicated in them except bronze or stonework or painting,


1.164.3
1162
ἐν ᾧ ὦν ὁ Ἅρπαγος ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχεος ἀπήγαγε τὴν , στρατιήν , οἱ Φωκαιέες ἐν τούτῳ κατασπάσαντες τὰς πεντηκοντέρους , ἐσθέμενοι τέκνα καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ ἔπιπλα πάντα , πρὸς δὲ καὶ τὰ ἀγάλματα τὰ ἐν τῶν ἱρῶν καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ἀναθήματα , χωρὶς ὅ τι χαλκὸς ἢ λίθος ἢ γραφὴ ἦν , τὰ δὲ ἄλλα πάντα ἐσθέντες καὶ αὐτοὶ εἰσβάντες ἔπλεον ἐπὶ Χίου .
and then embarked themselves and set sail for Chios;


1.164.3
1163
τὴν δὲ Φωκαίην ἐρημωθεῖσαν ἀνδρῶν ἔσχον οἱ Πέρσαι .
and the Persians took Phocaea, left thus uninhabited.


1.165.1
1164
οἱ δὲ Φωκαιέες , ἐπείτε σφι Χῖοι τὰς νήσους τὰς Οἰνούσσας καλεομένας οὐκ ἐβούλοντο ὠνευμένοισι πωλέειν , δειμαίνοντες μὴ αἳ μὲν ἐμπόριον γένωνται , ἡ δὲ αὐτῶν νῆσος ἀποκληισθῇ τούτου εἵνεκα , πρὸς ταῦτα οἱ Φωκαίες ἐστέλλοντο ἐς Κύρνον ·
The Phocaeans would have bought the islands called Oenussae from the Chians; but the Chians would not sell them, because they feared that the islands would become a market and so their own island be cut off from trade:


1.165.1
1165
ἐν γὰρ τῇ Κύρνῳ εἴκοσι ἔτεσι πρότερον τούτων ἐκ θεοπροπίου ἀνεστήσαντο πόλιν , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Ἀλαλίη .
so the Phocaeans prepared to sail to Corsica, where at the command of an oracle they had built a city called Aleria twenty years before.


1.165.2
1166
Ἀργανθώνιος δὲ τηνικαῦτα ἤδη τετελευτήκεε .
Arganthonius was by this time dead.


1.165.2
1167
στελλόμενοι δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν Κύρνον , πρῶτα καταπλεύσαντες ἐς τὴν Φωκαίην κατεφόνευσαν τῶν Περσέων τὴν φυλακήν , ἣ ἐφρούρεε παραδεξαμένη παρὰ Ἁρπάγου τὴν πόλιν .
While getting ready for their voyage, they first sailed to Phocaea, where they destroyed the Persian guard to whom Harpagus had entrusted the defense of the city;


1.165.2
1168
μετὰ δέ , ὡς τοῦτο σφι ἐξέργαστο , ἐποιήσαντο ἰσχυρὰς κατάρας τῷ ὑπολειπομένῳ ἑωυτῶν τοῦ στόλου , πρὸς δὲ ταύτῃσι καὶ μύδρον σιδήρεον κατεπόντωσαν καὶ ὤμοσαν μὴ πρὶν ἐς Φωκαίην ἥξειν πρὶν ἢ τὸν μύδρον τοῦτον ἀναφανῆναι .
and when this was done, they called down mighty curses on any one of them who should stay behind when the rest sailed.


1.165.3
1169
στελλομένων δὲ αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τὴν Κύρνον , ὑπερημίσεας τῶν ἀστῶν ἔλαβε πόθος τε καὶ οἶκτος τῆς πόλιος καὶ τῶν ἠθέων τῆς χώρης , ψευδόρκιοι δὲ γενόμενοι ἀπέπλεον ὀπίσω ἐς τὴν Φωκαίην .
Not only this, but they sank a mass of iron in the sea, and swore never to return to Phocaea before the iron should appear again.


1.165.3
1170
οἳ δὲ αὐτῶν τὸ ὅρκιον ἐφύλασσον , ἀερθέντες ἐκ τῶν Οἰνουσσέων ἔπλεον .
But while they prepared to sail to Cyrnus, more than half of the citizens were overcome with longing and pitiful sorrow for the city and the life of their land, and they broke their oath and sailed back to Phocaea. Those of them who kept the oath put out to sea from the Oenussae.


1.166.1
1171
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐς τὴν Κύρνον ἀπίκοντο , οἴκεον κοινῇ μετὰ τῶν πρότερον ἀπικομένων ἐπ’ ἔτεα πέντε , καὶ ἱρὰ ἐνιδρύσαντο .
And when they came to Cyrnus they lived there for five years as one community with those who had come first, and they founded temples there.


1.166.1
1172
καὶ ἦγον γὰρ δὴ καὶ ἔφερον τοὺς περιοίκους ἅπαντας , στρατεύονται ὦν ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς κοινῷ λόγῳ χρησάμενοι Τυρσηνοὶ καὶ Καρχηδόνιοι , νηυσὶ ἑκάτεροι ἑξήκόντα .
But they harassed and plundered all their neighbors, as a result of which the Tyrrhenians and Carthaginians made common cause against them, and sailed to attack them with sixty ships each.


1.166.2
1173
οἱ δὲ Φωκαιέες πληρώσαντες καὶ αὐτοὶ τὰ πλοῖα , ἐόντα ἀριθμὸν ἑξήκοντα , ἀντίαζον ἐς τὸ Σαρδόνιον καλεόμενον πέλαγος .
The Phocaeans also manned their ships, sixty in number, and met the enemy in the sea called Sardonian.


1.166.2
1174
συμμισγόντων δὲ τῇ ναυμαχίῃ Καδμείη τις νίκη τοῖσι Φωκαιεῦσι ἐγένετο ·
They engaged and the Phocaeans won, yet it was only a kind of Cadmean victory;


1.166.2
1175
αἱ μὲν γὰρ τεσσεράκοντά σφι νέες διεφθάρησαν , αἱ δὲ εἴκοσι αἱ περιεοῦσαι ἦσαν ἄχρηστοι ·
for they lost forty of their ships, and the twenty that remained were useless.


1.166.2
1176
ἀπεστράφατο γὰρ τοὺς ἐμβόλους .
Their rams had been twisted awry.


1.166.3
1177
καταπλώσαντες δὲ ἐς τὴν Ἀλαλίην ἀνέλαβον τὰ τέκνα καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας καὶ τὴν ἄλλην κτῆσιν ὅσην οἷαι τε ἐγίνοντο αἱ νέες σφι ἄγειν , καὶ ἔπειτα ἀπέντες τὴν Κύρνον ἔπλεον ἐς Ῥήγιον .
Then sailing to  Aleria Alalia    they took their children and women and all of their possessions that their ships could hold on board, and leaving Cyrnus they sailed to  Reggio Rhegium   .


1.167.1
1178
τῶν δὲ διαφθαρεισέων νεῶν τοὺς ἄνδρας οἱ τε Καρχηδόνιοι καὶ οἱ Τυρσηνοὶ διέλαχον , τῶν δὲ Τυρσηνῶν οἱ Ἀγυλλαῖοι ἔλαχόν τε αὐτῶν πολλῷ πλείστους καὶ τούτους ἐξαγαγόντες κατέλευσαν .
As for the crews of the disabled ships, the Carthaginians and Tyrrhenians drew lots for them,


1.167.1
1179
μετὰ δὲ Ἀγυλλαίοισι πάντα τὰ παριόντα τὸν χῶρον , ἐν τῶ οἱ Φωκαιέες καταλευσθέντες ἐκέατο , ἐγίνετο διάστροφα καὶ ἔμπηρα καὶ ἀπόπληκτα , ὁμοίως πρόβατα καὶ ὑποζύγια καὶ ἄνθρωποι .
and of the Tyrrhenians the Agyllaioi were allotted by far the majority and these they led out and stoned to death. But afterwards, everything from Agylla that passed the place where the stoned Phocaeans lay, whether sheep or beasts of burden or men, became distorted and crippled and palsied.


1.167.2
1180
οἱ δὲ Ἀγυλλαῖοι ἐς Δελφοὺς ἔπεμπον βουλόμενοι ἀκέσασθαι τὴν ἁμαρτάδα .
The Agyllaeans sent to Delphi, wanting to mend their offense;


1.167.2
1181
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη σφέας ἐκέλευσε ποιέειν τὰ καὶ νῦν οἱ Ἀγυλλαῖοι ἔτι ἐπιτελέουσι ·
and the Pythian priestess told them to do what the people of Agylla do to this day:


1.167.2
1182
καὶ γὰρ ἐναγίζουσί σφι μεγάλως καὶ ἀγῶνα γυμνικὸν καὶ ἱππικὸν ἐπιστᾶσι .
for they pay great honors to the Phocaeans, with religious rites and games and horse-races.


1.167.3
1183
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν τῶν Φωκαιέων τοιούτῳ μόρῳ διεχρήσαντο , οἱ δὲ αὐτῶν ἐς τὸ Ῥήγιον καταφυγόντες ἐνθεῦτεν ὁρμώμενοι ἐκτήσαντο πόλιν γῆς τῆς Οἰνωτπίης ταύτην ἥτις νῦν Ὑέλη καλέεται ·
Such was the end of this part of the Phocaeans. Those of them who fled to  Reggio Rhegium    set out from there and gained possession of that city in the Oenotrian country which is now called  Elea Hyele   ;


1.167.4
1184
ἔκτισαν δὲ ταύτην πρὸς ἀνδρὸς Ποσειδωνιήτεω μαθόντες ὡς τὸν Κύρνον σφι ἡ Πυθίη ἔχρησε κτίσαι ἥρων ἐόντα , ἀλλ’ οὐ τὴν νῆσον .
they founded this because they learned from a man of Posidonia that the Cyrnus whose establishment the Pythian priestess ordained was the hero, and not the island.


1.168.1
1185
Φωκαίης μέν νυν πέρι τῆς ἐν Ἰωνίῃ οὕτω ἔσχε παραπλήσια δὲ τούτοισι καὶ Τήιοι ἐποίησαν .
Thus, then, it went with the Ionian Phocaea. The Teians did the same things as the Phocaeans:


1.168.1
1186
ἐπείτε γὰρ σφέων εἷλε χώματι τὸ τεῖχος Ἅρπαγος , ἐσβάντες πάντες ἐς τὰ πλοῖα οἴχοντο πλέοντες ἐπὶ τῆς Θρηίκης , καὶ ἐνθαῦτα ἔκτισαν πόλιν Ἄβδηρα , τὴν πρότερος τούτων Κλαζομένιος Τιμήσιος κτίσας οὐκ ἀπόνητο , ἀλλ’ ὑπὸ Θρηίκων ἐξελασθεὶς τιμὰς νῦν ὑπὸ Τηίων τῶν ἐν Ἀβδήροισι ὡς ἥρως ἔχει .
when Harpagus had taken their walled city by building an earthwork, they all embarked aboard ship and sailed away for Thrace. There they founded a city, Abdera, which before this had been founded by Timesius of Clazomenae; yet he got no profit of it, but was driven out by the Thracians. This Timesius is now honored as a hero by the Teians of Abdera.


1.169.1
1187
οὗτοὶ μέν νυν Ἰώνων μοῦνοι τὴν δουλοσύνην οὐκ ἀνεχόμενοι ἐξέλιπον τὰς πατρίδας ·
These were the only Ionians who left their native lands, unable to endure slavery.


1.169.1
1188
οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι Ἴωνες πλὴν Μιλησίων διὰ μάχης μὲν ἀπίκοντο Ἁρπάγῳ κατά περ οἱ ἐκλιπόντες , καὶ ἄνδρες ἐγένοντο ἀγαθοὶ περὶ τῆς ἑωυτοῦ ἕκαστος μαχόμενοι , ἑσσωθέντες δὲ καὶ ἁλόντες ἔμενον κατὰ χώρην ἕκαστοι καὶ τὰ ἐπιτασσόμενα ἐπετέλεον .
The rest of the Ionians, except the Milesians, though they faced Harpagus in battle as did the exiles, and conducted themselves well, each fighting for his own country, yet, when they were defeated and their cities taken, they remained where they were and did as they were told.


1.169.2
1189
Μιλήσιοι δέ , ὡς καὶ πρότερόν μοι ἔρηται , αὐτῷ Κύρῳ ὅρκιον ποιησάμενοι ἡσυχίην ἦγον .
The Milesians, as I have already said, made a treaty with Cyrus himself and struck no blow.


1.169.2
1190
οὕτω δὴ τὸ δεύτερον Ἰωνίη ἐδεδούλωτο .
Thus Ionia was enslaved for the second time:


1.169.2
1191
ὡς δὲ τοὺς ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ Ἴωνας ἐχειρώσατο Ἅρπαγος , οἱ τὰς νήσους ἔχοντες Ἴωνες καταρρωδήσαντες ταῦτα σφέας αὐτοὺς ἔδοσαν Κύρῳ .
and when Harpagus had conquered the Ionians of the mainland, the Ionians of the islands, fearing the same fate, surrendered to Cyrus.


1.170.1
1192
κεκακωμένων δὲ Ἰώνων καὶ συλλεγομένων οὐδὲν ἧσσον ἐς τὸ Πανιώνιον , πυνθάνομαι γνώμην Βίαντα ἄνδρα Πριηνέα ἀποδέξασθαι Ἴωσι χρησιμωτάτην , τῇ εἰ ἐπείθοντο , παρεῖχε ἂν σφι εὐδαιμονέειν Ἑλλήνων μάλιστα ·
When the Ionians, despite their evil plight, nonetheless assembled at the  Panionion Panionion   , Bias of  Priene Priene   , I have learned, gave them very useful advice, and had they followed it they might have been the most prosperous of all Greeks:


1.170.2
1193
ὃς ἐκέλευε κοινῷ στόλῳ Ἴωνας ἀερθέντας πλέειν ἐς Σαρδὼ καὶ ἔπειτα πόλιν μίαν κτίζειν πάντων Ἰώνων , καὶ οὕτω ἀπαλλαχθέντας σφέας δουλοσύνης εὐδαιμονήσειν , νήσων τε ἁπασέων μεγίστην νεμομένους καὶ ἄρχοντας ἄλλων ·
for he advised them to put out to sea and sail all together to Sardo and then found one city for all Ionians:


1.170.2
1194
μένουσι δέ σφι ἐν τῇ Ἰωνίῃ οὐκ ἔφη ἐνορᾶν ἐλευθερίην ἔτι ἐσομένην .
thus, possessing the greatest island in the world and ruling others, they would be rid of slavery and have prosperity; but if they stayed in Ionia he could see (he said) no hope of freedom for them.


1.170.3
1195
αὕτη μὲν Βίαντος τοῦ Πριηνέος γνώμη ἐπὶ διεφθαρμένοισι Ἴωσι γενομένη , χρηστὴ δὲ καὶ πρὶν ἢ διαφθαρῆναι Ἰωνίην Θάλεω ἀνδρὸς Μιλησίου ἐγένετο , τὸ ἀνέκαθεν γένος ἐόντος Φοίνικος , ὃς ἐκέλευε ἓν βουλευτήριον Ἴωνας ἐκτῆσθαι , τὸ δὲ εἶναι ἐν Τέῳ ( Τέων γὰρ μέσον εἶναι Ἰωνίης ) , τὰς δὲ ἄλλας πόλιας οἰκεομένας μηδὲν ἧσσον νομίζεσθαι κατά περ ἐς δῆμοι εἶεν ·
This was the advice which Bias of Priene gave after the destruction of the Ionians;


1.170.3
1196
οὗτοι μὲν δή σφι γνώμας τοιάσδε ἀπεδέξαντο .
and that given before the destruction by Thales of Miletus, a Phoenician by descent, was good too; he advised that the Ionians have one place of deliberation, and that it be in Teos (for that was the center of Ionia), and that the other cities be considered no more than demes.


1.171.1
1197
Ἅρπαγος δὲ καταστρεψάμενος Ἰωνίην ἐποιέετο στρατηίην ἐπὶ Κᾶρας καὶ Καυνίους καὶ Λυκίους , ἅμα ἀγόμενος καὶ Ἴωνας καὶ Αἰολέας .
Harpagus, after subjugating  Ionia Ionia   , made an expedition against the Carians, Caunians, and Lycians, taking Ionians and Aeolians with him.


1.171.2
1198
εἰσὶ δὲ τούτων Κᾶρες μὲν ἀπιγμένοι ἐς τὴν ἤπειρον ἐκ τῶν νήσων .
Of these, the Carians have come to the mainland from the islands;


1.171.2
1199
τὸ γὰρ παλαιὸν ἐόντες Μίνω κατήκοοι καὶ καλεόμενοι Λέλεγες εἶχον τὰς νήσους , φόρον μὲν οὐδένα ὑποτελέοντες , ὅσον καὶ ἐγὼ δυνατός εἰμι ἐπὶ μακρότατον ἐξικέσθαι ἀκοῇ ·
for in the past they were islanders, called Leleges and under the rule of Minos, not (as far as I can learn by report) paying tribute.


1.171.2
1200
οἳ δέ , ὅκως Μίνως δέοιτο , ἐπλήρουν οἱ τὰς νέας .
They manned ships for him when he needed them.


1.171.3
1201
ἅτε δὴ Μίνω τε κατεστραμμένου γῆν πολλὴν καὶ εὐτυχέοντος τῷ πολέμῳ , τὸ Καρικὸν ἦν ἔθνος λογιμώτατον τῶν ἐθνέων ἁπάντων κατὰ τοῦτον ἅμα τὸν χρόνον μακρῷ μάλιστα .
Since Minos had subjected a good deal of territory for himself and was victorious in war, this made the Carians too at that time by far the most respected of all nations.


1.171.4
1202
καί σφι τριξὰ ἐξευρήματα ἐγένετο , τοῖσι οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐχρήσαντο ·
They invented three things in which they were followed by the Greeks:


1.171.4
1203
καὶ γὰρ ἐπὶ τὰ κράνεα λόφους ἐπιδέεσθαι Κᾶρες εἰσὶ οἱ καταδέξαντες καὶ ἐπὶ τὰς ἀσπίδας τὰ σημήια ποιέεσθαι , καὶ ὄχανα ἀσπίσι οὗτοι εἰσὶ οἱ ποιησάμενοι πρῶτοι ·
it was the Carians who originated wearing crests on their helmets and devices on their shields, and who first made grips for their shields;


1.171.4
1204
τέως δὲ ἄνευ ὀχάνων ἐφόρεον τὰς ἀσπίδας πάντες οἳ περ ἐώθεσαν ἀσπίσι χρᾶσθαι , τελαμῶσι σκυτίνοισι οἰηκίζοντες , περὶ τοῖσι αὐχέσι τε καὶ τοῖσι ἀριστεροῖσι ὤμοισι περικείμενοι .
until then all who used shields carried them without these grips, and guided them with leather belts which they slung round the neck and over the left shoulder.


1.171.5
1205
μετὰ δὲ τοὺς Κᾶρας χρόνῳ ὕστερον πολλῷ Δωριέες τε καὶ Ἴωνες ἐξανέστησαν ἐκ τῶν νήσων , καὶ οὕτω ἐς τὴν ἤπειρον ἀπίκοντο .
Then, a long time afterwards, the Carians were driven from the islands by Dorians and Ionians and so came to the mainland.


1.171.5
1206
κατὰ μὲν δὴ Κᾶρας οὕτω Κρῆτες λέγουσι γενέσθαι ·
This is the Cretan story about the Carians;


1.171.5
1207
οὐ μέντοι αὐτοί γε ὁμολογέουσι τούτοισι οἱ Κᾶρες , ἀλλὰ νομίζουσι αὐτοὶ ἑωυτοὺς εἶναι αὐτόχθονας ἠπειρώτας , καὶ τῷ οὐνόματι τῷ αὐτῷ αἰεὶ διαχρεωμένους τῷ περ νῦν .
but the Carians themselves do not subscribe to it, but believe that they are aboriginal inhabitants of the mainland and always bore the name which they bear now;


1.171.6
1208
ἀποδείκνῦσι δὲ ἐν Μυλάσοισι Διὸς Καρίου ἱρὸν ἀρχαῖον , τοῦ Μυσοῖσι μὲν καὶ Λυδοῖσι μέτεστι ὡς κασιγνήτοισι ἐοῦσι τοῖσι Καρσί ·
and they point to an ancient shrine of Carian Zeus at Mylasa,


1.171.6
1209
τὸν γὰρ Λυδὸν καὶ τὸν Μυσὸν λέγουσι εἶναι Καρὸς ἀδελφεούς .
to which Mysians and Lydians, as brethren of the Carians (for Lydus and Mysus, they say, were brothers of Car), are admitted,


1.171.6
1210
τούτοισι μὲν δὴ μέτεστι , ὅσοι δὲ ἐόντες ἄλλου ἔθνεος ὁμόγλωσσοι τοῖσι Καρσὶ ἐγένοντο , τούτοισι δὲ οὐ μέτα .
but not those who spoke the same language as the Carians but were of another people.


1.172.1
1211
οἱ δὲ Καύνιοι αὐτόχθονες δοκέειν ἐμοὶ εἰσί , αὐτοὶ μέντοι ἐκ Κρήτης φασὶ εἶναι .
I think the Caunians are aborigines of the soil,


1.172.1
1212
προσκεχωρήκασι δὲ γλῶσσαν μὲν πρὸς τὸ Καρικὸν ἔθνος , ἢ οἱ Κᾶρες πρὸς τὸ Καυνικόν ( τοῦτο γὰρ οὐκ ἔχω ἀτρεκέως διακρῖναι ) , νόμοισι δὲ χρέωνται κεχωρισμένοισι πολλὸν τῶν τε ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων καὶ Καρῶν .
but they say that they came from Crete. Their speech has become like the Carian, or the Carian like theirs (for I cannot clearly decide), but in their customs they diverge widely from the Carians, as from all other men.


1.172.1
1213
τοῖσι γὰρ κάλλιστον ἐστὶ κατ’ ἡλικίην τε καὶ φιλότητα εἰλαδὸν συγγίνεσθαι ἐς πόσιν , καὶ ἀνδράσι καὶ γυναιξὶ καὶ παισί .
Their chief pleasure is to assemble for drinking-bouts in groups according to their ages and friendships: men, women, and children.


1.172.2
1214
ἱδρυθέντων δέ σφι ἱρῶν ξεινικῶν , μετέπειτα ὥς σφι ἀπέδοξε , ἔδοξέ δὲ τοῖσι πατρίοισι μοῦνον , χέασθαι θεοῖσι , ἐνδύντες τὰ ὅπλα ἅπαντες Καύνιοι ἡβηδόν , τύπτοντες δόρασι τὸν ἠέρα , μέχρι οὔρων τῶν Καλυνδικῶν εἵποντο , καὶ ἔφασαν ἐκβάλλειν τοὺς ξεινικοὺς θεούς .
Certain foreign rites of worship were established among them; but afterwards, when they were inclined otherwise, and wanted to worship only the gods of their fathers, all Caunian men of full age put on their armor and went together as far as the boundaries of Calynda, striking the air with their spears and saying that they were casting out the alien gods.


1.173.1
1215
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν τρόποισι τοιούτοισι χρέωνται , οἱ δὲ Λύκιοι ἐκ Κρήτης τ- ἀρχαῖον γεγόνασι ( τὴν γὰρ Κρήτην εἶχον τὸ παλαιὸν πᾶσαν βάρβαροι ) ·
Such are their ways. The Lycians were from  Crete Crete    in ancient times (for in the past none that lived on  Crete Crete    were Greek).


1.173.2
1216
διενειχθέντων δὲ ἐν Κρήτῃ περὶ τῆς βασιληίης τῶν Εὐρώπης παίδων Σαρπηδόνος τε καὶ Μίνω , ὡς ἐπεκράτησε τῇ στάσι Μίνως , ἐξήλασε αὐτόν τε Σαρπηδόνα καὶ τοὺς στασιώτας αὐτοῦ , οἳ δὲ ἀπωσθέντες ἀπίκοντο τῆς Ἀσίης ἐς γῆν τὴν Μιλυάδα ·
Now there was a dispute in Crete about the royal power between Sarpedon and Minos, sons of Europa;


1.173.2
1217
τὴν γὰρ νῦν Λύκιοι νέμονται , αὕτη τὸ παλαιὸν ἦν Μιλυάς , οἱ δὲ Μιλύαι τότε Σόλυμοι ἐκαλέοντο .
Minos prevailed in this dispute and drove out Sarpedon and his partisans; who, after being driven out, came to the Milyan land in Asia. What is now possessed by the Lycians was in the past Milyan, and the Milyans were then called Solymi.


1.173.3
1218
ἕως μὲν δὴ αὐτῶν Σαρπηδὼν ἦρχε , οἳ δὲ ἐκαλέοντο τό πέρ τε ἠνείκαντο οὔνομα καὶ νυν ἔτι καλέονται ὑπὸ τῶν περιοίκων οἱ Λύκιοι Τερμίλαι ·
For a while Sarpedon ruled them, and the people were called Termilae,


1.173.3
1219
ὡς δὲ ἐξ Ἀθηνέων Λύκος ὁ Πανδίονος , ἐξελασθεὶς καὶ οὗτος ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀδελφεοῦ Αἰγέος , ἀπίκετο ἐς τοὺς Τερμίλας παρὰ Σαρπηδόνα , οὕτω δὴ κατὰ τοῦ Λύκου τὴν ἐπωνυμίην Λύκιοι ἀνὰ χρόνον ἐκλήθησαν .
which was the name that they had brought with them and that is still given to the Lycians by their neighbors; but after Lycus son of Pandion came from Athens — banished as well by his brother, Aegeus — to join Sarpedon in the land of the Termilae, they came in time to be called Lycians after Lycus.


1.173.4
1220
νόμοισι δὲ τὰ μὲν Κρητικοῖσι τὰ δὲ Καρικοῖσι χρέωνται .
Their customs are partly Cretan and partly Carian.


1.173.4
1221
ἓν δὲ τόδε ἴδιον νενομίκασι καὶ οὐδαμοῖσι ἄλλοισι συμφέρονται ἀνθρώπων ·
But they have one which is their own and shared by no other men:


1.173.4
1222
καλέουσι ἀπὸ τῶν μητέρων ἑωυτοὺς καὶ οὐκὶ ἀπὸ τῶν πατέρων ·
they take their names not from their fathers but from their mothers,


1.173.5
1223
εἰρομένου δὲ ἑτέρου τὸν πλησίον τίς εἴη , καταλέξει ἑωυτὸν μητρόθεν καὶ τῆς μητρὸς ἀνανεμέεται τὰς μητέρας .
and when one is asked by his neighbor who he is, he will say that he is the son of such a mother, and rehearse the mothers of his mother.


1.173.5
1224
καὶ ἢν μέν γε γυνὴ ἀστὴ δούλῳ συνοικήσῃ , γενναῖα τὰ τέκνα νενόμισται ·
Indeed, if a female citizen marries a slave, her children are considered pure-blooded;


1.173.5
1225
ἢν δὲ ἀνὴρ ἀστὸς καὶ ὁ πρῶτος αὐτῶν γυναῖκα ξείνην ἢ παλλακὴν ἔχῃ , ἄτιμα τὰ τέκνα γίνεται .
but if a male citizen, even the most prominent of them, takes an alien wife or concubine, the children are dishonored.


1.174.1
1226
οἱ μέν νυν Κᾶρες οὐδὲν λαμπρὸν ἔργον ἀποδεξάμενοι ἐδουλώθησαν ὑπὸ Ἁρπάγου , οὔτε αὐτοὶ οἱ Κᾶρες ἀποδεξάμενοι οὐδέν , οὔτε ὅσοι Ἑλλήνων ταύτην τὴν χώρην οἰκέουσι ·
Neither the Carians nor any Greeks who dwell in this country did any thing notable before they were all enslaved by Harpagus.


1.174.2
1227
οἰκέουσι δὲ καὶ ἄλλοι καὶ Λακεδαιμονίων ἄποικοι Κνίδιοι .
Among those who inhabit it are certain Cnidians, colonists from Sparta.


1.174.2
1228
οἳ τῆς χώρης τῆς σφετέρης τετραμμένης ἐς πόντον , τὸ δὴ Τριόπιον καλέεται , ἀργμένης δὲ ἐκ τῆς Χερσονήσου τῆς Βυβασσίης , ἐούσης τε πάσης τῆς Κνιδίης πλὴν ὀλίγης περιρρόου ( τὰ μὲν γὰρ αὐτῆς πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον ὁ Κεραμεικὸς κόλπος ἀπέργει , τὰ δὲ πρὸς νότον ἡ κατὰ Σύμην τε καὶ Ῥόδον θάλασσα ) , τὸ ὦν δὴ ὀλίγον τοῦτο , ἐὸν ὅσον τε ἐπὶ πέντε στάδια , ὤρυσσον οἱ Κνίδιοι ἐν ὅσῳ Ἅρπαγος τὴν Ἰωνίην κατεστρέφετο , βουλόμενοι νῆσον τὴν χώρην ποιῆσαι .
Their country (it is called the Triopion) lies between the sea and that part of the peninsula which belongs to Bubassus, and all but a small part of the Cnidian territory is washed by the sea


1.174.3
1229
ἐντὸς δὲ πᾶσά σφι ἐγίνετο ·
(for it is bounded on the north by the gulf of Ceramicus, and on the south by the sea off Syme and Rhodes).


1.174.3
1230
τῇ γὰρ ἡ Κνιδίη χώρη ἐς τὴν ἤπειρον τελευτᾷ , ταύτῃ ὁ ἰσθμός ἐστι τὸν ὤρυσσον .
Now while Harpagus was conquering Ionia, the Cnidians dug a trench across this little space, which is about two-thirds of a mile wide, in order that their country might be an island. So they brought it all within the entrenchment; for the frontier between the Cnidian country and the mainland is on the isthmus across which they dug.


1.174.4
1231
καὶ δὴ πολλῇ , χειρὶ ἐργαζομένων τῶν Κνιδίων , μᾶλλον γάρ τι καὶ θειότερον ἐφαίνοντο τιτρώσκεσθαι οἱ ἐργαζόμενοι τοῦ οἰκότος τά τε ἄλλα τοῦ σώματος καὶ μάλιστα τὰ περὶ τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς θραυομένης τῆς πέτρης , ἔπεμπον ἐς Δελφοὺς θεοπρόπους ἐπειρησομένους τὸ ἀντίξοον .
Many of them were at this work; and seeing that the workers were injured when breaking stones more often and less naturally than usual, some in other ways, but most in the eyes, the Cnidians sent envoys to  Delphi Delphi    to inquire what it was that opposed them.


1.174.5
1232
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη σφι , ὡς αὐτοὶ Κνίδιοι λέγουσι , χρᾷ ἐν τριμέτρῳ τόνῳ τάδε .
Then, as they themselves say, the priestess gave them this answer in iambic verse:


1.174.5
1233
Ἰσθμὸν δὲ μὴ πυργοῦτε μηδ’ ὀρύσσετε ·
“Do not wall or trench the isthmus:


1.174.5
1234
Ζεὺς γάρ κ’ ἔθηκε νῆσον , εἴ κ’ ἐβούλετο .
Zeus would have given you an island, if he had wanted to.”


1.174.6
1235
Κνίδιοι μὲν ταῦτα τῆς Πυθίης χρησάσης τοῦ τε ὀρύγματος ἐπαύσαντο καὶ Ἁρπάγῳ ἐπιόντι σὺν τῷ στρατῷ ἀμαχητὶ σφέας αὐτοὺς παρέδοσαν .
At this answer from the priestess, the Cnidians stopped their digging, and when Harpagus came against them with his army they surrendered to him without resistance.


1.175.1
1236
ἦσαν δὲ Πηδασέες οἰκέοντες ὑπὲρ Ἁλικαρνησσοῦ μεσόγαιαν ·
There were Pedaseans dwelling inland above Halicarnassus;


1.175.1
1237
τοῖσι ὅκως τι μέλλοι ἀνεπιτήδεον ἔσεσθαι , αὐτοῖσί τε καὶ τοῖσι περιοίκοισι , ἡ ἱρείη τῆς Ἀθηναίης πώγωνα μέγαν ἴσχε .
when any misfortune was approaching them or their neighbors, the priestess of Athena grew a long beard.


1.175.1
1238
τρὶς σφι τοῦτο ἐγένετο .
This had happened to them thrice.


1.175.1
1239
οὗτοι τῶν περὶ Καρίην ἀνδρῶν μοῦνοί τε ἀντέσχον χρόνον Ἁρπάγῳ καὶ πρήγματα παρέσχον πλεῖστα , ὄρος τειχίσαντες τῷ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Λίδη .
These were the only men near Caria who held out for long against Harpagus, and they gave him the most trouble; they fortified a hill called Lide.


1.176.1
1240
Πηδασέες μέν νυν χρόνῳ ἐξαιρέθησαν .
The Pedaseans were at length taken,


1.176.1
1241
Λύκιοι δέ , ὡς ἐς τὸ Ξάνθιον πεδίον ἤλασε ὁ Ἅρπαγος τὸν στρατόν , ἐπεξιόντες καὶ μαχόμενοι ὀλίγοι πρὸς πολλοὺς ἀρετᾶς ἀπεδείκνυντο , ἑσσωθέντες δὲ καὶ κατειληθέντες ἐς τὸ ἄστυ συνήλισαν ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν τάς τε γυναῖκας καὶ τὰ τέκνα καὶ τὰ χρήματα καὶ τοὺς οἰκέτας , καὶ ἔπειτα ὑπῆψαν τὴν ἀκρόπολιν πᾶσαν ταύτην καίεσθαι .
and when Harpagus led his army into the plain of Xanthos, the Lycians came out to meet him, and showed themselves courageous fighting few against many; but being beaten and driven into the city, they gathered their wives and children and goods and servants into the acropolis, and then set the whole acropolis on fire.


1.176.2
1242
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσαντες καὶ συνομόσαντες ὅρκους δεινούς , ἐπεξελθόντες ἀπέθανον πάντες Ξάνθιοι μαχόμενοι .
Then they swore great oaths to each other, and sallying out fell fighting, all the men of  Xanthos Xanthus   .


1.176.3
1243
τῶν δὲ νῦν Λυκίων φαμένων Ξανθίων εἶναι οἱ πολλοί , πλὴν ὀγδώκοντα ἱστιέων , εἰσὶ ἐπήλυδες ·
Of the Xanthians who claim now to be Lycians the greater number, all except eighty households, are of foreign descent;


1.176.3
1244
αἱ δὲ ὀγδώκοντα ἱστίαι αὗται ἔτυχον τηνικαῦτα ἐκδημέουσι καὶ οὕτω περιεγένοντο .
these eighty families as it happened were away from the city at that time, and thus survived.


1.176.3
1245
τὴν μὲν δὴ Ξάνθον οὕτω ἔσχε ὁ Ἅρπαγος , παραπλησίως δὲ καὶ τὴν Καῦνον ἔσχε ·
So Harpagus gained Xanthos,


1.176.3
1246
καὶ γὰρ οἱ Καύνιοι τοὺς Λυκίους ἐμιμήσαντο τὰ πλέω .
and Caunus too in a somewhat similar manner, the Caunians following for the most part the example of the Lycians.


1.177.1
1247
τὰ μέν νυν κάτω τῆς Ἀσίης Ἅρπαγος ἀνάστατα ἐποίεε , τὰ δὲ ἄνω αὐτῆς αὐτὸς Κῦρος , πᾶν ἔθνος καταστρεφόμενος καὶ οὐδὲν παριείς .
Harpagus, then, made havoc of lower Asia;


1.177.1
1248
τὰ μέν νυν αὐτῶν πλέω παρήσομεν ·
in the upper country, Cyrus himself vanquished every nation, leaving none untouched.


1.177.1
1249
τὰ δὲ οἱ παρέσχε τε πόνον πλεῖστον καὶ ἀξιαπηγητότατα ἐστί , τούτων ἐπιμνήσομαι .
Of the greater part of these I will say nothing, but will speak only of those which gave Cyrus the most trouble and are most worthy of being described.


1.178.1
1250
Κῦρος ἐπείτε τὰ πάντα τῆς ἠπείρου ὑποχείρια ἐποιήσατο , Ἀσσυρίοισι ἐπετίθετο .
When Cyrus had made all the mainland submit to him, he attacked the Assyrians.


1.178.1
1251
τῆς δὲ Ἀσσυρίης ἐστὶ μὲν κου καὶ ἄλλα πολίσματα μεγάλα πολλά , τὸ δὲ ὀνομαστότατον καὶ ἰσχυρότατον καὶ ἔνθα σφι Νίνου ἀναστάτου γενομένης τὰ βασιλήια κατεστήκεε , ἦν Βαβυλών , ἐοῦσα τοιαύτη δή τις πόλις .
In Assyria there are many other great cities, but the most famous and the strongest was Babylon, where the royal dwelling had been established after the destruction of Ninus. Babylon was a city such as I will now describe.


1.178.2
1252
κέεται ἐν πεδίῳ μεγάλῳ , μέγαθος ἐοῦσα μέτωπον ἕκαστον εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατὸν σταδίων , ἐούσης τετραγώνου ·
It lies in a great plain, and is in shape a square, each side fifteen miles in length;


1.178.2
1253
οὗτοι στάδιοι τῆς περιόδου τῆς πόλιος γίνονται συνάπαντες ὀγδώκοντα καὶ τετρακόσιοι , τὸ μέν νυν μέγαθος τοσοῦτον ἐστὶ τοῦ ἄστεος τοῦ Βαβυλωνίου , ἐκεκόσμητο δὲ ὡς οὐδὲν ἄλλο πόλισμα τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν .
thus sixty miles make the complete circuit of the city. Such is the size of the city of Babylon; and it was planned like no other city of which we know.


1.178.3
1254
τάφρος μὲν πρῶτά μιν βαθέα τε καὶ εὐρέα καὶ πλέη ὕδατος περιθέει , μετὰ δὲ τεῖχος πεντήκοντα μὲν πηχέων βασιληίων ἐὸν τὸ εὖρος , ὕψος δὲ διηκοσίων πηχέων ·
Around it runs first a moat deep and wide and full of water,


1.178.3
1255
ὁ δὲ βασιλήιος πῆχυς τοῦ μετρίου ἐστὶ πήχεος μέζων τρισὶ δακτύλοισι .
and then a wall eighty-three feet thick and three hundred thirty-three feet high. The royal measure is greater by three fingers' breadth than the common measure.


1.179.1
1256
δεῖ δή με πρὸς τούτοισι ἔτι φράσαι ἵνα τε ἐκ τῆς τάφρου ἡ γῆ ἀναισιμώθη , καὶ τὸ τεῖχος ὅντινα τρόπον ἔργαστο .
Further, I must relate where the earth was used as it was dug from the moat and how the wall was constructed.


1.179.1
1257
ὀρύσσοντες ἅμα τὴν τάφρον ἐπλίνθευον τὴν γῆν τὴν ἐκ τοῦ ὀρύγματος ἐκφερομένην , ἑλκύσαντες δὲ πλίνθους ἱκανὰς ὤπτησαν αὐτὰς ἐν καμίνοισι ·
As they dug the moat, they made bricks of the earth which was carried out of the place they dug, and when they had moulded bricks enough, they baked them in ovens;


1.179.2
1258
μετὰ δὲ τέλματι χρεώμενοι ἀσφάλτῳ θερμῇ καὶ διὰ τριήκοντα δόμων πλίνθου ταρσοὺς καλάμων διαστοιβάζοντες , ἔδειμαν πρῶτα μὲν τῆς τάφου τὰ χείλεα , δευτέρα δὲ αὐτὸ τὸ τεῖχος τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον .
then using hot bitumen for cement and interposing layers of wattled reeds at every thirtieth course of bricks, they built first the border of the moat and then the wall itself in the same fashion.


1.179.3
1259
ἐπάνω δὲ τοῦ τείχεος παρὰ τὰ ἔσχατα οἰκήματα μουνόκωλα ἔδειμαν , τετραμμένα ἐς ἄλληλα ·
On the top, along the edges of the wall, they built houses of a single room, facing each other,


1.179.3
1260
τὸ μέσον δὲ τῶν οἰκημάτων ἔλιπον τεθρίππῳ περιέλασιν .
with space enough between to drive a four-horse chariot.


1.179.3
1261
πύλαι δὲ ἐνεστᾶσι πέριξ τοῦ τείχεος ἑκατόν , χάλκεαι πᾶσαι , καὶ σταθμοί τε καὶ ὑπέρθυρα ὡσαύτως .
There are a hundred gates in the circuit of the wall, all of bronze, with posts and lintels of the same.


1.179.4
1262
ἔστι δὲ ἄλλη πόλις ἀπέχουσα ὀκτὼ ἡμερέων ὁδὸν ἀπὸ Βαβυλῶνος ·
There is another city, called Is, eight days' journey from Babylon;


1.179.4
1263
Ἲς οὔνομα αὐτῇ .
where there is a little river, also named Is;


1.179.4
1264
ἔνθα ἐστὶ ποταμὸς οὐ μέγας ·
a tributary of the Euphrates river;


1.179.4
1265
Ἲς καὶ τῷ ποταμῷ τὸ οὔνομα ·
from the source of this river Is,


1.179.4
1266
ἐσβάλλει δὲ οὗτος ἐς τὸν Εὐφρήτην ποταμὸν τὸ ῥέεθρον .
many lumps of bitumen rise with the water;


1.179.4
1267
οὗτος ὦν ὁ Ἲς ποταμὸς ἅμα τῷ , ὕδατι θρόμβους ἀσφάλτου ἀναδιδοῖ πολλούς , ἔνθεν ἡ ἄσφαλτος ἐς τὸ ἐν Βαβυλῶνι τεῖχος ἐκομίσθη .
and from there the bitumen was brought for the wall of Babylon.


1.180.1
1268
ἐτετείχιστο μέν νυν ἡ Βαβυλὼν τρόπῳ τοιῷδε , ἔστι δὲ δύο φάρσεα τῆς πόλιος .
Thus, then, this wall was built; the city is divided into two parts;


1.180.1
1269
τὸ γὰρ μέσον αὐτῆς ποταμὸς διέργει , τῷ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Εὐφρήτης ·
for it is cut in half by a river named Euphrates;


1.180.1
1270
ῥέει δὲ ἐξ Ἀρμενίων , ἐὼν μέγας καὶ βαθὺς καὶ ταχύς ·
a wide, deep, and swift river, flowing from Armenia;


1.180.1
1271
ἐξιεῖ δὲ οὗτος ἐς τὴν Ἐρυθρὴν θάλασσαν .
and issuing into the Red Sea.


1.180.2
1272
τὸ ὦν δὴ τεῖχος ἑκάτερον τοὺς ἀγκῶνας ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν ἐλήλαται ·
The angles of the wall, then, on either side are built quite down to the river;


1.180.2
1273
τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτου αἱ ἐπικαμπαὶ παρὰ χεῖλος ἑκάτερον τοῦ ποταμοῦ αἱμασιὴ πλίνθων ὀπτέων παρατείνει .
here they turn, and from here a fence of baked bricks runs along each bank of the stream.


1.180.3
1274
τὸ δὲ ἄστυ αὐτό , ἐὸν πλῆρες οἰκιέων τριωρόφων καὶ τετρωρόφων , κατατέτμηται τὰς ὁδοὺς ἰθέας τάς τε ἄλλας καὶ τὰς ἐπικαρσίας τὰς ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν ἐχούσας .
The city itself is full of houses three and four stories high; and the ways that traverse it, those that run crosswise towards the river and the rest, are all straight.


1.180.4
1275
κατὰ δὴ ὦν ἑκάστην ὁδὸν ἐν τῇ αἱμασιῇ τῇ παρὰ τὸν ποταμὸν πυλίδες ἐπῆσαν , ὅσαι περ αἱ λαῦραι , τοσαῦται ἀριθμόν ·
Further, at the end of each road there was a gate in the riverside fence,


1.180.4
1276
ἦσαν δὲ καὶ αὗται χάλκεαι G? φέρουσαι καὶ αὐταὶ ἐς αὐτὸν τὸν ποταμόν .
one gate for each alley; these gates also were of bronze, and these too opened on the river.


1.181.1
1277
τοῦτο μὲν δὴ τὸ τεῖχος θώρηξ ἐστί , ἕτερον δὲ ἔσωθεν τεῖχος περιθέει , οὐ πολλῷ τεῳ ἀσθενέστερον τοῦ ἑτέρου τείχεος , στεινότερον δέ .
These walls are the city's outer armor; within them there is another encircling wall, nearly as strong as the other, but narrower.


1.181.2
1278
ἐν δὲ φάρσεϊ ἑκατέρῳ τῆς πόλιος ἐτετείχιστο ἐν μέσῳ ἐν τῷ μὲν τὰ βασιλήια περιβόλῳ μεγάλῳ τε καὶ ἰσχυρῷ , ἐν δὲ τῷ ἑτέρῳ Διὸς Βήλου ἱρὸν χαλκόπυλον , καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἔτι τοῦτο ἐόν , δύο σταδίων πάντῃ , ἐὸν τετράγωνον .
In the middle of one division of the city stands the royal palace, surrounded by a high and strong wall; and in the middle of the other is still to this day the sacred enclosure of Zeus Belus, a square of four hundred and forty yards each way, with gates of bronze.


1.181.3
1279
ἐν μέσῳ δὲ τοῦ ἱροῦ πύργος στερεὸς οἰκοδόμηται , σταδίου καὶ τὸ μῆκος καὶ τὸ εὖρος , καὶ ἐπὶ τούτῳ τῷ πύργῳ ἄλλος πύργος ἐπιβέβηκε , καὶ ἕτερος μάλα ἐπὶ τούτῳ , μέχρι οὗ ὀκτὼ πύργων .
In the center of this sacred enclosure a solid tower has been built, two hundred and twenty yards long and broad; a second tower rises from this and from it yet another, until at last there are eight.


1.181.4
1280
ἀνάβασις δὲ ἐς αὐτοὺς ἔξωθεν κύκλῳ περὶ πάντας τοὺς πύργους ἔχουσα πεποίηται .
The way up them mounts spirally outside the height of the towers;


1.181.4
1281
μεσοῦντι δέ κου τῆς ἀναβάσιος ἐστὶ καταγωγή τε καὶ θῶκοι ἀμπαυστήριοι , ἐν τοῖσι κατίζοντες ἀμπαύονται οἱ ἀναβαίνοντες .
about halfway up is a resting place, with seats for repose, where those who ascend sit down and rest.


1.181.5
1282
ἐν δὲ τῷ τελευταίῳ πύργῳ νηὸς ἔπεστι μέγας ·
In the last tower there is a great shrine;


1.181.5
1283
ἐν δὲ τῷ νηῷ κλίνη μεγάλη κέεται εὖ ἐστρωμένη , καὶ οἱ τράπεζα παρακέεται χρυσέη .
and in it stands a great and well-covered couch, and a golden table nearby.


1.181.5
1284
ἄγαλμα δὲ οὐκ ἔνι οὐδὲν αὐτόθι ἐνιδρυμένον , οὐδὲ νύκτα οὐδεὶς ἐναυλίζεται ἀνθρώπων ὅτι μὴ γυνὴ μούνη τῶν ἐπιχωρίων , τὴν ἂν ὁ θεὸς ἕληται ἐκ πασέων , ὡς λέγουσι οἱ Χαλδαῖοι ἐόντες ἱρέες τούτου τοῦ θεοῦ .
But no image has been set up in the shrine, nor does any human creature lie there for the night, except one native woman, chosen from all women by the god, as the Chaldaeans say, who are priests of this god.


1.182.1
1285
φασὶ δὲ οἱ αὐτοὶ οὗτοι , ἐμοὶ μὲν οὐ πιστὰ λέγοντες , τὸν θεὸν αὐτὸν φοιτᾶν τε ἐς τὸν νηὸν καὶ ἀμπαύεσθαι ἐπὶ τῆς κλίνης , κατά περ ἐν Θήβῃσι τῇσι Αἰγυπτίῃσι κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον , ὡς λέγουσι οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι ·
These same Chaldaeans say (though I do not believe them) that the god himself is accustomed to visit the shrine and rest on the couch, as in  Thebes Thebes    of  Egypt Egypt   , as the Egyptians say


1.182.2
1286
καὶ γὰρ δὴ ἐκεῖθι κοιμᾶται ἐν τῷ τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ Θηβαιέος γυνή , ἀμφότεραι δὲ αὗται λέγονται ἀνδρῶν οὐδαμῶν ἐς ὁμιλίην φοιτᾶν ·
(for there too a woman sleeps in the temple of Theban Zeus, and neither the Egyptian nor the Babylonian woman, it is said, has intercourse with men),


1.182.2
1287
καὶ κατά περ ἐν Πατάροισι τῆς Λυκίης ἡ πρόμαντις τοῦ θεοῦ , ἐπεὰν γένηται ·
and as does the prophetess of the god at Patara in Lycia, whenever she is appointed;


1.182.2
1288
οὐ γὰρ ὦν αἰεί ἐστι χρηστήριον αὐτόθι ·
for there is not always a place of divination there;


1.182.2
1289
ἐπεὰν δὲ γένηται τότε ὦν συγκατακληίεται τὰς νύκτας ἔσω ἐν τῷ νηῷ .
but when she is appointed she is shut up in the temple during the night.


1.183.1
1290
ἔστι δὲ τοῦ ἐν Βαβύλῶνι ἱροῦ καὶ ἄλλος κάτω νηός , ἔνθα ἄγαλμα μέγα τοῦ Διὸς ἔνι κατήμενον χρύσεον , καὶ οἱ τράπεζα μεγάλη παρακέεται χρυσέη , καὶ τὸ βάθρον οἱ καὶ ὁ θρόνος χρύσεος ἐστί ·
In the Babylonian temple there is another shrine below,


1.183.1
1291
καὶ ὡς ἔλεγον οἱ Χαλδαῖοι , ταλάντων ὀκτακοσίων χρυσίου πεποίηται ταῦτα .
where there is a great golden image of Zeus, sitting at a great golden table, and the footstool and the chair are also gold; the gold of the whole was said by the Chaldeans to be eight hundred talents' weight.


1.183.2
1292
ἔξω δὲ τοῦ νηοῦ βωμός ἐστι χρύσεος , ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλος βωμὸς μέγας , ἐπ’ οὗ θύεται τὰ τέλεα τῶν προβάτων ·
Outside the temple is a golden altar.


1.183.2
1293
ἐπὶ γὰρ τοῦ χρυσέου βωμοῦ οὐκ ἔξεστι θύειν ὅτι μὴ γαλαθηνὰ μούνᾳ , ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ μέζονος βωμοῦ καὶ καταγίζουσι λιβανωτοῦ χίλια τάλαντα ἔτεος ἑκάστου οἱ Χαλδαῖοι τότε ἐπεὰν τὴν ὁρτὴν ἄγωσι τῷ θεῷ τούτῳ .
There is also another great altar, on which are sacrificed the full-grown of the flocks; only nurslings may be sacrificed on the golden altar, but on the greater altar the Chaldeans even offer a thousand talents' weight of frankincense yearly, when they keep the festival of this god;


1.183.2
1294
ἦν δὲ ἐν τῷ τεμένεϊ τούτῳ ἔτι τὸν χρόνον ἐκεῖνον καὶ ἀνδριὰς δυώδεκα πηχέων χρύσεος στερεός ·
and in the days of Cyrus there was still in this sacred enclosure a statue of solid gold twenty feet high.


1.183.3
1295
ἐγὼ μέν μιν οὐκ εἶδον , τὰ δὲ λέγεται ὑπὸ Χαλδαίων , ταῦτα λέγω .
I myself have not seen it, but I relate what is told by the Chaldeans.


1.183.3
1296
τούτῳ τῷ ἀνδριάντι Δαρεῖος μὲν ὁ Ὑστάσπεος ἐπιβουλεύσας οὐκ ἐτόλμησε λαβεῖν , Ξέρξης δὲ ὁ Δαρείου ἔλαβε καὶ τὸν ἱρέα ἀπέκτεινε ἀπαγορεύοντα μὴ κινέειν τὸν ἀνδριάντα .
Darius son of Hystaspes proposed to take this statue but dared not; Xerxes his son took it, and killed the priest who warned him not to move the statue.


1.183.3
1297
τὸ μὲν δὴ ἱρὸν τοῦτο οὕτω κεκόσμηται , ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἴδια ἀναθήματα πολλά .
Such is the furniture of this temple, and there are many private offerings besides.


1.184.1
1298
τῆς δὲ Βαβυλῶνος ταύτης πολλοὶ μέν κου καὶ ἄλλοι ἐγένοντο βασιλέες , τῶν ἐν τοῖσι Ἀσσυρίοισι λόγοισι μνήμην ποιήσομαι , οἳ τὰ τείχεά τε ἐπεκόσμησαν καὶ τὰ ἱρά , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ γυναῖκες δύο .
Now among the many rulers of this city of Babylon (whom I shall mention in my Assyrian history) who finished the building of the walls and the temples,


1.184.1
1299
ἡ μὲν πρότερον ἄρξασα , τῆς ὕστερον γενεῇσι πέντε πρότερον γενομένη , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Σεμίραμις , αὕτη μὲν ἀπεδέξατο χώματα ἀνὰ τὸ πεδίον ἐόντα ἀξιοθέητα ·
there were two that were women. The first of these lived five generations earlier than the second, and her name was Semiramis: it was she who built dikes on the plain, a notable work;


1.184.1
1300
πρότερον δὲ ἐώθεε ὁ ποταμὸς ἀνὰ τὸ πεδίον πᾶν πελαγίζειν .
before that the whole plain used to be flooded by the river.


1.185.1
1301
ἡ δὲ δὴ δεύτερον γενομένη ταύτης βασίλεια , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Νίτωκρις , αὕτη δὲ συνετωτέρη γενομένη τῆς πρότερον ἀρξάσης τοῦτο μὲν μνημόσυνα ἐλίπετο τὰ ἐγὼ ἀπηγήσομαι , τοῦτο δὲ τὴν Μήδων ὁρῶσα ἀρχὴν μεγάλην τε καὶ οὐκ ἀτρεμίζουσαν , ἀλλ’ ἄλλα τε ἀραιρημένα ἄστεα αὐτοῖσι , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ τὴν Νίνον , προεφυλάξατο ὅσα ἐδύνατο μάλιστα .
The second queen, whose name was Nitocris, was a wiser woman than the first. She left such monuments as I shall record; and moreover, seeing that the kingdom of Media was great and restless and  Nineveh Ninus    itself among other cities had fallen to it, she took such precautions as she could for her protection.


1.185.2
1302
πρῶτα μὲν τὸν Εὐφρήτην ποταμὸν ῥέοντα πρότερον ἰθύν , ὅς σφι διὰ τῆς πόλιος μέσης ῥέει , τοῦτον ἄνωθεν διώρυχας ὀρύξασα οὕτω δή τι ἐποίησε σκολιὸν ὥστε δὴ τρὶς ἐς τῶν τινα κωμέων τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσσυρίῃ ἀπικνέεται ῥέων ·
First she dealt with the river Euphrates, which flows through the middle of her city; this had been straight before;


1.185.2
1303
τῇ δὲ κώμῃ οὔνομα ἐστί , ἐς τὴν ἀπικνέεται ὁ Εὐφρήτης , Ἀρδέρικκα .
but by digging canals higher up she made the river so crooked that its course now passes one of the Assyrian villages three times;


1.185.2
1304
καὶ νῦν οἳ ἂν κομίζωνται ἀπὸ τῆσδε τῆς θαλάσσης ἐς Βαβυλῶνα , καταπλέοντες τὸν Εὐφρήτην ποταμὸν τρίς τε ἐς τὴν αὐτὴν ταύτην κώμην παραγίνονται καὶ ἐν τρισὶ ἡμέρῃσι .
the village which is so approached by the Euphrates is called Ardericca. And now those who travel from our sea to Babylon must spend three days as they float down the Euphrates, coming three times to the same village.


1.185.3
1305
τοῦτο μὲν δὴ τοιοῦτον ἐποίησε , χῶμα δὲ παρέχωσε παρ’ ἑκάτερον τοῦ ποταμοῦ τὸ χεῖλος ἄξιον θώματος μέγαθος καὶ ὕψος ὅσον τι ἐστί .
Such was this work; and she built an embankment along either shore of the river, marvellous for its greatness and height.


1.185.4
1306
κατύπερθε δὲ πολλῷ Βαβυλῶνος ὤρυσσε ἔλυτρον λίμνῃ , ὀλίγον τι παρατείνουσα ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ , βάθος μὲν ἐς τὸ ὕδωρ αἰεὶ ὀρύσσουσα , εὖρος δὲ τὸ περίμετρον αὐτοῦ ποιεῦσα εἴκοσί τε καὶ τετρακοσίων σταδίων ·
Then a long way above Babylon she dug the reservoir of a lake, a little way off from the river,


1.185.4
1307
τὸν δὲ ὀρυσσόμενον χοῦν ἐκ τούτου τοῦ ὀρύγματος ἀναισίμου παρὰ τὰ χείλεα τοῦ ποταμοῦ παραχέουσα .
always digging deep enough to find water, and making the circumference a distance of fifty-two miles; what was dug out of this hole, she used to embank either edge of the river;


1.185.5
1308
ἐπείτε δέ οἱ ὀρώρυκτο , λίθους ἀγαγομένη κρηπῖδα κύκλῳ περὶ αὐτὴν ἤλασε .
and when she had it all dug, she brought stones and made a quay all around the lake.


1.185.6
1309
ἐποίεε δὲ ἀμφότερα ταῦτα , τόν τε ποταμὸν σκολιὸν καὶ τὸ ὄρυγμα πᾶν ἕλος , ὡς ὅ τε ποταμὸς βραδύτερος εἴη περὶ καμπὰς πολλὰς ἀγνύμενος , καὶ οἱ πλόοι ἔωσι σκολιοὶ ἐς τὴν Βαβυλῶνα , ἔκ τε τῶν πλόων ἐκδέκηται περίοδος τῆς λίμνης μακρή .
Her purpose in making the river wind and turning the hole into marsh was this: that the current might be slower because of the many windings that broke its force, and that the passages to  Babylon Babylon    might be crooked, and that right after them should come also the long circuit of the lake.


1.185.7
1310
κατὰ τοῦτο δὲ ἐργάζετο τῆς χώρης τῇ αἵ τε ἐσβολαὶ ἦσαν καὶ τὰ σύντομα τῆς ἐκ Μήδων ὁδοῦ , ἵνα μὴ ἐπιμισγόμενοι οἱ Μῆδοι ἐκμανθάνοιεν αὐτῆς τὰ πρήγματα .
All this work was done in that part of the country where the passes are and the shortest road from Media, so that the Medes might not mix with her people and learn of her affairs.


1.186.1
1311
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ ἐκ βάθεος περιεβάλετο , τοιήνδε δὲ ἐξ αὐτῶν παρενθήκην ἐποιήσατο .
So she made the deep river her protection;


1.186.1
1312
τῆς πόλιος ἐούσης δύο φαρσέων , τοῦ δὲ ποταμοῦ μέσον ἔχοντος , ἐπὶ τῶν πρότερον βασιλέων ὅκως τις ἐθέλοι ἐκ τοῦ ἑτέρου φάρσεος ἐς τ- ἕτερον διαβῆναι , χρῆν πλοίῳ διαβαίνειν , καὶ ἦν , ὡς ἐγὼ δοκέω , ὀχληρὸν τοῦτο .
and this work led to another which she added to it. Her city was divided into two parts by the river that flowed through the middle. In the days of the former rulers, when one wanted to go from one part to the other, one had to cross in a boat; and this, I suppose, was a nuisance.


1.186.1
1313
αὕτη δὲ καὶ τοῦτο προεῖδε .
But the queen also provided for this;


1.186.1
1314
ἐπείτε γὰρ ὤρυσσε τὸ ἔλυτρον τῇ λίμνῃ , μνημόσυνον τόδε ἄλλο ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἔργου ἐλίπετο ·
she made another monument of her reign out of this same work when the digging of the basin of the lake was done.


1.186.2
1315
ἐτάμνετο λίθους περιμήκεας , ὡς δέ οἱ ἦσαν οἱ λίθοι ἕτοιμοι καὶ τὸ χωρίον ὀρώρυκτο , ἐκτρέψασα τοῦ ποταμοῦ τὸ ῥέεθρον πᾶν ἐς τὸ ὤρυσσε χωρίον , ἐν ᾧ ἐπίμπλατο τοῦτο , ἐν τούτω ἀπεξηρασμένου τοῦ ἀρχαίου ῥεέθρου τοῦτο μὲν τὰ χείλεα τοῦ ποταμοῦ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν καὶ τὰς καταβάσιας τὰς ἐκ τῶν πυλίδων ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν φερούσας ἀνοικοδόμησε πλίνθοισι ὀπτῇσι κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον τῷ τείχεϊ , τοῦτο δὲ κατὰ μέσην κου μάλιστα τὴν πόλιν τοῖσι λίθοισι τοὺς ὠρύξατο οἰκοδόμεε γέφυραν , δέουσα τοὺς λίθους σιδήρῳ τε καὶ μολύβδῳ .
She had very long blocks of stone cut; and when these were ready and the place was dug, she turned the course of the river into it, and while it was filling, the former channel now being dry, she bricked the borders of the river in the city and the descent from the gate leading down to the river with baked bricks, like those of the wall; and near the middle of the city she built a bridge with the stones that had been dug up, binding them together with iron and lead.


1.186.3
1316
ἐπιτείνεσκε δὲ ἐπ’ αὐτήν , ὅκως μὲν ἡμέρη γίνοιτο , ξύλα τετράγωνα , ἐπ’ ὧν τὴν διάβασιν ἐποιεῦντο οἱ Βαβυλώνιοι ·
Each morning, she laid square-hewn logs across it, on which the Babylonians crossed;


1.186.3
1317
τὰς δὲ νύκτας τὰ ξύλα ταῦτα ἀπαιρέεσκον τοῦδε εἵνεκα , ἵνα μὴ διαφοιτέοντες τὰς νύκτας κλέπτοιεν παρ’ ἀλλήλων .
but these logs were removed at night, lest folk always be crossing over and stealing from one another.


1.186.4
1318
ὡς δὲ τό τε ὀρυχθὲν λίμνη πλήρης ἐγεγόνεε ὑπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ καὶ τὰ περὶ τὴν γέφυραν ἐκεκόσμητο , τὸν Εὐφρήτην ποταμὸν ἐς τὰ ἀρχαῖα ῥέεθρα ἐκ τῆς λίμνης ἐξήγαγε , καὶ οὕτω τὸ ὀρυχθὲν ἕλος γενόμενον ἐς δέον ἐδόκεε γεγονέναι καὶ τοῖσι πολιήτῃσι γέφυρα ἦν κατεσκευασμένη .
Then, when the basin she had made for a lake was filled by the river and the bridge was finished, Nitocris brought the  Euphrates Euphrates    back to its former channel out of the lake; thus she had served her purpose, as she thought, by making a swamp of the basin, and her citizens had a bridge made for them.


1.187.1
1319
ἡ δ’ αὐτὴ αὕτη βασίλεια καὶ ἀπάτην τοιήνδε τινὰ ἐμηχανήσατο ·
There was a trick, too, that this same queen contrived.


1.187.1
1320
ὕπερ τῶν μάλιστα λεωφόρων πυλέων τοῦ ἄστεος τάφον ἑωυτῇ κατεσκευάσατο μετέωρον ἐπιπολῆς αὐτέων τῶν πυλέων , ἐνεκόλαψε δὲ ἐς τὸν τάφον γράμματα λέγοντα τάδε .
She had a tomb made for herself and set high over the very gate of that entrance of the city which was used most, with writing engraved on the tomb, which read:


1.187.2
1321
" τῶν τις ἐμεῦ ὕστερον γινομένων Βαβυλῶνος βασιλέων ἢν σπανίσῃ χρημάτων , ἀνοίξας τὸν τάφον λαβέτω ὁκόσα βούλεται χρήματα ·
“If any king of Babylon in the future is in need of money, let him open this tomb and take as much as he likes:


1.187.2
1322
μὴ μέντοι γε μὴ σπανίσας γε ἄλλως ἀνοίξῃ ·
but let him not open it unless he is in need;


1.187.2
1323
οὐ γὰρ ἄμεινον " ·
for it will be the worse for him.”


1.187.3
1324
οὗτος ὁ τάφος ἦν ἀκίνητος μέχρι οὗ ἐς Δαρεῖον περιῆλθε ἡ βασιληίη ·
This tomb remained untouched until the kingship fell to Darius.


1.187.3
1325
Δαρείῳ δὲ καὶ δεινὸν ἐδόκεε εἶναι τῇσι πύλῃσι ταύτῃσι μηδὲν χρᾶσθαι , καὶ χρημάτων κειμένων καὶ αὐτῶν τῶν γραμμάτων ἐπικαλεομένων , μὴ οὐ λαβεῖν αὐτά ·
He thought it a very strange thing that he should never use this gate, or take the money when it lay there and the writing itself invited him to.


1.187.4
1326
τῇσι δὲ πύλῃσι ταύτῃσι οὐδὲν ἐχρᾶτο τοῦδε εἵνεκα , ὅτι ὕπερ κεφαλῆς οἱ ἐγίνετο ὁ νεκρὸς διεξελαύνοντι .
The reason he did not use the gate was that the dead body would be over his head as he passed through.


1.187.5
1327
ἀνοίξας δὲ τὸν τάφον εὗρε χρήματα μὲν οὔ , τὸν δὲ νεκρὸν καὶ γράμματα λέγοντα τάδε ·
After opening the tomb, he found no money there, only the dead body,


1.187.5
1328
" εἰ μὴ ἄπληστός τε ἔας χρημάτων καὶ αἰσχροκερδής , οὐκ ἂν νεκρῶν θήκας ἀνέῳγες " .
with writing which read: “If you were ever satisfied with what you had and did not disgrace yourself seeking more, you would not have opened the coffins of the dead.”


1.187.5
1329
αὕτη μέν νυν ἡ βασίλεια τοιαύτη τις λέγεται γενέσθαι .
Such a woman, it is recorded, was this queen.


1.188.1
1330
ὁ δὲ δὴ Κῦρος ἐπὶ ταύτης τῆς γυναικὸς τὸν παῖδα ἐστρατεύετο , ἔχοντά τε τοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ ἑωυτοῦ τ- ὄνομα Λαβυνήτου καὶ τὴν Ἀσσυρίων ἀρχήν .
Cyrus, then, marched against Nitocris' son, who inherited the name of his father Labynetus and the sovereignty of Assyria.


1.188.1
1331
στρατεύεται δὲ δὴ βασιλεὺς ὁ μέγας καὶ σιτίοισι εὖ ἐσκευασμένος ἐξ οἴκου καὶ προβάτοῖσι , καὶ δὴ καὶ ὕδωρ ἀπὸ τοῦ Χοάσπεω ποταμοῦ ἅμα ἄγεται τοῦ παρὰ Σοῦσα ῥέοντος , τοῦ μούνου πίνει βασιλεὺς καὶ ἄλλου οὐδενὸς ποταμοῦ .
Now when the Great King campaigns, he marches well provided with food and flocks from home; and water from the Choaspes river that flows past Susa is carried with him, the only river from which the king will drink.


1.188.2
1332
τούτου δὲ τοῦ Χοάσπεω τοῦ ὕδατος ἀπεψημένου πολλαὶ κάρτα ἅμαξαι τετράκυκλοι ἡμιόνεαι κομίζουσαι ἐν ἀγγηίοισι ἀργυρέοισι ἕπονται , ὅκῃ ἂν ἐλαύνῃ ἑκάστοτε .
This water of the Choaspes is boiled, and very many four-wheeled wagons drawn by mules carry it in silver vessels, following the king wherever he goes at any time.


1.189.1
1333
ἐπείτε δὲ ὁ Κῦρος πορευόμενος ἐπὶ τὴν Βαβυλῶνα ἐγίνετο ἐπὶ Γύνδῃ ποταμῷ , τοῦ αἱ μὲν πηγαὶ ἐν Ματιηνοῖσι ὄρεσι , ῥέει δὲ διὰ Δαρδανέων , ἐκδιδοῖ δὲ ἐς ἕτερον ποταμὸν Τίγρην , ὁ δὲ παρὰ Ὦπιν πόλιν ῥέων ἐς τὴν Ἐρυθρὴν θάλασσαν ἐκδιδοῖ , τοῦτον δὴ τὸν Γύνδην ποταμὸν ὡς διαβαίνειν ἐπειρᾶτο ὁ Κῦρος ἐόντα νηυσιπέρητον , ἐνθαῦτά οἱ τῶν τις ἱρῶν ἵππων τῶν λευκῶν ὑπὸ ὕβριος ἐσβὰς ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν διαβαίνειν ἐπειρᾶτο , ὁ δέ μιν συμψήσας ὑποβρύχιον οἰχώκεε φέρων .
When Cyrus reached the Gyndes river on his march to  Babylon Babylon   , which rises in the mountains of the Matieni and flows through the Dardanean country into another river, the  Tigris Tigris   , that again passes the city of Opis and empties into the  Red Red Sea    — when, I say, Cyrus tried to cross the Gyndes, which was navigable there, one of his sacred white horses dashed recklessly into the river trying to get through it, but the current overwhelmed him and swept him under and away.


1.189.2
1334
κάρτα τε δὴ ἐχαλέπαινε τῷ ποταμῷ ὁ Κῦρος τοῦτο ὑβρίσαντι , καί οἱ ἐπηπείλησε οὕτω δή μιν ἀσθενέα ποιήσειν ὥστε τοῦ λοιποῦ καὶ γυναῖκας μιν εὐπετέως τὸ γόνυ οὐ βρεχούσας διαβήσεσθαι .
At this violence of the river Cyrus was very angry, and he threatened to make it so feeble that women could ever after cross it easily without wetting their knees.


1.189.3
1335
μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἀπειλὴν μετεὶς τὴν ἐπὶ Βαβυλῶνα στράτευσιν διαίρεε τὴν στρατιὴν δίχα , διελὼν δὲ κατέτεινε σχοινοτενέας ὑποδέξας διώρυχας ὀγδώκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν παρ’ ἑκάτερον τὸ χεῖλος τοῦ Γύνδεω τετραμμένας πάντα τρόπον , διατάξας δὲ τὸν στρατὸν ὀρύσσειν ἐκέλευε .
After uttering this threat, he paused in his march against  Babylon Babylon   , and, dividing his army into two parts, drew lines planning out a hundred and eighty canals running every way from either bank of the Gyndes; then he organized his army along the lines and made them dig.


1.189.4
1336
οἷα δὲ ὁμίλου πολλοῦ ἐργαζομένου ἤνετο μὲν τὸ ἔργον , ὅμως μέντοι τὴν θερείην πᾶσαν αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ διέτριψαν ἐργαζόμενοι .
Since a great multitude was at work, it went quickly; but they spent the whole summer there before it was finished.


1.190.1
1337
ὡς δὲ τὸν Γύνδην ποταμὸν ἐτίσατο Κῦρος ἐς τριηκοσίας καὶ ἑξήκοντα διώρυχάς μιν διαλαβών , καὶ τὸ δεύτερον ἔαρ ὑπέλαμπε , οὕτω δὴ ἤλαυνε ἐπὶ τὴν Βαβυλῶνα .
Then at the beginning of the following spring, when Cyrus had punished the Gyndes by dividing it among the three hundred and sixty canals, he marched against Babylon at last.


1.190.1
1338
οἱ δὲ Βαβυλώνιοι ἐκστρατευσάμενοι ἔμενον αὐτόν .
The Babylonians sallied out and awaited him;


1.190.1
1339
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐγένετο ἐλαύνων ἀγχοῦ τῆς πόλιος , συνέβαλόν τε οἱ Βαβυλώνιοι καὶ ἑσσωθέντες τῇ μάχῃ κατειλήθησαν ἐς τὸ ἄστυ .
and when he came near their city in his march, they engaged him, but they were beaten and driven inside the city.


1.190.2
1340
οἷα δὲ ἐξεπιστάμενοι ἔτι πρότερον τὸν Κῦρον οὐκ ἀτρεμίζοντα , ἀλλ’ ὁρέοντες αὐτὸν παντὶ ἔθνεϊ ὁμοίως ἐπιχειρέοντα , προεσάξαντο σιτία ἐτέων κάρτα πολλῶν .
There they had stored provisions enough for very many years, because they knew already that Cyrus was not a man of no ambition, and saw that he attacked all nations alike;


1.190.2
1341
ἐνθαῦτα οὗτοι μὲν λόγον εἶχον τῆς πολιορκίης οὐδένα , Κῦρος δὲ ἀπορίῃσι ἐνείχετο , ἅτε χρόνου τε ἐγγινομένου συχνοῦ ἀνωτέρω τε οὐδὲν τῶν πρηγμάτων προκοπτομένων .
so now they were indifferent to the siege; and Cyrus did not know what to do, being so long delayed and gaining no advantage.


1.191.1
1342
εἴτε δὴ ὦν ἄλλος οἱ ἀπορέοντι ὑπεθήκατο , εἴτε καὶ αὐτὸς ἔμαθε τὸ ποιητέον οἱ ἦν , ἐποίεε δὴ τοιόνδε .
Whether someone advised him in his difficulty, or whether he perceived for himself what to do, I do not know, but he did the following.


1.191.2
1343
τάξας τὴν στρατιὴν ἅπασαν ἐξ ἐμβολῆς τοῦ ποταμοῦ , τῇ ἐς τὴν πόλιν ἐσβάλλει , καὶ ὄπισθε αὖτις τῆς πόλιος τάξας ἑτέρους , τῇ ἐξιεῖ ἐκ τῆς πόλιος ὁ ποταμός , προεῖπε τῷ στρατῷ , ὅταν διαβατὸν τὸ ῥέεθρον ἴδωνται γενόμενον , ἐσιέναι ταύτῃ ἐς τὴν πόλιν .
He posted his army at the place where the river goes into the city, and another part of it behind the city, where the river comes out of the city, and told his men to enter the city by the channel of the Euphrates when they saw it to be fordable.


1.191.2
1344
οὕτω τε δὴ τάξας καὶ κατὰ ταῦτα παραινέσας ἀπήλαυνε αὐτὸς σὺν τῷ ἀχρηίῳ τοῦ στρατοῦ .
Having disposed them and given this command, he himself marched away with those of his army who could not fight;


1.191.3
1345
ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν λίμνην , τά περ ἡ τῶν Βαβυλωνίων βασίλεια ἐποίησε κατά τε τὸν ποταμὸν καὶ κατὰ τὴν λίμνην , ἐποίεε καὶ ὁ Κῦρος ἕτερα τοιαῦτα ·
and when he came to the lake, Cyrus dealt with it and with the river just as had the Babylonian queen:


1.191.3
1346
τὸν γὰρ ποταμὸν διώρυχι ἐσαγαγὼν ἐς τὴν λίμνην ἐοῦσαν ἕλος , τὸ ἀρχαῖον ῥέεθρον διαβατὸν εἶναι ἐποίησε , ὑπονοστήσαντος τοῦ ποταμοῦ .
drawing off the river by a canal into the lake, which was a marsh, he made the stream sink until its former channel could be forded.


1.191.4
1347
γενομένου δὲ τούτου τοιούτου , οἱ Πέρσαι οἵ περ ἐτετάχατο ἐπ’ αὐτῷ τούτῳ κατὰ τὸ ῥέεθρον τοῦ Εὐφρήτεω ποταμοῦ ὑπονενοστηκότος ἀνδρὶ ὡς ἐς μέσον μηρὸν μάλιστά κῃ , κατὰ τοῦτο ἐσήισαν ἐς τὴν Βαβυλῶνα .
When this happened, the Persians who were posted with this objective made their way into  Babylon Babylon    by the channel of the  Euphrates Euphrates   , which had now sunk to a depth of about the middle of a man's thigh.


1.191.5
1348
εἰ μέν νυν προεπύθοντο ἢ ἔμαθον οἱ Βαβυλώνιοι τὸ ἐκ τοῦ Κύρου ποιεύμενον , οἳ δ’ ἂν περιιδόντες τοὺς Πέρσας ἐσελθεῖν ἐς τὴν πόλιν διέφθειραν ἂν κάκιστα ·
Now if the Babylonians had known beforehand or learned what Cyrus was up to, they would have let the Persians enter the city and have destroyed them utterly;


1.191.5
1349
κατακληίσαντες γὰρ ἂν πάσας τὰς ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν πυλίδας ἐχούσας καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐπὶ τὰς αἱμασιὰς ἀναβάντες τὰς παρὰ τὰ χείλεα τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἐληλαμένας , ἔλαβον ἂν σφέας ὡς ἐν κύρτῃ .
for then they would have shut all the gates that opened on the river and mounted the walls that ran along the river banks, and so caught their enemies in a trap.


1.191.6
1350
νῦν δὲ ἐξ ἀπροσδοκήτου σφι παρέστησαν οἱ Πέρσαι .
But as it was, the Persians took them unawares,


1.191.6
1351
ὑπὸ δὲ μεγάθεος τῆς πόλιος , ὡς λέγεται ὑπὸ τῶν ταύτῃ οἰκημένων , τῶν περὶ τὰ ἔσχατα τῆς πόλιος ἑαλωκότων τοὺς τὸ μέσον οἰκέοντας τῶν Βαβυλωνίων οὐ μανθάνειν ἑαλωκότας , ἀλλὰ τυχεῖν γάρ σφι ἐοῦσαν ὁρτήν , χορεύειν τε τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον καὶ ἐν εὐπαθείῃσι εἶναι , ἐς ὃ δὴ καὶ τὸ κάρτα ἐπύθοντο .
and because of the great size of the city (those who dwell there say) those in the outer parts of it were overcome, but the inhabitants of the middle part knew nothing of it; all this time they were dancing and celebrating a holiday which happened to fall then, until they learned the truth only too well.


1.192.1
1352
καὶ Βαβυλὼν μὲν οὕτω τότε πρῶτον ἀραίρητο .
And Babylon, then for the first time, was taken in this way.


1.192.1
1353
τὴν δὲ δύναμιν τῶν Βαβυλωνίων πολλοῖσι μὲν καὶ ἄλλοισι δηλώσω ὅση τις ἐστί , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ τῷδε .
I shall show how great the power of Babylon is by many other means, but particularly by this.


1.192.1
1354
βασιλέι τῷ μεγάλῳ ἐς τροφὴν αὐτοῦ τε καὶ τῆς στρατιῆς διαραίρηται , πάρεξ τοῦ φόρου , γῆ πᾶσα ὅσης ἄρχει ·
All the land that the great King rules is parcelled out to provision him and his army, and pays tribute besides:


1.192.1
1355
δυώδεκα ὦν μηνῶν ἐόντων ἐς τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν τοὺς τέσσερας μῆνας τρέφει μιν ἡ Βαβυλωνίη χωρῇ , τοὺς δὲ ὀκτὼ τῶν μηνῶν ἡ λοιπὴ πᾶσα Ἀσίη .
now the territory of Babylon feeds him for four of the twelve months in the year, the whole of the rest of Asia providing for the other eight.


1.192.2
1356
οὕτω τριτημορίη ἡ Ἀσσυρίη χώρη τῇ δυνάμι τῆς ἄλλης Ἀσίης .
Thus the wealth of Assyria is one third of the entire wealth of Asia.


1.192.2
1357
καὶ ἡ ἀρχὴ τῆς χώρης ταύτης , τὴν οἱ Πέρσαι σατραπηίην καλέουσι , ἐστὶ ἁπασέων τῶν ἀρχέων πολλόν τι κρατίστη , ὅκου Τριτανταίχμῃ τῷ Ἀρταβάζου ἐκ βασιλέος ἔχοντι τὸν νομὸν τοῦτον ἀργυρίου μὲν προσήιε ἑκάστης ἡμέρης ἀρτάβη μεστή .
The governorship of this land, which the Persians call “satrapy,” is by far the most powerful of all the governorships, since the daily income of Tritantaechmes son of Artabazus, who governed this province by the king's will, was an artaba full of silver.


1.192.3
1358
ἡ δὲ ἀρτάβη , μέτρον ἐὸν Περσικόν , χωρέει μεδίμνου Ἀττικοῦ πλέον χοίνιξι τρισὶ Ἀττικῇσι , ἵπποι δὲ οἱ αὐτοῦ ἦσαν ἰδίῃ , πάρεξ τῶν πολεμιστηρίων , οἱ μὲν ἀναβαίνοντες τὰς θηλέας ὀκτακόσιοι , αἱ δὲ βαινόμεναι ἑξακισχίλιαι καὶ μυρίαι ·
(the artaba is a Persian measure, containing more than an Attic medimnus by three Attic choenixes),


1.192.3
1359
ἀνέβαινε γὰρ ἕκαστος τῶν ἐρσένων τούτων εἴκοσι ἵππους .
and besides warhorses he had eight hundred stallions in his stables, and sixteen thousand brood mares, each stallion servicing twenty mares.


1.192.4
1360
κυνῶν δὲ Ἰνδικῶν τοσοῦτο δή τι πλῆθος ἐτρέφετο ὥστε τέσσερες τῶν ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ κῶμαι μεγάλαι , τῶν ἄλλων ἐοῦσαι ἀτελέες , τοῖσι κυσὶ προσετετάχατο σιτία παρέχειν .
Moreover he kept so great a number of Indian dogs that four great villages of the plain were appointed to provide food for the dogs and exempted from all other burdens.


1.192.4
1361
τοιαῦτα μὲν τῷ ἄρχοντι τῆς Βαβυλῶνος ὑπῆρχε ἐόντα .
Such were the riches of the governor of Babylon.


1.193.1
1362
ἡ δὲ γῆ τῶν Ἀσσυρίων ὕεται μὲν ὀλίγῳ , καὶ τὸ ἐκτρέφον τὴν ῥίζαν τοῦ σίτου ἐστὶ τοῦτο ·
There is little rain in Assyria.


1.193.1
1363
ἀρδόμενον μέντοι ἐκ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἁδρύνεταί τε τὸ λήιον καὶ παραγίνεται ὁ σῖτος , οὐ κατὰ περ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ αὐτοῦ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἀναβαίνοντος ἐς τὰς ἀρούρας , ἀλλὰ χερσί τε καὶ κηλωνηίοισι ἀρδόμενος .
This nourishes the roots of the grain; but it is irrigation from the river that ripens the crop and brings the grain to fullness. In Egypt, the river itself rises and floods the fields; in Assyria, they are watered by hand and by swinging beams.


1.193.2
1364
ἡ γὰρ Βαβυλωνίη χώρη πᾶσα , κατά περ ἡ Αἰγυπτίη , κατατέτμηται ἐς διώρυχας ·
For the whole land of Babylon, like Egypt, is cut across by canals.


1.193.2
1365
καὶ ἡ μεγίστη τῶν διωρύχων ἐστὶ νηυσιπέρητος , πρὸς ἥλιον τετραμμένη τὸν χειμερινόν , ἐσέχει δὲ ἐς ἄλλον ποταμὸν ἐκ τοῦ Εὐφρήτεω , ἐς τὸν Τίγρην , παρ’ ὃν Νίνος πόλις οἴκητο .
The greatest of these is navigable: it runs towards where the sun rises in winter, from the Euphrates to another river, the Tigris, on which stood the city of Nineveh.


1.193.2
1366
ἔστι δὲ χωρέων αὕτη πασέων μακρῷ ἀρίστη τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν Δήμητρος καρπὸν ἐκφέρειν G? τὰ γὰρ δὴ ἄλλα δένδρεα οὐδὲ πειρᾶται ἀρχὴν φέρειν , οὔτε συκέην οὔτε ἄμπελον οὔτε ἐλαίην .
This land is by far the most fertile in grain which we know.


1.193.3
1367
τὸν δὲ τῆς Δήμητρος καρπὸν ὧδε ἀγαθὴ ἐκφέρειν ἐστὶ ὥστε ἐπὶ διηκόσια μὲν τὸ παράπαν ἀποδιδοῖ , ἐπειδὰν δὲ ἄριστα αὐτὴ ἑωυτῆς ἐνείκῃ , ἐπὶ τριηκόσια ἐκφέρει .
It does not even try to bear trees, fig, vine, or olive,


1.193.3
1368
τὰ δὲ φύλλα αὐτόθι τῶν τε πυρῶν καὶ τῶν κριθέων τὸ πλάτος γίνεται τεσσέρων εὐπετέως δακτύλων .
but Demeter's grain is so abundant there that it yields for the most part two hundred fold, and even three hundred fold when the harvest is best. The blades of the wheat and barley there are easily four fingers broad;


1.193.4
1369
ἐκ δὲ κέγχρου καὶ σησάμου ὅσον τι δένδρον μέγαθος γίνεται , ἐξεπιστάμενος μνήμην οὐ ποιήσομαι , εὖ εἰδὼς ὅτι τοῖσι μὴ ἀπιγμένοισι ἐς τὴν Βαβυλωνίην χώρην καὶ τὰ εἰρημένα καρπῶν ἐχόμενα ἐς ἀπιστίην πολλὴν ἀπῖκται .
and for millet and sesame, I will not say to what height they grow, though it is known to me;


1.193.4
1370
χρέωνται δὲ οὐδὲν ἐλαίῳ ἀλλ’ ἢ ἐκ τῶν σησάμων ποιεῦντες .
for I am well aware that even what I have said regarding grain is wholly disbelieved by those who have never visited Babylonia.


1.193.4
1371
εἰσὶ δέ σφι φοίνικες πεφυκότες ἀνὰ πᾶν τὸ πεδίον , οἱ πλεῦνες αὐτῶν καρποφόροι , ἐκ τῶν καὶ σιτία καὶ οἶνον καὶ μέλι ποιεῦνται ·
They use no oil except what they make from sesame. There are palm trees there growing all over the plain, most of them yielding fruit, from which food is made and wine and honey.


1.193.5
1372
τοὺς συκέων τρόπον θεραπεύουσι τά τε ἄλλα καὶ φοινίκων τοὺς ἔρσενας Ἕλληνὲς καλέουσι , τούτων τὸν καρπὸν περιδέουσι τῇσι βαλανηφόροισι τὸν φοινίκων , ἵνα πεπαίνῃ τε σφι ὁ ψὴν τὴν βάλανον ἐσδύνων καὶ μὴ ἀπορρέῃ ὁ καρπὸς τοῦ φοίνικος ·
The Assyrians tend these like figs, and chiefly in this respect,


1.193.5
1373
ψῆνας γὰρ δὴ φέρουσι ἐν τῷ καρπῷ οἱ ἔρσενες κατά περ δὴ οἱ ὄλυνθοι .
that they tie the fruit of the palm called male by the Greeks to the date-bearing palm, so that the gall-fly may enter the dates and cause them to ripen, and that the fruit of the palm may not fall; for the male palms, like unripened figs, have gall-flies in their fruit.


1.194.1
1374
τὸ δὲ ἁπάντων θῶμα μέγιστόν μοι ἐστὶ τῶν ταύτῃ μετά γε αὐτὴν τὴν πόλιν , ἔρχομαι φράσων ·
I am going to indicate what seems to me to be the most marvellous thing in the country, next to the city itself.


1.194.1
1375
τὰ πλοῖα αὐτοῖσι ἐστὶ τὰ κατὰ τὸν ποταμὸν πορευόμενα ἐς τὴν Βαβυλῶνα , ἐόντα κυκλοτερέα , πάντα σκύτινα .
Their boats which ply the river and go to Babylon are all of skins, and round.


1.194.2
1376
ἐπεὰν γὰρ ἐν τοῖσι Ἀρμενίοισι τοῖσι κατύπερθε Ἀσσυρίων οἰκημένοισι νομέας ἰτέης ταμόμενοι ποιήσωνται , περιτείνουσι τούτοισι διφθέρας στεγαστρίδας ἔξωθεν ἐδάφεος τρόπον , οὔτε πρύμνην ἀποκρίνοντες οὔτε πρῴρην συνάγοντες , ἀλλ’ ἀσπίδος τρόπον κυκλοτερέα ποιήσαντες καὶ καλάμης πλήσαντες πᾶν τὸ πλοῖον τοῦτο ἀπιεῖσι κατὰ τὸν ποταμὸν φέρεσθαι , φορτίων πλήσαντες ·
They make these in Armenia, higher up the stream than Assyria.


1.194.2
1377
μάλιστα δὲ βίκους φοινικηίους κατάγουσι οἴνου πλέους .
First they cut frames of willow, then they stretch hides over these for a covering, making as it were a hold; they neither broaden the stern nor narrow the prow, but the boat is round, like a shield. They then fill it with reeds and send it floating down the river with a cargo; and it is for the most part palm wood casks of wine that they carry down.


1.194.3
1378
ἰθύνεται δὲ ὑπό τε δύο πλήκτρων καὶ δύο ἀνδρῶν ὀρθῶν ἑστεώτων , καὶ ὃ μὲν ἔσω ἕλκει τὸ πλῆκτρον ὁ δὲ ἔξω ὠθέει .
Two men standing upright steer the boat, each with a paddle, one drawing it to him, the other thrusting it from him.


1.194.3
1379
ποιέεται δὲ καὶ κάρτα μεγάλα ταῦτα τὰ πλοῖα καὶ ἐλάσσω ·
These boats are of all sizes, some small, some very large;


1.194.3
1380
τὰ δὲ μέγιστα αὐτῶν καὶ πεντακισχιλίων ταλάντων γόμον ἔχει .
the largest of them are of as much as five thousand talents burden.


1.194.3
1381
ἐν ἑκάστῳ δὲ πλοίῳ ὄνος ζωὸς ἔνεστι , ἐν δὲ τοῖσι μέζοσι πλεῦνες .
There is a live ass in each boat, or more than one in the larger.


1.194.4
1382
ἐπεὰν ὦν ἀπίκωνται πλέοντες ἐς τὴν Βαβυλῶνα καὶ διαθέωνται τὸν φόρτον , νομέας μὲν τοῦ πλοίου καὶ τὴν καλάμην πᾶσαν ἀπ’ ὦν ἐκήρυξαν , τὰς δὲ διφθέρας ἐπισάξαντες ἐπὶ τοὺς ὄνους ἀπελαύνουσι ἐς τοὺς Ἀρμενίους .
So when they have floated down to  Babylon Babylon    and disposed of their cargo, they sell the framework of the boat and all the reeds; the hides are set on the backs of asses, which are then driven back to  Armenia Armenia   ,


1.194.5
1383
ἀνὰ τὸν ποταμὸν γὰρ δὴ οὐκ οἷά τε ἐστὶ πλέειν οὐδενὶ τρόπῳ ὑπὸ τάχεος τοῦ ποταμοῦ ·
for it is not by any means possible to go upstream by water, because of the swiftness of the current;


1.194.5
1384
διὰ γὰρ ταῦτα καὶ οὐκ ἐκ ξύλων ποιεῦνται τὰ πλοῖα ἀλλ’ ἐκ διφθερέων .
it is for this reason that they make their boats of hides and not of wood.


1.194.5
1385
ἐπεὰν δὲ τοὺς ὄνους ἐλαύνοντες ἀπίκωνται ὀπίσω ἐς τοὺς Ἀρμενίους , ἄλλα τρόπῳ τῷ αὐτῷ ποιεῦνται πλοῖα .
When they have driven their asses back into Armenia, they make more boats in the same way.


1.195.1
1386
τὰ μὲν δὴ πλοῖα αὐτοῖσι ἐστὶ τοιαῦτα ·
Such then are their boats.


1.195.1
1387
ἐσθῆτι δὲ τοιῇδε χρέωνται , κιθῶνι ποδηνεκέι λινέῳ , καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦτον ἄλλον εἰρίνεον κιθῶνα ἐπενδύνει καὶ χλανίδιον λευκὸν περιβαλλόμενος , ὑποδήματα ἔχων ἐπιχώρια , παραπλήσια τῇσι Βοιωτίῃσι ἐμβάσι .
For clothing, they wear a linen tunic, reaching to the feet; over this the Babylonian puts on another tunic, of wool, and wraps himself in a white mantle; he wears the shoes of his country, which are like Boeotian sandals.


1.195.1
1388
κομῶντες δὲ τὰς κεφαλὰς μίτρῃσι ἀναδέονται , μεμυρισμένοι πᾶν τὸ σῶμα .
Their hair is worn long, and covered by caps; the whole body is perfumed.


1.195.2
1389
σφρηγῖδα δὲ ἕκαστος ἔχει καὶ σκῆπτρον χειροποίητον ·
Every man has a seal and a carved staff,


1.195.2
1390
ἐπ’ ἑκάστῳ δὲ σκήπτρῳ ἔπεστι πεποιημένον ἢ μῆλον ἢ ῥόδον ἢ κρίνον ἢ αἰετὸς ἢ ἄλλο τι ·
and on every staff is some image, such as that of an apple or a rose or a lily or an eagle:


1.195.2
1391
ἄνευ γὰρ ἐπισήμου οὔ σφι νόμος ἐστὶ ἔχειν σκῆπτρον .
no one carries a staff without an image.


1.196.1
1392
αὕτη μὲν δή σφι ἄρτισις περὶ τὸ σῶμα ἐστί ·
This is the equipment of their persons.


1.196.1
1393
νόμοι δὲ αὐτοῖσι ὧδε κατεστᾶσι , ὁ μὲν σοφώτατος ὅδε κατὰ γνώμην τὴν ἡμετέρην , τῷ καὶ Ἰλλυριῶν Ἐνετοὺς πυνθάνομαι χρᾶσθαι .
I will now speak of their established customs. The wisest of these, in our judgment, is one which I have learned by inquiry is also a custom of the Eneti in Illyria.


1.196.1
1394
κατὰ κώμας ἑκάστας ἅπαξ τοῦ ἔτεος ἑκάστου ἐποιέετο τάδε ·
It is this: once a year in every village all the maidens as they attained marriageable age were collected and brought together into one place, with a crowd of men standing around.


1.196.1
1395
ὡς ἂν αἱ παρθένοι γενοίατο γάμων ὡραῖαι , ταύτας ὅκως συναγάγοιεν πάσας , ἐς ἓν χωρίον ἐσάγεσκον ἁλέας , πέριξ δὲ αὐτὰς ἵστατο ὅμιλος ἀνδρῶν , ἀνιστὰς δὲ κατὰ μίαν ἑκάστην κῆρυξ πωλέεσκε , πρῶτα μὲν τὴν εὐειδεστάτην ἐκ πασέων ·
Then a crier would display and offer them for sale one by one, first the fairest of all;


1.196.2
1396
μετὰ δέ , ὅκως αὕτη εὑροῦσα πολλὸν χρυσίον πρηθείη , ἄλλην ἂν ἐκήρυσσε ἣ μετ’ ἐκείνην ἔσκε εὐειδεστάτη ·
and then, when she had fetched a great price, he put up for sale the next most attractive.


1.196.2
1397
ἐπωλέοντο δὲ ἐπὶ συνοικήσι .
All the maidens were sold as lawful wives.


1.196.2
1398
ὅσοι μὲν δὴ ἔσκον εὐδαίμονες τῶν Βαβυλωνίων ἐπίγαμοι , ὑπερβάλλοντες ἀλλήλους ἐξωνέοντο τὰς καλλιστευούσας ·
Rich men of Assyria who desired to marry would outbid each other for the fairest;


1.196.2
1399
ὅσοι δὲ τοῦ δήμου ἔσκον ἐπίγαμοι , οὗτοι δὲ εἴδεος μὲν οὐδὲν ἐδέοντο χρηστοῦ , οἳ δ’ ἂν χρήματά τε καὶ αἰσχίονας παρθένους ἐλάμβανον .
the ordinary people, who desired to marry and had no use for beauty, could take the ugly ones and money besides;


1.196.3
1400
ὡς γὰρ δὴ διεξέλθοι ὁ κῆρυξ πωλέων τὰς εὐειδεστάτας τῶν παρθένων ἀνίστη ἂν τὴν ἀμορφεστάτην , ἢ εἴ τις αὐτέων ἔμπηρος εἴη , καὶ ταύτην ἂν ἐκήρυσσε , ὅστις θέλοι ἐλάχιστον χρυσίον λαβὼν συνοικέειν αὐτῇ , ἐς ὃ τῷ τὸ ἐλάχιστον ὑπισταμένῳ προσέκειτο .
for when the crier had sold all the most attractive, he would put up the one that was least beautiful, or crippled, and offer her to whoever would take her to wife for the least amount, until she fell to one who promised to accept least;


1.196.3
1401
τὸ δὲ ἂν χρυσίον ἐγίνετο ἀπὸ τῶν εὐειδέων παρθένων καὶ οὕτω αἱ εὔμορφοι τὰς ἀμόρφους καὶ ἐμπήρους ἐξεδίδοσαν .
the money came from the sale of the attractive ones, who thus paid the dowry of the ugly and the crippled.


1.196.3
1402
ἐκδοῦναι δὲ τὴν ἑωυτοῦ θυγατέρα ὅτεῳ βούλοιτο ἕκαστος οὐκ ἐξῆν , οὐδὲ ἄνευ ἐγγυητέω ἀπάγεσθαι τὴν παρθένον πριάμενον , ἀλλ’ ἐγγυητὰς χρῆν καταστήσαντα ἡ μὲν συνοικήσειν αὐτῇ , οὕτω ἀπάγεσθαι .
But a man could not give his daughter in marriage to whomever he liked, nor could one that bought a girl take her away without giving security that he would in fact make her his wife.


1.196.4
1403
εἰ δὲ μὴ συμφεροίατο , ἀποφέρειν τὸ χρυσίον ἔκειτο νόμος .
And if the couple could not agree, it was a law that the money be returned.


1.196.4
1404
ἐξῆν δὲ καὶ ἐξ ἄλλης ἐλθόντα κώμης τὸν βουλόμενον ὠνέεσθαι .
Men might also come from other villages to buy if they so desired.


1.196.5
1405
ὁ μέν νυν κάλλιστος νόμος οὗτός σφι ἦν , οὐ μέντοι νῦν γε διατελέει ἐών , ἄλλο δέ τι ἐξευρήκασι νεωστὶ γενέσθαι ἵνα μὴ ἀδικοῖεν αὐτὰς μηδ’ εἰς ἑτέραν πόλιν ἄγωνται ·
This, then, was their best custom; but it does not continue at this time; they have invented a new one lately [so that the women not be wronged or taken to another city];


1.196.5
1406
ἐπείτε γὰρ ἁλόντες ἐκακώθησαν καὶ οἰκοφθορήθησαν , πᾶς τις τοῦ δήμου βίου σπανίζων καταπορνεύει τὰ θήλεα τέκνα .
since the conquest of Babylon made them afflicted and poor, everyone of the people that lacks a livelihood prostitutes his daughters.


1.197.1
1407
δεύτερος δὲ σοφίῃ ὅδε ἄλλος σφι νόμος κατέστηκε ·
I come now to the next wisest of their customs.


1.197.1
1408
τοὺς κάμνοντας ἐς τὴν ἀγορὴν ἐκφορέουσι ·
They carry the sick into the market-place.


1.197.1
1409
οὐ γὰρ δὴ χρέωνται ἰητροῖσι .
They have no use for physicians.


1.197.1
1410
προσιόντες ὦν πρὸς τὸν κάμνοντα συμβουλεύουσι περὶ τῆς νούσου , εἴ τις καὶ αὐτὸς τοιοῦτο ἔπαθε ὁκοῖον ἂν ἔχῃ ὁ κάμνων ἢ ἄλλον εἶδε παθόντα , ταῦτα προσιόντες συμβουλεύουσι καὶ παραινέουσι ἅσσα αὐτὸς ποιήσας ἐξέφυγε ὁμοίην νοῦσον ἢ ἄλλον εἶδε ἐκφυγόντα .
Then those who have been afflicted themselves by the same illness as the sick man's, or seen others in like case, come near and advise him about his disease and comfort him, telling him by what means they have themselves recovered from it or seen others recover.


1.197.1
1411
σιγῇ δὲ παρεξελθεῖν τὸν κάμνοντα οὔ σφι ἔξεστι , πρὶν ἂν ἐπείρηται ἥντινα νοῦσον ἔχει .
No one may pass by the sick man without speaking and asking after his sickness.


1.198.1
1412
ταφαὶ δέ σφι ἐν μέλιτι , θρῆνοι δὲ παραπλήσιοι τοῖσι ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ .
The dead are embalmed in honey for burial, and their dirges are like the dirges of Egypt.


1.198.1
1413
ὁσάκις δ’ ἂν μιχθῇ γυναικὶ τῇ ἑωυτοῦ ἀνὴρ Βαβυλώνιος , περὶ θυμίημα καταγιζόμενον ἵζει , ἑτέρωθι δὲ ἡ γυνὴ τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο ποιέει , ὄρθρου δὲ γενομένου λοῦνται καὶ ἀμφότεροι ·
Whenever a Babylonian has had intercourse with his wife, they both sit before a burnt offering of incense, and at dawn they wash themselves;


1.198.1
1414
ἄγγεος γὰρ οὐδενὸς ἅψονται πρὶν ἂν λούσωνται .
they will touch no vessel before this is done.


1.198.1
1415
τ- αὐτὰ δὲ ταῦτα καὶ Ἀράβιοι ποιεῦσι .
This is the custom in Arabia also.


1.199.1
1416
ὁ δὲ δὴ αἴσχιστος τῶν νόμων ἐστὶ τοῖσι Βαβυλωνίοισι ὅδε ·
The foulest Babylonian custom is the following.


1.199.1
1417
δεῖ πᾶσαν γυναῖκα ἐπιχωρίην ἱζομένην ἐς ἱρὸν Ἀφροδίτης ἅπαξ ἐν τῇ ζόῃ μιχθῆναι ἀνδρὶ ξείνῳ .
It is necessary for every woman of the land to sit in the temple of Aphrodite and have intercourse with some stranger once in her life.


1.199.1
1418
πολλαὶ δὲ καὶ οὐκ ἀξιούμεναι ἀναμίσγεσθαι τῇσι ἄλλῃσι , οἷα πλούτῳ ὑπερφρονέουσαι , ἐπὶ ζευγέων ἐν καμάρῃσι ἐλάσασαι πρὸς τὸ ἱρὸν ἑστᾶσι ·
Many women who are rich and proud and disdain to mingle with the rest, drive to the temple in covered carriages drawn by teams.


1.199.1
1419
θεραπηίη δέ σφι ὄπισθε ἕπεται πολλή .
They stand there with a great retinue of attendants.


1.199.2
1420
αἱ δὲ πλεῦνες ποιεῦσι ὧδε ·
But most do the following.


1.199.2
1421
ἐν τεμένεϊ Ἀφροδίτης κατέαται στέφανον περὶ τῇσι κεφαλῇσι ἔχουσαι θώμιγγος πολλαὶ γυναῖκες ·
They sit down in the sacred plot of Aphrodite, with crowns of cord on their heads;


1.199.2
1422
αἳ μὲν γὰρ προσέρχονται , αἳ δὲ ἀπέρχονται .
there is a great multitude of women coming and going;


1.199.2
1423
σχοινοτενέες δὲ διέξοδοι πάντα τρόπον ὁδῶν ἔχουσι διὰ τῶν γυναικῶν , δι’ ὧν οἱ ξεῖνοι διεξιόντες ἐκλέγονται ·
passages marked by line run every way through the crowd, by which the men pass and make their choice.


1.199.3
1424
ἔνθα ἐπεὰν ἵζηται γυνή , οὐ πρότερον ἀπαλλάσσεται ἐς τὰ οἰκία ἤ τίς οἱ ξείνων ἀργύριον ἐμβαλὼν ἐς τὰ γούνατα μιχθῇ ἔξω τοῦ ἱροῦ ·
Once a woman has taken her place there, she does not go away to her home before some stranger has cast money into her lap, and had intercourse with her outside the temple;


1.199.3
1425
ἐμβαλόντα δὲ δεῖ εἰπεῖν τοσόνδε ·
but while he casts the money, he must say,


1.199.3
1426
" ἐπικαλέω τοι τὴν θεὸν Μύλιττα " .
“I invite you in the name of Mylitta”


1.199.3
1427
Μύλιττα δὲ καλέουσι τὴν Ἀφροδίτην Ἀσσύριοι .
(that is the Assyrian name for Aphrodite).


1.199.4
1428
τὸ δὲ ἀργύριον μέγαθος ἐστὶ ὅσον ὦν ·
It does not matter what sum the money is;


1.199.4
1429
οὐ γὰρ μὴ ἀπώσηται ·
the woman will never refuse,


1.199.4
1430
οὐ γάρ οἱ θέμις ἐστί ·
for that would be a sin,


1.199.4
1431
γίνεται γὰρ ἱρὸν τοῦτο τὸ ἀργύριον .
the money being by this act made sacred.


1.199.4
1432
τῷ δὲ πρώτῳ ἐμβαλόντι ἕπεται οὐδὲ ἀποδοκιμᾷ οὐδένα .
So she follows the first man who casts it and rejects no one.


1.199.4
1433
ἐπεὰν δὲ μιχθῇ , ἀποσιωσαμένη τῇ θεῷ ἀπαλλάσσεται ἐς τὰ οἰκία , καὶ τ- ἀπὸ τούτου οὐκ οὕτω μέγα τί οἱ δώσεις ὥς μιν λάμψεαι .
After their intercourse, having discharged her sacred duty to the goddess, she goes away to her home; and thereafter there is no bribe however great that will get her.


1.199.5
1434
ὅσσαι μέν νυν εἴδεός τε ἐπαμμέναι εἰσὶ καὶ μεγάθεος , ταχὺ ἀπαλλάσσονται , ὅσαι δὲ ἄμορφοι αὐτέων εἰσί , χρόνον πολλὸν προσμένουσι οὐ δυνάμεναι τὸν νόμον ἐκπλῆσαι ·
So then the women that are fair and tall are soon free to depart,


1.199.5
1435
καὶ γὰρ τριέτεα καὶ τετραέτεα μετεξέτεραι χρόνον μένουσι .
but the uncomely have long to wait because they cannot fulfill the law; for some of them remain for three years, or four.


1.199.5
1436
ἐνιαχῇ δὲ καὶ τῆς Κύπρου ἐστὶ παραπλήσιος τούτῳ νόμος .
There is a custom like this in some parts of Cyprus.


1.200.1
1437
νόμοι μὲν δὴ τοῖσι Βαβυλωνίοισι οὗτοι κατεστᾶσι ·
These are established customs among the Babylonians.


1.200.1
1438
εἰσὶ δὲ αὐτῶν πατριαὶ τρεῖς αἳ οὐδὲν ἄλλο σιτέονται εἰ μὴ ἰχθὺς μοῦνον , τοὺς ἐπείτε ἂν θηρεύσαντες αὐήνωσι πρὸς ἥλιον , ποιεῦσι τάδε ·
Furthermore, there are three tribes in the country that eat nothing but fish, which they catch and dry in the sun;


1.200.1
1439
ἐσβάλλουσι ἐς ὅλμον καὶ λεήναντες ὑπέροισι σῶσι διὰ σινδόνος , καὶ ὃς μὲν ἂν βούληται αὐτῶν ἅτε μᾶζαν μαξάμενος ἔχει , ὁ δὲ ἄρτου τρόπον ὀπτήσας .
then, after throwing it into a mortar, they pound it with pestles and strain everything through linen. Then whoever desires kneads as it were a cake of it and eats it; others bake it like bread.


1.201.1
1440
ὡς δὲ τῷ Κύρῳ καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἔθνος κατέργαστο , ἐπεθύμησε Μασσαγέτας ὑπ’ ἑωυτῷ ποιήσασθαι .
When Cyrus had conquered this nation, too, he wanted to subject the Massagetae.


1.201.1
1441
τὸ δὲ ἔθνος τοῦτο καὶ μέγα λέγεται εἶναι καὶ ἄλκιμον , οἰκημένον δὲ πρὸς ἠῶ τε καὶ ἡλίου ἀνατολάς , πέρην τοῦ Ἀράξεω ποταμοῦ , ἀντίον δὲ Ἰσσηδόνων ἀνδρῶν .
These are said to be a great and powerful people dwelling towards the east and the sunrise, beyond the Araxes and opposite the Issedones;


1.201.1
1442
εἰσὶ δὲ οἵτινες καὶ Σκυθικὸν λέγουσι τοῦτο τὸ ἔθνος εἶναι .
and some say that they are a Scythian people.


1.202.1
1443
ὁ δὲ Ἀράξης λέγεται καὶ μέζων καὶ ἐλάσσων εἶναι τοῦ Ἴστρου ·
The Araxes is said by some to be greater and by some to be less than the Ister.


1.202.1
1444
νήσους δὲ ἐν αὐτῷ Λέσβῳ μεγάθεα παραπλησίας συχνάς φασι εἶναι , ἐν δὲ αὐτῇσι ἀνθρώπους οἳ σιτέονται μὲν ῥίζας τὸ θέρος ὀρύσσοντες παντοίας ·
It is reported that there are many islands in it as big as Lesbos, and men on them who in summer live on roots of all kinds that they dig up,


1.202.1
1445
καρποὺς δὲ ἀπὸ δενδρέων ἐξευρημένους σφι ἐς φορβὴν κατατίθεσθαι ὡραίους , καὶ τούτους σιτέεσθαι τὴν χειμερινήν .
and in winter on fruit that they have got from trees when it was ripe and stored for food;


1.202.2
1446
ἄλλα δέ σφι ἐξευρῆσθαι δένδρεα καρποὺς τοιούσδε τινὰς φέροντα , τοὺς ἐπείτε ἂν ἐς τ- αὐτὸ συνέλθωσι κατὰ εἴλας καὶ πῦρ ἀνακαύσωνται κύκλῳ περιιζομένους ἐπιβάλλειν ἐπὶ τὸ πῦρ , ὀσφραινομένους δὲ καταγιζομένου τοῦ καρποῦ τοῦ ἐπιβαλλομένου μεθύσκεσθαι τῇ ὀσμῇ κατά περ Ἕλληνας τῷ οἴνῳ πλεῦνος δὲ ἐπιβαλλομένου τοῦ καρποῦ μᾶλλον μεθύσκεσθαι , ἐς ὃ ἐς ὄρχησίν τε ἀνίστασθαι καὶ ἐς ἀοιδὴν ἀπικνέεσθαι .
and they know (it is said) of trees bearing a fruit whose effect is this:


1.202.2
1447
τούτων μὲν αὕτη λέγεται δίαιτᾳ εἶναι .
gathering in groups and kindling a fire, the people sit around it and throw the fruit into the flames; then the fumes of it as it burns make them drunk as the Greeks are with wine, and more and more drunk as more fruit is thrown on the fire, until at last they rise up to dance and even sing. Such is said to be their way of life.


1.202.3
1448
ὁ δὲ Ἀράξης ποταμὸς ῥέει μὲν ἐκ Ματιηνῶν , ὅθεν περ ὁ Γύνδης τὸν ἐς τὰς διώρυχας τὰς ἑξήκοντά τε καὶ τριηκοσίας διέλαβε ὁ Κῦρος , στόμασι δὲ ἐξερεύγεται τεσσεράκοντα , τῶν τὰ πάντα πλὴν ἑνὸς ἐς ἕλεά τε καὶ τενάγεα ἐκδιδοῖ ·
The Araxes flows from the country of the Matieni (as does the Gyndes, which Cyrus divided into the three hundred and sixty channels) and empties itself through forty mouths,


1.202.3
1449
ἐν τοῖσι ἀνθρώπους κατοικῆσθαι λέγουσι ἰχθῦς ὠμοὺς σιτεομένους , ἐσθῆτι δὲ νομίζοντας χρᾶσθαι φωκέων δέρμασι .
of which all except one issue into bogs and swamps, where men are said to live whose food is raw fish, and their customary dress sealskins.


1.202.4
1450
τὸ δὲ ἓν τῶν στομάτων τοῦ Ἀράξεω ῥέει διὰ καθαροῦ ἐς τὴν Κασπίην θάλασσαν .
The one remaining stream of the Araxes flows in a clear channel into the  Caspian Caspian sea   . This is a sea by itself, not joined to the other sea. For that on which the Greeks sail, and the sea beyond the pillars of Heracles, which they call  Atlantic Atlantic   , and the  Red Red Sea   , are all one:


1.203.1
1451
ἡ δὲ Κασπίη θάλασσα ἐστὶ ἐπ’ ἑωυτῆς , οὐ συμμίσγουσα τῇ ἑτέρῃ θαλάσσῃ .
The Caspian Sea is separate, not mixing with the other sea.


1.203.1
1452
τὴν μὲν γὰρ Ἕλληνὲς ναυτίλλονται πᾶσα καὶ ἡ ἔξω στηλέων θάλασσα ἡ Ἀτλαντὶς καλεομένη καὶ ἡ Ἐρυθρὴ μία ἐοῦσα τυγχάνει .
For all the sea navigated by Greeks and the sea beyond the pillars called the Atlantic and the Red Sea happen to be one.


1.203.1
1453
ἡ δὲ Κασπίη ἐστὶ ἑτέρη ἐπ’ ἑωυτῆς , ἐοῦσα μῆκος μὲν πλόου εἰρεσίῃ χρεωμένῳ πεντεκαίδεκα ἡμερέων , εὖρος δέ , τῇ εὐρυτάτη ἐστὶ αὐτὴ ἑωυτῆς , ὀκτὼ ἡμερέων .
But the Caspian is different and separate, its length being fifteen days’ journey for a ship rowed by oars, and its breadth, where it is broadest, an eight days’ journey.


1.203.1
1454
καὶ τὰ μὲν πρὸς τὴν ἑσπέρην φέροντα τῆς θαλάσσης ταύτης ὁ Καύκασος παρατείνει , ἐὸν ὀρέων καὶ πλήθεϊ μέγιστον καὶ μεγάθεϊ ὑψηλότατον .
Along its western shore stretches the range of the Caucasus, which has more and higher peaks than any other range.


1.203.1
1455
ἔθνεα δὲ ἀνθρώπων πολλὰ καὶ παντοῖα ἐν ἑωυτῷ ἔχει ὁ Καύκασος , τὰ πολλὰ πάντα ἀπ’ ὕλης ἀγρίης ζώοντα ·
Many and all kinds of nations dwell in the Caucasus, and the most of them live on the fruits of the forest.


1.203.2
1456
ἐν τοῖσι καὶ δένδρεα φύλλα τοιῆσδε ἰδέης παρεχόμενα εἶναι λέγεται , τὰ τρίβοντάς τε καὶ παραμίσγοντας ὕδωρ ζῷα ἑωυτοῖσι ἐς τὴν ἐσθῆτα ἐγγράφειν ·
Here, it is said, are trees growing leaves that men crush and mix with water and use for painting figures on their clothing;


1.203.2
1457
τὰ δὲ ζῷα οὐκ ἐκπλύνεσθαι , ἀλλὰ συγκαταγηράσκειν τῷ ἄλλῳ εἰρίῳ κατὰ περ ἐνυφανθέντα ἀρχήν .
these figures cannot be washed out, but last as long as the wool, as if they had been woven into it from the first.


1.203.2
1458
μῖξιν δὲ τούτων τῶν ἀνθρώπων εἶναι ἐμφανέα κατὰ περ τοῖσι προβάτοισι .
Men and women here (they say) have intercourse openly, like beasts of the flock.


1.204.1
1459
τὰ μὲν δὴ πρὸς ἑσπέρην τῆς θαλάσσης ταύτης τῆς Κασπίης καλεομένης ὁ Καύκασος ἀπέργει , τὰ δὲ πρὸς ἠῶ τε καὶ ἥλιον ἀνατέλλοντα πεδίον ἐκδέκεται πλῆθος ἄπειρον ἐς ἄποψιν .
The Caspian is hemmed in to the west by the Caucasus: towards the east and the sunrise there stretches from its shores a boundless plain as far as the eye can see.


1.204.1
1460
τοῦ ὦν δὴ πεδίου τούτου τοῦ μεγάλου οὐκ ἐλαχίστην μοῖραν μετέχουσι οἱ Μασσαγέται , ἐπ’ οὓς ὁ Κῦρος ἔσχε προθυμίην στρατεύσασθαι .
The greater part of this wide plain is the country of the Massagetae, against whom Cyrus was eager to lead his army.


1.204.2
1461
πολλά τε γάρ μιν καὶ μεγάλα τὰ ἐπαείροντα καὶ ἐποτρύνοντα ἦν , πρῶτον μὲν ἡ γένεσις , τὸ δοκέειν πλέον τι εἶναι ἀνθρώπου , δευτέρα δὲ ἡ εὐτυχίη ἡ κατὰ τοὺς πολέμους γενομένη ·
For there were many weighty reasons that impelled and encouraged him to do so: first, his birth, because of which he seemed to be something more than mortal;


1.204.2
1462
ὅκῃ γὰρ ἰθύσειε στρατεύεσθαι Κῦρος , ἀμήχανον ἦν ἐκεῖνο τὸ ἔθνος διαφυγεῖν .
and next, his victories in his wars: for no nation that Cyrus undertook to attack could escape from him.


1.205.1
1463
ἦν δὲ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀποθανόντος γυνὴ τῶν Μασσαγετέων βασίλεια .
Now at this time the Massagetae were ruled by a queen whose husband was dead.


1.205.1
1464
Τόμυρίς οἱ ἦν οὔνομα .
Her name was Tomyris.


1.205.1
1465
ταύτην πέμπων ὁ Κῦρος ἐμνᾶτο τῷ λόγῳ θέλων γυναῖκα ἣν ἔχειν .
Cyrus sent a message with a pretence of wanting her for his wife,


1.205.1
1466
ἡ δὲ Τόμυρις συνιεῖσα οὐκ αὐτήν μιν μνώμενον ἀλλὰ τὴν Μασαγετέων βασιληίην , ἀπείπατο τὴν πρόσοδον .
but Tomyris would have none of his advances, well understanding that he wanted not her but the kingdom of the Massagetae.


1.205.2
1467
Κῦρος δὲ μετὰ τοῦτο , ὥς οἱ δόλῳ οὐ προεχώρεε , ἐλάσας ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀράξεα ἐποιέετο ἐκ τοῦ ἐμφανέος ἐπὶ τοὺς Μασσαγέτας στρατηίην , γεφύρας τε ζευγνύων ἐπὶ τοῦ ποταμοῦ διάβασιν τῷ στρατῷ , καὶ πύργους ἐπὶ πλοίων τῶν διαπορθμευόντων τὸν ποταμὸν οἰκοδομεόμενος .
So when guile was of no avail, Cyrus marched to the Araxes and openly prepared to attack the Massagetae; he bridged the river for his army to cross, and built towers on the pontoons bridging the river.


1.206.1
1468
ἔχοντι δέ οἱ τοῦτον τὸν πόνον πέμψασα ἡ Τόμυρις κήρυκα ἔλεγε τάδε .
But while he was busy at this, Tomyris sent a herald to him with this message:


1.206.1
1469
" ὦ βασιλεῦ Μήδων , παῦσαι σπεύδων τὰ σπεύδεις ·
“O king of the Medes, stop hurrying on what you are hurrying on,


1.206.1
1470
οὐ γὰρ ἂν εἰδείης εἴ τοι ἐς καιρὸν ἔσται ταῦτα τελεόμενα ·
for you cannot know whether the completion of this work will be for your advantage.


1.206.1
1471
παυσάμενος δὲ βασίλευε τῶν σεωυτοῦ , καὶ ἡμέας ἀνέχευ ὁρέων ἄρχοντας τῶν περ ἄρχομεν .
Stop, and be king of your own country; and endure seeing us ruling those whom we rule.


1.206.2
1472
οὔκων ἐθελήσεις ὑποθήκῃσι τῇσιδε χρᾶσθαι , ἀλλὰ πάντως μᾶλλον ἢ δι’ ἡσυχίης εἶναι ·
But if you will not take this advice, and will do anything rather than remain at peace,


1.206.2
1473
σὺ δὴ εἰ μεγάλως προθυμέαι Μασσαγετέων πειρηθῆναι , φέρε μόχθον μὲν τὸν ἔχεις ζευγνὺς τὸν ποταμὸν ἄπες , σὺ δὲ ἡμέων ἀναχωρησάντων ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ τριῶν ἡμερέων ὁδὸν διάβαινε ἐς τὴν ἡμετέρην ·
then if you so greatly desire to try the strength of the Massagetae, stop your present work of bridging the river, and let us withdraw three days' journey from the Araxes; and when that is done, cross into our country.


1.206.3
1474
εἰ δ’ ἡμέας βούλεαι ἐσδέξασθαι μᾶλλον ἐς τὴν ὑμετέρην , σὺ τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο ποίεε " .
Or if you prefer to receive us into your country, then withdraw yourself as I have said.”


1.206.3
1475
ταῦτα δὲ ἀκούσας ὁ Κῦρος συνεκάλεσε Περσέων τοὺς πρώτους , συναγείρας δὲ τούτους ἐς μέσον σφι προετίθεε τὸ πρῆγμα , συμβουλευόμενος ὁκότερα ποιέῃ .
Hearing this, Cyrus called together the leading Persians and laid the matter before them, asking them to advise him which he should do.


1.206.3
1476
τῶν δὲ κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ αἱ γνῶμαι συνεξέπιπτον κελευόντων ἐσδέκεσθαι Τόμυρίν τε καὶ τὸν στρατὸν αὐτῆς ἐς τὴν χώρην .
They all spoke to the same end, urging him to let Tomyris and her army enter his country.


1.207.1
1477
παρεὼν δὲ καὶ μεμφόμενος τὴν γνώμην ταύτην Κροῖσος ὁ Λυδὸς ἀπεδείκνυτο ἐναντίην τῇ προκειμένῃ γνώμῃ , λέγων τάδε .
But Croesus the Lydian, who was present, was displeased by their advice and spoke against it.


1.207.1
1478
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , εἶπον μὲν καὶ πρότερόν τοι ὅτι ἐπεί με Ζεὺς ἔδωκέ τοι , τὸ ἂν ὁρῶ σφάλμα ἐὸν οἴκῳ τῷ σῷ κατὰ δύναμιν ἀποτρέψειν ·
“O King,” he said, “you have before now heard from me that since Zeus has given me to you I will turn aside to the best of my ability whatever misadventure I see threatening your house.


1.207.1
1479
τὰ δὲ μοι παθήματα ἐόντα ἀχάριτα μαθήματα γέγονε .
And disaster has been my teacher.


1.207.2
1480
εἰ μὲν ἀθάνατος δοκέεις εἶναι καὶ στρατιῆς τοιαύτης ἄρχειν , οὐδὲν ἂν εἴη πρῆγμα γνώμας ἐμὲ σοὶ ἀποφαίνεσθαι ·
Now, if you think that you and the army that you lead are immortal, I have no business giving you advice;


1.207.2
1481
εἰ δ’ ἔγνωκας ὅτι ἄνθρωπος καὶ σὺ εἶς καὶ ἑτέρων τοιῶνδε ἄρχεις , ἐκεῖνο πρῶτον μάθε , ὡς κύκλος τῶν ἀνθρωπηίων ἐστὶ πρηγμάτων , περιφερόμενος δὲ οὐκ ἐᾷ αἰεὶ τοὺς αὐτοὺς ;
but if you know that you and those whom you rule are only men, then I must first teach you this: men's fortunes are on a wheel, which in its turning does not allow the same man always


1.207.2
1482
εὐτυχέειν .
 to prosper.


1.207.3
1483
ἤδη ὦν ἔχω γνώμην περὶ τοῦ προκειμένου πρήγματος τὰ ἔμπαλιν ἢ οὗτοι .
So, if that is the case, I am not of the same opinion about the business in hand as these other counsellors of yours.


1.207.3
1484
εἰ γὰρ ἐθελήσομεν ἐσδέξασθαι τοὺς πολεμίους ἐς τὴν χώρην , ὅδε τοι ἐν αὐτῷ κίνδυνος ἔνι ·
This is the danger if we agree to let the enemy enter your country:


1.207.3
1485
ἑσσωθεὶς μὲν προσαπολλύεις πᾶσαν τὴν ἀρχήν .
if you lose the battle, you lose your empire also,


1.207.3
1486
δῆλα γὰρ δὴ ὅτι νικῶντες Μασσαγέται οὐ τὸ ὀπίσω φεύξονται ἀλλ’ ἐπ’ ἀρχὰς τὰς σὰς ἐλῶσι .
for it is plain that if the Massagetae win they will not retreat but will march against your provinces.


1.207.4
1487
νικῶν δὲ οὐ νικᾷς τοσοῦτον ὅσον εἰ διαβὰς ἐς τὴν ἐκείνων , νικῶν Μασσαγέτας , ἕποιο φεύγουσι .
And if you conquer them, it is a lesser victory than if you crossed into their country and routed the Massagetae and pursued them;


1.207.4
1488
τ- αὐτὸ γὰρ ἀντιθήσω ἐκείνῳ , ὅτι νικήσας τοὺς ἀντιουμένους ἐλᾷς ἰθὺ τῆς ἀρχῆς τῆς Τομύριος .
for I weigh your chances against theirs, and suppose that when you have beaten your adversaries you will march for the seat of Tomyris' power.


1.207.5
1489
χωρίς τε τοῦ ἀπηγημένου αἰσχρὸν καὶ οὐκ ἀνασχετὸν Κῦρόν γε τὸν Καμβύσεω γυναικὶ εἴξαντα ὑποχωρῆσαι τῆς χώρης .
And besides what I have shown, it would be a shameful thing and not to be endured if Cyrus the son of Cambyses should yield and give ground before a woman.


1.207.5
1490
νῦν ὦν μοι δοκέει διαβάντας προελθεῖν ὅσον ἂν ἐκεῖνοι ὑπεξίωσι , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ τάδε ποιεῦντας πειρᾶσθαι ἐκείνων περιγενέσθαι .
Now then, it occurs to me that we should cross and go forward as far as they draw back, and that then we should endeavor to overcome them by doing as I shall show.


1.207.6
1491
ὡς γὰρ ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι , Μασσαγέται εἰσὶ ἀγαθῶν τε Περσικῶν ἄπειροι καὶ καλῶν μεγάλων ἀπαθέες .
As I understand, the Massagetae have no experience of the good things of Persia, and have never fared well as to what is greatly desirable.


1.207.6
1492
τούτοισι ὦν τοῖσι ἀνδράσι τῶν προβάτων ἀφειδέως πολλὰ κατακόψαντας καὶ σκευάσαντας προθεῖναι ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ τῷ ἡμετέρῳ δαῖτα , πρὸς δὲ καὶ κρητῆρας ἀφειδέως οἴνου ἀκρήτου καὶ σιτία παντοῖα ·
Therefore, I advise you to cut up the meat of many of your sheep and goats into generous portions for these men, and to cook it and serve it as a feast in our camp, providing many bowls of unmixed wine and all kinds of food.


1.207.7
1493
ποιήσαντας δὲ ταῦτα , ὑπολιπομένους τῆς στρατιῆς τὸ φλαυρότατον , τοὺς λοιποὺς αὖτις ἐξαναχωρέειν ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμόν .
Then let your army withdraw to the river again, leaving behind that part of it which is of least value.


1.207.7
1494
ἢν γὰρ ἐγὼ γνώμης μὴ ἁμάρτω , κεῖνοι ἰδόμενοι ἀγαθὰ πολλὰ τρέψονταί τε πρὸς αὐτὰ καὶ ἡμῖν τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν λείπεται ἀπόδεξις ἔργων μεγάλων " .
For if I am not mistaken in my judgment, when the Massagetae see so many good things they will give themselves over to feasting on them; and it will be up to us then to accomplish great things.”


1.208.1
1495
γνῶμαι μὲν αὗται συνέστασαν ·
So these opinions clashed;


1.208.1
1496
Κῦρος δὲ μετεὶς τὴν προτέρην γνώμην , τὴν Κροίσου δὲ ἑλόμενος , προηγόρευε Τομύρι ἐξαναχωρέειν ὡς αὐτοῦ διαβησομένου ἐπ’ ἐκείνην .
and Cyrus set aside his former plan and chose that of Croesus; consequently, he told Tomyris to draw her army off, for he would cross (he said) and attack her;


1.208.1
1497
ἣ μὲν δὴ ἐξανεχώρεε κατὰ ὑπέσχετο πρῶτα ·
so she withdrew as she had promised before.


1.208.1
1498
Κῦρος δὲ Κροῖσον ἐς τὰς χεῖρας ἐσθεὶς τῷ ἑωυτοῦ παιδὶ Καμβύσῃ , τῷ περ τὴν βασιληίην ἐδίδου , καὶ πολλὰ ἐντειλάμενὸς οἱ τιμᾶν τε αὐτὸν καὶ εὖ ποιέειν , ἢν ἡ διάβασις ἡ ἐπὶ Μασσαγέτας μὴ ὀρθωθῇ , ταῦτα ἐντειλάμενος καὶ ἀποστείλας τούτους ἐς Πέρσας , αὐτὸς διέβαινε τὸν ποταμὸν καὶ ὁ στρατὸς αὐτοῦ .
Then he entrusted Croesus to the care of his own son Cambyses, to whom he would leave his sovereignty, telling Cambyses to honor Croesus and treat him well if the crossing of the river against the Massagetae should not go well. With these instructions, he sent the two back to Persia, and he and his army crossed the river.


1.209.1
1499
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐπεραιώθη τὸν Ἀράξεα , νυκτὸς ἐπελθούσης εἶδε ὄψιν εὕδων ἐν τῶν Μασσαγετέων τῇ χωρῇ τοιήνδε ·
After he had crossed the Araxes,  that night while sleeping in the country of the Massagetae he had a dream like this.


1.209.1
1500
ἐδόκεε ὁ Κῦρος ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ ὁρᾶν τῶν Ὑστάσπεος παίδων τὸν πρεσβύτατον ἔχοντα ἐπὶ τῶν ὤμων πτέρυγας καὶ τουτέων τῇ μὲν τὴν Ἀσίην τῇ δὲ τὴν Εὐρώπην ἐπισκιάζειν .
In his dream Cyrus seemed to see the eldest of Hystaspes' sons with wings on his shoulders, the one wing overshadowing Asia and the other Europe.


1.209.2
1501
Ὑστάσπεϊ δὲ τῷ Ἀρσάμεος ἐόντι ἀνδρὶ Ἀχαιμενίδῃ ἦν τῶν παίδων Δαρεῖος πρεσβύτατος , ἐὼν τότε ἡλικίην ἐς εἴκοσί κου μάλιστα ἔτεα , καὶ οὗτος κατελέλειπτο ἐν Πέρσῃσι ·
Hystaspes son of Arsames was an Achaemenid, and Darius was the eldest of his sons, then about twenty years old;


1.209.2
1502
οὐ γὰρ εἶχέ κω ἡλικίην στρατεύεσθαι .
this Darius had been left behind in Persia, not yet being of an age to go on campaign.


1.209.3
1503
ἐπεὶ ὦν δὴ ἐξηγέρθη ὁ Κῦρος , ἐδίδου λόγον ἑωυτῷ περὶ τῆς ὄψιος .
So when Cyrus awoke he considered his vision,


1.209.3
1504
ὡς δέ οἱ ἐδόκεε μεγάλη εἶναι ἡ ὄψις , καλέσας Ὑστάσπεα καὶ ἀπολαβὼν μοῦνον εἶπε " Ὕστασπες , παῖς σὸς ἐπιβουλεύων ἐμοί τε καὶ τῇ ἐμῇ ἀρχῇ ἑάλωκε .
and because it seemed to him to be of great importance, he sent for Hystaspes and said to him privately, “Hystaspes, I have caught your son plotting against me and my sovereignty;


1.209.3
1505
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ἀτρεκέως οἶδα , ἐγὼ σημανέω ·
and I will tell you how I know this for certain.


1.209.4
1506
ἐμεῦ θεοὶ κήδονται καί μοι πάντα προδεικνύουσι τὰ ἐπιφερόμενα .
The gods care for me and show me beforehand all that is coming.


1.209.4
1507
ἤδη ὦν ἐν τῇ παροιχομένῃ νυκτὶ εὕδων εἶδον τῶν σῶν παίδων τὸν πρεσβύτατον ἔχοντα ἐπὶ τῶν ὤμων πτέρυγας καὶ τουτέων τῇ μὲν τὴν Ἀσίην τῇ δὲ τὴν Εὐρώπην ἐπισκιάζειν .
Now then, I have seen in a dream in the past night your eldest son with wings on his shoulders, overshadowing Asia with the one and Europe with the other.


1.209.5
1508
οὔκων ἐστὶ μηχανὴ ἀπὸ τῆς ὄψιος ταύτης οὐδεμία τὸ μὴ ἐκεῖνον ἐπιβουλεύειν ἐμοί ·
From this vision, there is no way that he is not plotting against me.


1.209.5
1509
σύ νυν τὴν ταχίστην πορεύεο ὀπίσω ἐς Πέρσας καὶ ποίεε ὅκως , ἐπεὰν ἐγὼ τάδε καταστρεψάμενος ἔλθω ἐκεῖ , ὥς μοι καταστήσεις τὸν παῖδα ἐς ἔλεγχον " .
Therefore hurry back to Persia, and see that when I come back after subjecting this country you bring your son before me to be questioned about this.”


1.210.1
1510
Κῦρος μὲν δοκέων οἱ Δαρεῖον ἐπιβουλεύειν ἔλεγε τάδε ·
Cyrus said this, thinking that Darius was plotting against him;


1.210.1
1511
τῷ δὲ ὁ δαίμων προέφαινε ὡς αὐτὸς μὲν τελευτήσειν αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ μέλλοι , ἡ δὲ βασιληίη αὐτοῦ περιχωρέοι ἐς Δαρεῖον .
but in fact, heaven was showing him that he himself was to die in the land where he was and Darius inherit his kingdom.


1.210.2
1512
ἀμείβεται δὴ ὦν ὁ Ὑστάσπης τοῖσιδε .
So then Hystaspes replied with this:


1.210.2
1513
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , μὴ εἴη ἀνὴρ Πέρσης γεγονὼς ὅστις τοὶ ἐπιβουλεύσειε , εἰ δ’ ἐστί , ἀπόλοιτο ὡς τάχιστα ·
“O King, may there not be any Persian born who would plot against you! But if there is, may he perish suddenly;


1.210.2
1514
ὃς ἀντὶ μὲν δούλων ἐποίησας ἐλευθέρους Πέρσας εἶναι , ἀντὶ δὲ ἄρχεσθαι ὑπ’ ἄλλων ἄρχειν ἁπάντων .
for you have made the Persians free men instead of slaves and rulers of all instead of subjects of any.


1.210.3
1515
εἰ δέ τις τοὶ ὄψις ἀπαγγέλλει παῖδα τὸν ἐμὸν νεώτερα βουλεύειν περὶ σέο , ἐγώ τοι παραδίδωμι χρᾶσθαι αὐτῷ τοῦτο ὅ τι σὺ βούλεαι " .
But if your vision does indeed signify that my son is planning revolution, I give him to you to treat as you like.”


1.211.1
1516
Ὑστάσπης μὲν τούτοισι ἀμειψάμενος καὶ διαβὰς τὸν Ἀράξεα ἤιε ἐς Πέρσας φυλάξων Κύρῳ τὸν παῖδα Δαρεῖον , Κῦρος δὲ προελθὼν ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἀράξεω ἡμέρης ὁδὸν ἐποίεε κατὰ τὰς Κροίσου ὑποθήκας .
After having given this answer and crossed the Araxes, Hystaspes went to   Persia    to watch his son for Cyrus; and Cyrus, advancing a day's journey from the Araxes, acted according to Croesus' advice.


1.211.2
1517
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Κύρου τε καὶ Περσέων τοῦ καθαροῦ στρατοῦ ἀπελάσαντος ὀπίσω ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀράξεα , λειφθέντος δὲ τοῦ ἀχρηίου , ἐπελθοῦσα τῶν Μασσαγετέων τριτημορὶς τοῦ στρατοῦ τούς τε λειφθέντας τῆς Κύρου στρατιῆς ἐφόνευε ἀλεξομένους καὶ τὴν προκειμένην ἰδόντες δαῖτα , ὡς ἐχειρώσαντο τοὺς ἐναντίους , κλιθέντες ἐδαίνυντο , πληρωθέντες δὲ φορβῆς καὶ οἴνου ηὗδον .
Cyrus and the sound portion of the Persian army marched back to the Araxes, leaving behind those that were useless; a third of the Massagetae forces attacked those of the army who were left behind and destroyed them despite resistance; then, when they had overcome their enemies, seeing the banquet spread they sat down and feasted, and after they had had their fill of food and wine, they fell asleep.


1.211.3
1518
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ἐπελθόντες πολλοὺς μὲν σφέων ἐφόνευσαν , πολλῷ δ’ ἔτι πλεῦνας ἐζώγρησαν καὶ ἄλλους καὶ τὸν τῆς βασιλείης Τομύριος παῖδα στρατηγέοντα Μασσαγετέων , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Σπαργαπίσης .
Then the Persians attacked them, killing many and taking many more alive, among whom was the son of Tomyris the queen, Spargapises by name, the leader of the Massagetae.


1.212.1
1519
ἣ δὲ πυθομένη τά τε περὶ τὴν στρατιὴν γεγονότα καὶ τὰ περὶ τὸν παῖδα , πέμπουσα κήρυκα παρὰ Κῦρον ἔλεγε τάδε .
When Tomyris heard what had happened to her army and her son, she sent a herald to Cyrus with this message:


1.212.2
1520
" ἄπληστε αἵματος Κῦρε , μηδὲν ἐπαερθῇς τῷ γεγονότι τῷδε πρήγματι , εἰ ἀμπελίνῳ καρπῷ , τῷ περ αὐτοὶ ἐμπιπλάμενοι μαίνεσθε οὕτω ὥστε κατιόντος τοῦ οἴνου ἐς τὸ σῶμα ἐπαναπλέειν ὑμῖν ἔπεα κακά , τοιούτῳ φαρμάκῳ δολώσας ἐκράτησας παιδὸς τοῦ ἐμοῦ , ἀλλ’ οὐ μάχῃ κατὰ τὸ καρτερόν .
“Cyrus who can never get enough blood, do not be elated by what you have done; it is nothing to be proud of if, by the fruit of the vine — with which you Persians fill yourselves and rage so violently that evil words rise in a flood to your lips when the wine enters your bodies — if, by tricking him with this drug, you got the better of my son, and not by force of arms in battle.


1.212.3
1521
νῦν ὦν μευ εὖ παραινεούσης ὑπόλαβε τὸν λόγον ·
Now, then, take a word of good advice from me:


1.212.3
1522
ἀποδούς μοι τὸν παῖδα ἄπιθι ἐκ τῆσδε τῆς χώρης ἀζήμιος , Μασσαγετέων τριτημορίδι τοῦ στρατοῦ κατυβρίσας .
give me back my son and leave this country unpunished, even though you have savaged a third of the Massagetae army.


1.212.3
1523
εἰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐ ποιήσεις , ἥλιον ἐπόμνυμί τοι τὸν Μασσαγετέων δεσπότην , ἦ μέν σε ἐγὼ καὶ ἄπληστον ἐόντα αἵματος κορέσω " .
But if you will not, then I swear to you by the sun, lord of the Massagetae, that I shall give even you who can never get enough of it your fill of blood.”


1.213.1
1524
Κῦρος μὲν ἐπέων οὐδένα τούτων ἀνενειχθέντων ἐποιέετο λόγον ·
Cyrus dismissed this warning when it was repeated to him.


1.213.1
1525
ὁ δὲ τῆς βασιλείης Τομύριος παῖς Σπαργαπίσης , ὥς μιν ὅ τε οἶνος ἀνῆκε καὶ ἔμαθε ἵνα ἦν κακοῦ , δεηθεὶς Κύρου ἐκ τῶν δεσμῶν λυθῆναι ἔτυχε , ὡς δὲ ἐλύθη τε τάχιστα καὶ τῶν χειρῶν ἐκράτησε , διεργάζεται ἑωυτόν .
But Spargapises, the son of the queen Tomyris, after the wine wore off and he recognized his evil plight, asked Cyrus to be freed from his bonds; and this was granted him; but as soon as he was freed and had the use of his hands, he did away with himself.


1.214.1
1526
καὶ δὴ οὗτος μὲν τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ τελευτᾷ ·
Such was the end of Spargapises.


1.214.1
1527
Τόμυρις δέ , ὥς οἱ Κῦρος οὐκ ἐσήκουσε , συλλέξασα πᾶσαν τὴν ἑωυτῆς δύναμιν συνέβαλε Κύρῳ .
Tomyris, when Cyrus would not listen to her, collected all her forces and engaged him.


1.214.1
1528
ταύτην τὴν μάχην , ὅσαι δὴ βαρβάρων ἀνδρῶν μάχαι ἐγένοντο , κρίνω ἰσχυροτάτην γενέσθαι , καὶ δὴ καὶ πυνθάνομαι οὕτω τοῦτο γενόμενον .
This fight I judge to have been the fiercest ever fought by men that were not Greek; and indeed I have learned that this was so.


1.214.2
1529
πρῶτα μὲν γὰρ λέγεται αὐτοὺς διαστάντας ἐς ἀλλήλους τοξεύειν , μετὰ δὲ ὥς σφι τὰ βέλεα ἐξετετόξευτο , συμπεσόντας τῇσι αἰχμῇσί τε καὶ τοῖσι ἐγχειριδίοισι συνέχεσθαι .
For first (it is said) they shot arrows at each other from a distance;


1.214.2
1530
χρόνον τε δὴ ἐπὶ πολλὸν συνεστάναι μαχομένους καὶ οὐδετέρους ἐθέλειν φεύγειν .
then, when their arrows were all spent, they rushed at each other and fought with their spears and swords; and for a long time they stood fighting and neither would give ground;


1.214.2
1531
τέλος δὲ οἱ Μασσαγέται περιεγένοντο , ἥ τε δὴ πολλὴ τῆς Περσικῆς στρατιῆς αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ διεφθάρη καὶ δὴ καὶ αὐτὸς Κῦρος τελευτᾷ , βασιλεύσας τὰ πάντα ἑνὸς δέοντα τριήκοντα ἔτεα .
but at last the Massagetae got the upper hand.


1.214.4
1532
ἀσκὸν δὲ πλήσασα αἵματος ἀνθρωπηίου Τόμυρις ἐδίζητο ἐν τοῖσι τεθνεῶσι τῶν Περσέων τὸν Κύρου νέκυν , ὡς δὲ εὗρε , ἐναπῆκε αὐτοῦ τὴν κεφαλὴν ἐς τὸν ἀσκόν , λυμαινομένη δὲ τῷ νεκρῷ ἐπέλεγε τάδε ·
Tomyris filled a skin with human blood, and searched among the Persian dead for Cyrus' body; and when she found it, she pushed his head into the skin, and insulted the dead man in these words:


1.214.5
1533
" σὺ μὲν ἐμὲ ζῶσάν τε καὶ νικῶσάν σε μάχῃ ἀπώλεσας , παῖδα τὸν ἐμὸν ἑλὼν δόλῳ ·
“Though I am alive and have defeated you in battle, you have destroyed me, taking my son by guile;


1.214.5
1534
σὲ δ’ ἐγώ , κατά περ ἠπείλησα , αἵματος κορέσω " .
but just as I threatened, I give you your fill of blood.”


1.214.5
1535
τὰ μὲν δὴ κατὰ τὴν Κύρου τελευτὴν τοῦ βίου , πολλῶν λόγων λεγομένων , ὅδε μοι ὁ πιθανώτατος εἴρηται .
Many stories are told of Cyrus' death; this, that I have told, is the most credible.


1.215.1
1536
Μασσαγέται δὲ ἐσθῆτά τε ὁμοίην τῇ Σκυθικῇ φορέουσι καὶ δίαιταν ἔχουσι , ἱππόται δὲ εἰσὶ καὶ ἄνιπποι ( ἀμφοτέρων γὰρ μετέχουσι ) καὶ τοξόται τε καὶ αἰχμοφόροι , σαγάρις νομίζοντες ἔχειν .
These Massagetae are like the Scythians in their dress and way of life.


1.215.1
1537
χρυσῷ δὲ καὶ χαλκῷ τὰ πάντα χρέωνται ·
They are both cavalry and infantry (having some of each kind), and spearmen and archers; and it is their custom to carry battle-axes.


1.215.1
1538
ὅσα μὲν γὰρ ἐς αἰχμὰς καὶ ἄρδις καὶ σαγάρις , χαλκῷ τὰ πάντα χρέωνται , ὅσα δὲ περὶ κεφαλὴν καὶ ζωστῆρας καὶ μασχαλιστῆρας , χρυσῷ κοσμέονται .
They always use gold and bronze; all their spear-points and arrow-heads and battle-axes are bronze and the adornment of their headgear and belts and girdles is gold.


1.215.2
1539
ὣς δ’ αὕτως τῶν ἵππων τὰ μὲν περὶ τὰ στέρνα χαλκέους θώρηκας περιβάλλουσι , τὰ δὲ περὶ τοὺς χαλινοὺς καὶ στόμια καὶ φάλαρα χρυσῷ .
They equip their horses similarly, protecting their chests with bronze breastplates and putting gold on reins, bits, and cheekplates.


1.215.2
1540
σιδήρῳ δὲ οὐδ’ ἀργύρῳ χρέωνται οὐδέν ·
But they never use iron and silver,


1.215.2
1541
οὐδὲ γὰρ οὐδέ σφι ἐστὶ ἐν τῇ χωρῇ , ὁ δὲ χρυσὸς καὶ ὁ χαλκὸς ἄπλετος .
for there is none at all in their country, but gold and bronze abound.


1.216.1
1542
νόμοισι δὲ χρέωνται τοιοῖσιδε .
Now for their customs:


1.216.1
1543
γυναῖκα μὲν γαμέει ἕκαστος , ταύτῃσι δὲ ἐπίκοινα χρέωνται ·
each man marries a wife, but the wives are common to all.


1.216.1
1544
τὸ γὰρ Σκύθας φασὶ Ἕλληνες ποιέειν , οὐ Σκύθαι εἰσὶ οἱ ποιέοντες ἀλλὰ Μασσαγέται ·
The Greeks say this is a Scythian custom; it is not, but a custom of the Massagetae.


1.216.1
1545
τῆς γὰρ ἐπιθυμήσῃ γυναικὸς Μασσαγέτης ἀνήρ , τὸν φαρετρεῶνα ἀποκρεμάσας πρὸ τῆς ἁμάξης μίσγεται ἀδεῶς .
There, when a man desires a woman, he hangs his quiver before her wagon, and has intercourse with her without fear.


1.216.2
1546
οὖρος δὲ ἡλικίης σφι πρόκειται ἄλλος μὲν οὐδείς ·
Though they fix no certain term to life, yet when a man is very old all his family meet together and kill him, with beasts of the flock besides,


1.216.2
1547
ἐπεὰν δὲ γέρων γένηται κάρτα , οἱ προσήκοντές οἱ πάντες συνελθόντες θύουσί μιν καὶ ἄλλα πρόβατα ἅμα αὐτῷ , ἑψήσαντες δὲ τὰ κρέα κατευωχέονται .
then boil the flesh and feast on it.


1.216.3
1548
ταῦτα μὲν τὰ ὀλβιώτατά σφι νενόμισται , τὸν δὲ νούσῳ τελευτήσαντα οὐ κατασιτέονται ἀλλ’ γῇ κρύπτουσι , συμφορὴν ποιεύμενοι ὅτι οὐκ ἵκετο ἐς τὸ τυθῆναι .
This is held to be the happiest death; when a man dies of an illness, they do not eat him, but bury him in the earth, and lament that he did not live to be killed.


1.216.3
1549
σπείρουσι δὲ οὐδέν , ἀλλ’ ἀπὸ κτηνέων ζώουσι καὶ ἰχθύων ·
They never plant seed;


1.216.3
1550
οἳ δὲ ἄφθονοί σφι ἐκ τοῦ Ἀράξεω ποταμοῦ παραγίνονται ·
their fare is their livestock and the fish which they take in abundance from the Araxes.


1.216.4
1551
γαλακτοπόται δ’ εἰσί .
Their drink is milk.


1.216.4
1552
θεῶν δὲ μοῦνον ἥλιον σέβονται , τῷ θύουσι ἵππους .
The sun is the only god whom they worship; they sacrifice horses to him;


1.216.4
1553
νόος δὲ οὗτος τῆς θυσίης ·
the reasoning is that he is the swiftest of the gods,


1.216.4
1554
τῶν θεῶν τῷ ταχίστῳ πάντων τῶν θνητῶν τὸ τάχιστον δατέονται .
and therefore they give him the swiftest of mortal things.



2.1.1
1555
τελευτήσαντος δὲ Κύρου παρέλαβε τὴν βασιληίην Καμβύσης , Κύρου ἐὼν παῖς καὶ Κασσανδάνης τῆς Φαρνάσπεω θυγατρός , τῆς προαποθανούσης Κῦρος αὐτός τε μέγα πένθος ἐποιήσατο καὶ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι προεῖπε πᾶσι τῶν ἦρχε πένθος ποιέεσθαι .
After the death of Cyrus, Cambyses inherited his throne. He was the son of Cyrus and of Cassandane, the daughter of Pharnaspes, for whom Cyrus mourned deeply when she died before him, and had all his subjects mourn also.


2.1.2
1556
ταύτης δὴ τῆς γυναικὸς ἐὼν παῖς καὶ Κύρου Καμβύσης Ἴωνας μὲν καὶ Αἰολέας ὡς δούλους πατρωίους ἐόντας ἐνόμιζε , ἐπὶ δὲ Αἴγυπτον ἐποιέετο στρατηλασίην ἄλλους τε παραλαβὼν τῶν ἦρχε καὶ δὴ καὶ Ἑλλήνων τῶν ἐπεκράτεε .
Cambyses was the son of this woman and of Cyrus. He considered the Ionians and Aeolians slaves inherited from his father, and prepared an expedition against    Egypt   , taking with him some of these Greek subjects besides others whom he ruled.


2.2.1
1557
οἱ δὲ Αἰγύπτιοι , πρὶν μὲν ἢ Ψαμμήτιχον σφέων βασιλεῦσαι , ἐνόμιζον ἑωυτοὺς πρώτους γενέσθαι πάντων ἀνθρώπων ·
Now before Psammetichus became king of Egypt, the Egyptians believed that they were the oldest people on earth.


2.2.1
1558
ἐπειδὴ δὲ Ψαμμήτιχος βασιλεύσας ἠθέλησε εἰδέναι οἵτινες γενοίατο πρῶτοι , ἀπὸ τούτου νομίζουσι Φρύγας προτέρους γενέσθαι ἑωυτῶν , τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἑωυτούς .
But ever since Psammetichus became king and wished to find out which people were the oldest, they have believed that the Phrygians were older than they, and they than everybody else.


2.2.2
1559
Ψαμμήτιχος δὲ ὡς οὐκ ἐδύνατο πυνθανόμενος πόρον οὐδένα τούτου ἀνευρεῖν , οἳ γενοίατο πρῶτοι ἀνθρώπων , ἐπιτεχνᾶται τοιόνδε .
Psammetichus, when he was in no way able to learn by inquiry which people had first come into being, devised a plan


2.2.2
1560
παιδία δύο νεογνὰ ἀνθρώπων τῶν ἐπιτυχόντων δίδωσι ποιμένι τρέφειν ἐς τὰ ποίμνια τροφήν τινα τοιήνδε , ἐντειλάμενος μηδένα ἀντίον αὐτῶν μηδεμίαν φωνὴν ἱέναι , ἐν στέγῃ δὲ ἐρήμῃ ἐπ’ ἑωυτῶν κέεσθαι αὐτά , καὶ τὴν ὥρην ἐπαγινέειν σφι αἶγας , πλήσαντα δὲ γάλακτος τ- ἄλλα διαπρήσσεσθαι ·
by which he took two newborn children of the common people and gave them to a shepherd to bring up among his flocks. He gave instructions that no one was to speak a word in their hearing; they were to stay by themselves in a lonely hut, and in due time the shepherd was to bring goats and give the children their milk and do everything else necessary.


2.2.3
1561
ταῦτα δὲ ἐποίεέ τε καὶ ἐνετέλλετο Ψαμμήτιχος θέλων ἀκοῦσαι τῶν παιδίων , ἀπαλλαχθέντων τῶν ἀσήμων κνυζημάτων , ἥντινα φωνὴν ῥήξουσι πρώτην ·
Psammetichus did this, and gave these instructions, because he wanted to hear what speech would first come from the children, when they were past the age of indistinct babbling.


2.2.3
1562
τά περ ὦν καὶ ἐγένετο .
And he had his wish;


2.2.3
1563
ὡς γὰρ διέτης χρόνος ἐγεγόνεε ταῦτα τῷ ποιμένι πρήσσοντι , ἀνοίγοντι τὴν θύρην καὶ ἐσιόντι τὰ παιδία ἀμφότερα προσπίπτοντα βεκὸς ἐφώνεον , ὀρέγοντα τὰς χεῖρας .
for one day, when the shepherd had done as he was told for two years, both children ran to him stretching out their hands and calling “Bekos!” as he opened the door and entered.


2.2.4
1564
τὰ μὲν δὴ πρῶτα ἀκούσας ἥσυχος ἦν ὁ ποιμήν ·
When he first heard this, he kept quiet about it;


2.2.4
1565
ὡς δὲ πολλάκις φοιτέοντι καὶ ἐπιμελομένῳ πολλὸν ἦν τοῦτο τὸ ἔπος , οὕτω δὴ σημήνας τῷ δεσπότῃ ἤγαγε τὰ παιδία κελεύσαντος ἐς ὄψιν τὴν ἐκείνου .
but when, coming often and paying careful attention, he kept hearing this same word, he told his master at last and brought the children into the king's presence as required.


2.2.4
1566
ἀκούσας δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ Ψαμμήτιχος ἐπυνθάνετο οἵτινες ἀνθρώπων βεκός τι καλέουσι , πυνθανόμενος δὲ εὕρισκε Φρύγας καλέοντας τὸν ἄρτον .
Psammetichus then heard them himself, and asked to what language the word “Bekos” belonged; he found it to be a Phrygian word, signifying bread.


2.2.5
1567
οὕτω συνεχώρησαν Αἰγύπτιοι καὶ τοιούτῳ σταθμησάμενοι πρήγματι τοὺς Φρύγας πρεσβυτέρους εἶναι ἑωυτῶν .
Reasoning from this, the Egyptians acknowledged that the Phrygians were older than they.


2.2.5
1568
ὧδε μὲν γενέσθαι τῶν ἱρέων τοῦ Ἡφαίστου τοῦ ἐν Μέμφι ἤκουον ·
This is the story which I heard from the priests of Hephaestus' temple at Memphis;


2.2.5
1569
Ἕλληνες δὲ λέγουσι ἄλλα τε μάταια πολλὰ καὶ ὡς γυναικῶν τὰς γλώσσας ὁ Ψαμμήτιχος ἐκταμὼν τὴν δίαιταν οὕτω ἐποιήσατο τῶν παίδων παρὰ ταύτῃσι τῇσι γυναιξί .
the Greeks say among many foolish things that Psammetichus had the children reared by women whose tongues he had cut out.


2.3.1
1570
κατὰ μὲν δὴ τὴν τροφὴν τῶν παίδων τοσαῦτα ἔλεγον , ἤκουσα δὲ καὶ ἄλλα ἐν Μέμφι ἐλθὼν ἐς λόγους τοῖσι ἱρεῦσι τοῦ Ἡφαίστου .
Besides this story of the rearing of the children, I also heard other things at Memphis in conversation with the priests of Hephaestus;


2.3.1
1571
καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐς Θήβας τε καὶ ἐς Ἡλίου πόλιν αὐτῶν τούτων εἵνεκεν ἐτραπόμην , ἐθέλων εἰδέναι εἰ συμβήσονται τοῖσι λόγοισι τοῖσι ἐν Μέμφι ·
and I visited Thebes and Heliopolis, too, for this very purpose, because I wished to know if the people of those places would tell me the same story as the priests at Memphis;


2.3.1
1572
οἱ γὰρ Ἡλιοπολῖται λέγονται Αἰγυπτίων εἶναι λογιώτατοι .
for the people of Heliopolis are said to be the most learned of the Egyptians.


2.3.2
1573
τὰ μέν νυν θεῖα τῶν ἀπηγημάτων οἷα ἤκουον οὐκ εἰμὶ πρόθυμος ἐξηγέεσθαι , ἔξω ἢ τὰ οὐνόματα αὐτῶν μοῦνον , νομίζων πάντας ἀνθρώπους ἴσον περὶ αὐτῶν ἐπίστασθαι ·
Now, such stories as I heard about the gods I am not ready to relate, except their names, for I believe that all men are equally knowledgeable about them;


2.3.2
1574
τὰ δ’ ἂν ἐπιμνησθέω αὐτῶν , ὑπὸ τοῦ λόγου ἐξαναγκαζόμενος ἐπιμνησθήσομαι .
and I shall say about them what I am constrained to say by the course of my history.


2.4.1
1575
ὅσα δὲ ἀνθρωπήια πρήγματα , ὧδε ἔλεγον ὁμολογέοντες σφίσι , πρώτους Αἰγυπτίους ἀνθρώπων ἁπάντων ἐξευρεῖν τὸν ἐνιαυτόν , δυώδεκα μέρεα δασαμένους τῶν ὡρέων ἐς αὐτόν ·
But as to human affairs, this was the account in which they all agreed:


2.4.1
1576
ταῦτα δὲ ἐξευρεῖν ἐκ τῶν ἀστέρων ἔλεγον ·
the Egyptians, they said, were the first men who reckoned by years and made the year consist of twelve divisions of the seasons. They discovered this from the stars (so they said).


2.4.1
1577
ἄγουσι δὲ τοσῷδε σοφώτερον Ἑλλήνων , ἐμοὶ δοκέειν , ὅσῳ Ἕλληνες μὲν διὰ τρίτου ἔτεος ἐμβόλιμον ἐπεμβάλλουσι τῶν ὡρέων εἵνεκεν , Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ τριηκοντημέρους ἄγοντες τοὺς δυώδεκα μῆνας ἐπάγουσι ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος πέντε ἡμέρας πάρεξ τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ , καί σφι ὁ κύκλος τῶν ὡρέων ἐς τ- αὐτὸ περιιὼν παραγίνεται .
And their reckoning is, to my mind, a juster one than that of the Greeks; for the Greeks add an intercalary month every other year, so that the seasons agree; but the Egyptians, reckoning thirty days to each of the twelve months, add five days in every year over and above the total, and thus the completed circle of seasons is made to agree with the calendar.


2.4.2
1578
δυώδεκά τε θεῶν ἐπωνυμίας ἔλεγον πρώτους Αἰγυπτίους νομίσαι καὶ Ἕλληνας παρὰ σφέων ἀναλαβεῖν , βωμούς τε καὶ ἀγάλματα καὶ νηοὺς θεοῖσι ἀπονεῖμαι σφέας πρώτους καὶ ζῷα ἐν λίθοισι ἐγγλύψαι .
Furthermore, the Egyptians (they said) first used the names of twelve gods (which the Greeks afterwards borrowed from them); and it was they who first assigned to the several gods their altars and images and temples, and first carved figures on stone.


2.4.2
1579
καὶ τούτων μέν νυν τὰ πλέω ἔργῳ ἐδήλουν οὕτω γενόμενα .
Most of this they showed me in fact to be the case.


2.4.2
1580
βασιλεῦσαι δὲ πρῶτον Αἰγύπτου ἄνθρωπον ἔλεγον Μῖνα ·
The first human king of Egypt, they said, was Min.


2.4.3
1581
ἐπὶ τούτου , πλὴν τοῦ Θηβαϊκοῦ νομοῦ , πᾶσαν Αἴγυπτον εἶναι ἕλος , καὶ αὐτῆς εἶναι οὐδὲν ὑπερέχον τῶν νῦν ἔνερθε λίμνης τῆς Μοίριος ἐόντων , ἐς τὴν ἀνάπλοος ἀπὸ θαλάσσης ἑπτὰ ἡμερέων ἐστὶ ἀνὰ τὸν ποταμόν .
In his time all of    Egypt    except the Thebaic district was a marsh: all the country that we now see was then covered by water, north of    lake Moeris   , which is seven days' journey up the river from the sea.


2.5.1
1582
καὶ εὖ μοι ἐδόκεον λέγειν περὶ τῆς χώρης ·
And I think that their account of the country was true.


2.5.1
1583
δῆλα γὰρ δὴ καὶ μὴ προακούσαντι ἰδόντι δέ , ὅστις γε σύνεσιν ἔχει , ὅτι Αἴγυπτος , ἐς τὴν Ἕλληνες ναυτίλλονται , ἐστὶ Αἰγυπτίοισι ἐπίκτητός τε γῆ καὶ δῶρον τοῦ ποταμοῦ , καὶ τὰ κατύπερθε ἔτι τῆς λίμνης ταύτης μέχρι τριῶν ἡμερέων πλόου , τῆς πέρι ἐκεῖνοι οὐδὲν ἔτι τοιόνδε ἔλεγον , ἔστι δὲ ἕτερον τοιόνδε .
For even if a man has not heard it before, he can readily see, if he has sense, that that Egypt to which the Greeks sail is land deposited for the Egyptians, the river's gift — not only the lower country, but even the land as far as three days' voyage above the lake, which is of the same nature as the other, although the priests did not say this, too.


2.5.2
1584
Αἰγύπτου γὰρ φύσις ἐστὶ τῆς χώρης τοιήδε .
For this is the nature of the land of Egypt:


2.5.2
1585
πρῶτα μὲν προσπλέων ἔτι καὶ ἡμέρης δρόμον ἀπέχων ἀπὸ γῆς , κατεὶς καταπειρητηρίην πηλόν τε ἀνοίσεις καὶ ἐν ἕνδεκα ὀργυιῇσι ἔσεαι .
in the first place, when you approach it from the sea and are still a day's sail from land, if you let down a sounding line you will bring up mud from a depth of eleven fathoms.


2.5.2
1586
τοῦτο μὲν ἐπὶ τοσοῦτο δηλοῖ πρόχυσιν τῆς γῆς ἐοῦσαν .
This shows that the deposit from the land reaches this far.


2.6.1
1587
αὖτις δὲ αὐτῆς ἐστι Αἰγύπτου μῆκος τὸ παρὰ θάλασσαν ἑξήκοντα σχοῖνοι , κατὰ ἡμεῖς διαιρέομεν εἶναι Αἴγυπτον ἀπὸ τοῦ Πλινθινήτεω κόλπου μέχρι Σερβωνίδος λίμνης , παρ’ ἣν τὸ Κάσιον ὄρος τείνει ·
Further, the length of the seacoast of Egypt itself is sixty “schoeni” — of Egypt, that is, as we judge it to be, reaching from the Plinthinete gulf to the Serbonian marsh, which is under the Casian mountain —


2.6.1
1588
ταύτης ὦν ἄπο οἱ ἑξήκοντα σχοῖνοι εἰσί .
between these there is this length of sixty schoeni.


2.6.2
1589
ὅσοι μὲν γὰρ γεωπεῖναι εἰσὶ ἀνθρώπων , ὀργυιῇσι μεμετρήκασι τὴν χώρην , ὅσοι δὲ ἧσσον γεωπεῖναι , σταδίοισι , οἳ δὲ πολλὴν ἔχουσι , παρασάγγῃσι , οἳ δὲ ἄφθονον λίην , σχοίνοισι .
Men that have scant land measure by feet; those that have more, by miles; those that have much land, by parasangs; and those who have great abundance of it, by schoeni.


2.6.3
1590
δύναται δὲ ὁ παρασάγγης τριήκοντα στάδια , ὁ δὲ σχοῖνος , μέτρον ἐὸν Αἰγύπτιον , ἑξήκοντα στάδια .
The parasang is three and three quarters miles, and the schoenus, which is an Egyptian measure, is twice that.


2.7.1
1591
οὕτω ἂν εἴησαν Αἰγύπτου στάδιοι ἑξακόσιοι καὶ τρισχίλιοι τὸ παρὰ θάλασσαν .
By this reckoning, then, the seaboard of Egypt will be four hundred and fifty miles in length.


2.7.1
1592
ἐνθεῦτεν μὲν καὶ μέχρι Ἡλίου πόλιος ἐς τὴν μεσόγαιαν ἐστὶ εὐρέα Αἴγυπτος , ἐοῦσα πᾶσα ὑπτίη τε καὶ ἔνυδρος καὶ ἰλύς .
Inland from the sea as far as Heliopolis, Egypt is a wide land, all flat and watery and marshy.


2.7.1
1593
ἔστι δὲ ὁδὸς ἐς Ἡλίου πόλιν ἀπὸ θαλάσσης ἄνω ἰόντι παραπλησίη τὸ μῆκος τῇ ἐξ Ἀθηνέων ὁδῷ τῇ ἀπὸ τῶν δυώδεκα θεῶν τοῦ βωμοῦ φερούσῃ ἔς τε Πῖσαν καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν νηὸν τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ Ὀλυμπίου .
From the sea up to Heliopolis is a journey about as long as the way from the altar of the twelve gods at Athens to the temple of Olympian Zeus at Pisa.


2.7.2
1594
σμικρόν τι τὸ διάφορον εὕροι τις ἂν λογιζόμενος τῶν ὁδῶν τουτέων τὸ μὴ ἴσας μῆκος εἶναι , οὐ πλέον πεντεκαίδεκα σταδίων ·
If a reckoning is made, only a little difference of length, not more than two miles, will be found between these two journeys;


2.7.2
1595
ἡ μὲν γὰρ ἐς Πῖσαν ἐξ Ἀθηνέων καταδεῖ πεντεκαίδεκα σταδίων μὴ εἶναι πεντακοσίων καὶ χιλίων , ἡ δὲ ἐς Ἡλίου πόλιν ἀπὸ θαλάσσης πληροῖ ἐς τὸν ἀριθμὸν τοῦτον .
for the journey from Athens to Pisa is two miles short of two hundred, which is the number of miles between the sea and Heliopolis.


2.8.1
1596
ἀπὸ δὲ Ἡλίου πόλιος ἄνω ἰόντι στεινή ἐστι Αἴγυπτος .
Beyond and above Heliopolis, Egypt is a narrow land.


2.8.1
1597
τῇ μὲν γὰρ τῆς Ἀραβίης ὄρος παρατέταται , φέρον ἀπ’ ἄρκτου πρὸς μεσαμβρίην τε καὶ νότον , αἰεὶ ἄνω τεῖνον ἐς τὴν Ἐρυθρὴν καλεομένην θάλασσαν ·
For it is bounded on the one side by the mountains of Arabia, which run north to south, always running south towards the sea called the Red Sea.


2.8.1
1598
ἐν τῷ αἱ λιθοτομίαι ἔνεισι αἱ ἐς τὰς πυραμίδας κατατμηθεῖσαι τὰς ἐν Μέμφι .
In these mountains are the quarries that were hewn out for making the pyramids at Memphis.


2.8.1
1599
ταύτῃ μὲν λῆγον ἀνακάμπτει ἐς τὰ εἴρηται τὸ ὄρος ·
This way, then, the mountains run, and end in the places of which I have spoken;


2.8.1
1600
τῇ δὲ αὐτὸ ἑωυτοῦ ἐστι μακρότατον , ὡς ἐγὼ ἐπυνθανόμην , δύο μηνῶν αὐτὸ εἶναι τῆς ὁδοῦ ἀπὸ ἠοῦς πρὸς ἑσπέρην , τὰ δὲ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ λιβανωτοφόρα αὐτοῦ τὰ τέρματα εἶναι .
their greatest width from east to west, as I learned by inquiry, is a two months' journey, and their easternmost boundaries yield frankincense.


2.8.2
1601
τοῦτο μέν νυν τὸ ὄρος τοιοῦτο ἐστί , τὸ δὲ πρὸς Λιβύης τῆς Αἰγύπτου ὄρος ἄλλο πέτρινον τείνει , ἐν τῷ αἱ πυραμίδες ἔνεισι , ψάμμῳ κατειλυμένον , κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον καὶ τοῦ Ἀραβίου τὰ πρὸς μεσαμβρίην φέροντα .
Such are these mountains. On the side of    Libya   ,    Egypt    is bounded by another range of rocky mountains among which are the pyramids; these are all covered with sand, and run in the same direction as those Arabian hills that run southward.


2.8.3
1602
τὸ ὦν δὴ ἀπὸ Ἡλίου πόλιος οὐκέτι πολλὸν χωρίον ὡς εἶναι Αἰγύπτου , ἀλλ’ ὅσον τε ἡμερέων τεσσέρων καὶ δέκα ἀναπλόου ἐστὶ στεινὴ Αἴγυπτος , ἐοῦσα τῶν ὀρέων τῶν εἰρημένων τὸ μεταξὺ πεδιὰς μὲν γῆ , στάδιοι δὲ μάλιστα ἐδόκεόν μοι εἶναι , τῇ στεινότατον ἐστί , διηκοσίων οὐ πλέους ἐκ τοῦ Ἀραβίου ὄρεος ἐς τὸ Λιβυκὸν καλεόμενον .
Beyond Heliopolis, there is no great distance — in Egypt, that is: the narrow land has a length of only fourteen days' journey up the river. Between the aforesaid mountain ranges, the land is level, and where the plain is narrowest it seemed to me that there were no more than thirty miles between the Arabian mountains and those that are called Libyan.


2.8.3
1603
τὸ δ’ ἐνθεῦτεν αὖτις εὐρέα Αἴγυπτος ἐστί .
Beyond this Egypt is a wide land again.


2.8.3
1604
πέφυκε μέν νυν ἡ χώρη αὕτη οὕτω .
Such is the nature of this country.


2.9.1
1605
ἀπὸ δὲ Ἡλίου πόλιος ἐς Θήβας ἐστὶ ἀνάπλοος ἐννέα ἡμερέων , στάδιοι δὲ τῆς ὁδοῦ ἑξήκοντα καὶ ὀκτακόσιοι καὶ τετρακισχίλιοι , σχοίνων ἑνὸς καὶ ὀγδώκοντα ἐόντων .
From    Heliopolis    to    Thebes    is nine days' journey by river, and the distance is six hundred and eight miles, or eighty-one schoeni.


2.9.2
1606
οὗτοι συντιθέμενοι οἱ στάδιοι Αἰγύπτου τὸ μὲν παρὰ θάλασσαν ἤδη μοι καὶ πρότερον δεδήλωται ὅτι ἑξακοσίων τε ἐστὶ σταδίων καὶ τρισχιλίων , ὅσον δέ τι ἀπὸ θαλάσσης ἐς μεσόγαιαν μέχρι Θηβέων ἐστί , σημανέω ·
This, then, is a full statement of all the distances in Egypt: the seaboard is four hundred and fifty miles long; and I will now declare the distance inland from the sea to Thebes:


2.9.2
1607
στάδιοι γὰρ εἰσὶ εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατὸν καὶ ἑξακισχίλιοι .
it is seven hundred and sixty-five miles.


2.9.2
1608
τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ Θηβέων ἐς Ἐλεφαντίνην καλεομένην πόλιν στάδιοι χίλιοι καὶ ὀκτακόσιοι εἰσί .
And between Thebes and the city called Elephantine there are two hundred and twenty-five miles.


2.10.1
1609
ταύτης ὦν τῆς χώρης τῆς εἰρημένης ἡ πολλή , κατά περ οἱ ἱρέες ἔλεγον , ἐδόκεε καὶ αὐτῷ μοι εἶναι ἐπίκτητος Αἰγυπτίοισι .
The greater portion, then, of this country of which I have spoken was land deposited for the Egyptians as the priests told me, and I myself formed the same judgment;


2.10.1
1610
τῶν γὰρ ὀρέων τῶν εἰρημένων τῶν ὑπὲρ Μέμφιν πόλιν κειμένων τὸ μεταξὺ ἐφαίνετό μοι εἶναι κοτὲ κόλπος θαλάσσης , ὥσπερ γε τὰ περὶ Ἴλιον καὶ Τευθρανίην καὶ Ἔφεσόν τε καὶ Μαιάνδρου πεδίον , ὥς γε εἶναι σμικρὰ ταῦτα μεγάλοισι συμβαλεῖν ·
all that lies between the ranges of mountains above Memphis to which I have referred seemed to me to have once been a gulf of the sea, just as the country about Ilion and Teuthrania and Ephesus and the plain of the Maeander, to compare these small things with great.


2.10.2
1611
τῶν γὰρ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία προσχωσάντων ποταμῶν ἑνὶ τῶν στομάτων τοῦ Νείλου , ἐόντος πενταστόμου , οὐδεὶς αὐτῶν πλήθεος πέρι ἄξιος συμβληθῆναι ἐστί .
For of the rivers that brought down the stuff to make these lands, there is none worthy to be compared for greatness with even one of the mouths of the    Nile   , and the    Nile    has five mouths.


2.10.3
1612
εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ ἄλλοι ποταμοί , οὐ κατὰ τὸν Νεῖλον ἐόντες μεγάθεα , οἵτινες ἔργα ἀποδεξάμενοι μεγάλα εἰσί ·
There are also other rivers, not so great as the Nile, that have had great effects;


2.10.3
1613
τῶν ἐγὼ φράσαι ἔχω οὐνόματα καὶ ἄλλων καὶ οὐκ ἥκιστα Ἀχελῴου , ὃς ῥέων δι’ Ἀκαρνανίης καὶ ἐξιεὶς ἐς θάλασσαν τῶν Ἐχινάδων νήσων τὰς ἡμισέας ἤδη ἤπειρον πεποίηκε .
I could rehearse their names, but principal among them is the Achelous, which, flowing through Acarnania and emptying into the sea, has already made half of the Echinades Islands mainland.


2.11.1
1614
ἔστι δὲ τῆς Ἀραβίης χώρης , Αἰγύπτου δὲ οὐ πρόσω , κόλπος θαλάσσης ἐσέχων ἐκ τῆς Ἐρυθρῆς καλεομένης θαλάσσης , μακρὸς οὕτω δή τι καὶ στεινὸς ὡς ἔρχομαι φράσων ·
Now in    Arabia   , not far from    Egypt   , there is a gulf extending inland from the sea called Red , whose length and width are such as I shall show:


2.11.2
1615
μῆκος μὲν πλόου ἀρξαμένῳ ἐκ μυχοῦ διεκπλῶσαι ἐς τὴν εὐρέαν θάλασσαν ἡμέραι ἀναισιμοῦνται τεσσεράκοντα εἰρεσίῃ χρεωμένῳ ·
in length, from its inner end out to the wide sea, it is a forty days' voyage for a ship rowed by oars;


2.11.2
1616
εὖρος δέ , τῇ εὐρύτατος ἐστὶ ὁ κόλπος , ἥμισυ ἡμέρης πλόου .
and in breadth, it is half a day's voyage at the widest.


2.11.2
1617
ῥηχίη δ’ ἐν αὐτῷ καὶ ἄμπωτις ἀνὰ πᾶσαν ἡμέρην γίνεται .
Every day the tides ebb and flow in it.


2.11.3
1618
ἕτερον τοιοῦτον κόλπον καὶ τὴν Αἴγυπτον δοκέω γενέσθαι κοτέ , τὸν μὲν ἐκ τῆς βορηίης θαλάσσης κόλπον ἐσέχοντα ἐπ’ Αἰθιοπίης , τὸν δὲ Ἀράβιον , τὸν ἔρχομαι λέξων , ἐκ τῆς νοτίης φέροντα ἐπὶ Συρίης , σχεδὸν μὲν ἀλλήλοισι συντετραίνοντας τοὺς μυχούς , ὀλίγον δέ τι παραλλάσσοντας τῆς χώρης .
I believe that where    Egypt    is now, there was once another such gulf; this extended from the northern sea towards Aethiopia, and the other, the Arabian gulf of which I shall speak, extended from the south towards    Syria   ; the ends of these gulfs penetrated into the country near each other, and but a little space of land separated them.


2.11.4
1619
εἰ ὦν ἐθελήσει ἐκτρέψαι τὸ ῥέεθρον ὁ Νεῖλος ἐς τοῦτον τὸν Ἀράβιον κόλπον , τί μιν κωλύει ῥέοντος τούτου ἐκχωσθῆναι ἐντός γε δισμυρίων ἐτέων ;
Now, if the Nile inclined to direct its current into this Arabian gulf, why should the latter not be silted up by it inside of twenty thousand years?


2.11.4
1620
ἐγὼ μὲν γὰρ ἔλπομαί γε καὶ μυρίων ἐντὸς χωσθῆναι ἄν ·
In fact, I expect that it would be silted up inside of ten thousand years.


2.11.4
1621
κοῦ γε δὴ ἐν τῷ προαναισιμωμένῳ χρόνῳ πρότερον ἢ ἐμὲ γενέσθαι οὐκ ἂν χωσθείη κόλπος καὶ πολλῷ μέζων ἔτι τούτου ὑπὸ τοσούτου τε ποταμοῦ καὶ οὕτω ἐργατικοῦ ;
Is it to be doubted, then, that in the ages before my birth a gulf even much greater than this should have been silted up by a river so great and so busy?


2.12.1
1622
τὰ περὶ Αἴγυπτον ὦν καὶ τοῖσι λέγουσι αὐτὰ πείθομαι καὶ αὐτὸς οὕτω κάρτα δοκέω εἶναι , ἰδών τε τὴν Αἴγυπτον προκειμένην τῆς ἐχομένης γῆς κογχύλιά τε φαινόμενα ἐπὶ τοῖσι ὄρεσι καὶ ἅλμην ἐπανθέουσαν , ὥστε καὶ τὰς πυραμίδας δηλέεσθαι , καὶ ψάμμον μοῦνον Αἰγύπτου ὄρος τοῦτο τὸ ὑπὲρ Μέμφιος ἔχον , πρὸς δὲ τῇ χώρῃ οὔτε τῇ Ἀραβίῃ προσούρῳ ἐούσῃ τὴν Αἴγυπτον προσεικέλην οὔτε τῇ Λιβύῃ , οὐ μὲν οὐδὲ τῇ Συρίῃ ( τῆς γὰρ Ἀραβίης τὰ παρὰ θάλασσαν Σύροι νέμονται ) , ἀλλὰ μελάγγαιόν τε καὶ καταρρηγνυμένην , ὥστε ἐοῦσαν ἰλύν τε καὶ πρόχυσιν ἐξ Αἰθιοπίης κατενηνειγμένην ὑπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ .
As for    Egypt   , then, I credit those who say it, and myself very much believe it to be the case; for I have seen that    Egypt    projects into the sea beyond the neighboring land, and shells are exposed to view on the mountains, and things are coated with salt, so that even the pyramids show it, and the only sandy mountain in    Egypt    is that which is above    Memphis   ;


2.12.3
1623
τὴν δὲ Λιβύην ἴδμεν ἐρυθροτέρην τε γῆν καὶ ὑποψαμμοτέρην , τὴν δὲ Ἀραβίην τε καὶ Συρίην ἀργιλωδεστέρην τε καὶ ὑπόπετρον ἐοῦσαν .
but we know that the soil of    Libya    is redder and somewhat sandy, and    Arabia    and    Syria    are lands of clay and stones.


2.13.1
1624
ἔλεγον δὲ καὶ τόδε μοι μέγα τεκμήριον περὶ τῆς χώρης ταύτης οἱ ἱρέες , ὡς ἐπὶ Μοίριος βασιλέος , ὅκως ἔλθοι ὁ ποταμὸς ἐπὶ ὀκτὼ πήχεας τὸ ἐλάχιστον , ἄρδεσκε Αἴγυπτον τὴν ἔνερθε Μέμφιος ·
This, too, that the priests told me about Egypt, is a strong proof:


2.13.1
1625
καὶ Μοίρι οὔκω ἦν ἔτεα εἰνακόσια τετελευτηκότι ὅτε τῶν ἱρέων ταῦτα ἐγὼ ἤκουον .
when Moeris was king, if the river rose as much as thirteen feet, it watered all of Egypt below Memphis. Moeris had not been dead nine hundred years when I heard this from the priests.


2.13.1
1626
νῦν δὲ εἰ μὴ ἐπ’ ἑκκαίδεκα ἢ πεντεκαίδεκα πήχεας ἀναβῇ τὸ ἐλάχιστον ὁ ποταμός , οὐκ ὑπερβαίνει ἐς τὴν χώρην .
But now, if the river does not rise at least twenty-six or twenty-five feet, the land is not flooded.


2.13.2
1627
δοκέουσί τέ μοι Αἰγυπτίων οἱ ἔνερθε λίμνης τῆς Μοίριος οἰκέοντες τά τε ἄλλα χωρία καὶ τὸ καλεόμενον Δέλτα , ἢν οὕτω ἡ χώρη αὕτη κατὰ λόγον ἐπιδιδῷ ἐς ὕψος καὶ τὸ ὅμοιον ἀποδιδῷ ἐς αὔξησιν , μὴ κατακλύζοντος αὐτὴν τοῦ Νείλου πείσεσθαι τὸν πάντα χρόνον τὸν ἐπίλοιπον Αἰγύπτιοι τὸ κοτὲ αὐτοὶ Ἕλληνας ἔφασαν πείσεσθαι .
And, in my opinion, the Egyptians who inhabit the lands lower down the river than    lake Moeris   , and especially what is called the Delta — if this land of theirs rises in the same proportion and broadens likewise in extent, and the    Nile    no longer floods it — will forever after be in the same straits as they themselves once said the Greeks would be;


2.13.3
1628
πυθόμενοι γὰρ ὡς ὕεται πᾶσα ἡ χώρη τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἀλλ’ οὐ ποταμοῖσι ἄρδεται κατά περ ἡ σφετέρη , ἔφασαν Ἕλληνας ψευσθέντας κοτὲ ἐλπίδος μεγάλης κακῶς πεινήσειν .
for, learning that all the Greek land is watered by rain, but not by river water like theirs, they said that one day the Greeks would be let down by what they counted on, and miserably starve:


2.13.3
1629
τὸ δὲ ἔπος τοῦτο ἐθέλει λέγειν ὡς , εἰ μὴ ἐθελήσει σφι ὕειν ὁ θεὸς ἀλλὰ αὐχμῷ διαχρᾶσθαι , λιμῷ οἱ Ἕλληνες αἱρεθήσονται ·
meaning that, if heaven send no rain for the Greeks and afflict them with drought, the Greeks will be overtaken by famine,


2.13.3
1630
οὐ γὰρ δή σφι ἐστὶ ὕδατος οὐδεμία ἄλλη ἀποστροφὴ ὅτι μὴ ἐκ τοῦ Διὸς μοῦνον .
for there is no other source of water for them except Zeus alone.


2.14.1
1631
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ἐς Ἕλληνας Αἰγυπτίοισι ὀρθῶς ἔχοντα εἴρηται ·
And this prediction of the Egyptians about the Greeks was true enough.


2.14.1
1632
φέρε δὲ νῦν καὶ αὐτοῖσι Αἰγυπτίοισι ὡς ἔχει φράσω ·
But now let me show the prospect for the Egyptians themselves:


2.14.1
1633
εἴ σφι θέλοι , ὡς καὶ πρότερον εἶπον , ἡ χώρη ἡ ἔνερθε Μέμφιος ( αὕτη γὰρ ἐστὶ ἡ αὐξανομένη ) κατὰ λόγον τοῦ παροιχομένου χρόνου ἐς ὕψος αὐξάνεσθαι , ἄλλο τι ἢ οἱ ταύτῃ οἰκέοντες Αἰγυπτίων πεινήσουσι ;
if, as I have already said, the country below Memphis (for it is this which rises) should increase in height in the same proportion as formerly, will not the Egyptians who inhabit it go hungry, as there is no rain in their country and the river will be unable to inundate their fields?


2.14.1
1634
εἰ μήτε γε ὕσεταί σφι ἡ χώρη μήτε ὁ ποταμὸς οἷός τ’ ἔσται ἐς τὰς ἀρούρας ὑπερβαίνειν .
if neither the rain waters their country nor the river is able to rise to their fields.


2.14.2
1635
ἦ γὰρ δὴ νῦν γε οὗτοι ἀπονητότατα καρπὸν κομίζονται ἐκ γῆς τῶν τε ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων πάντων καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν Αἰγυπτίων ·
At present, of course, there are no people, either in the rest of Egypt or in the whole world, who live from the soil with so little labor;


2.14.2
1636
οἳ οὔτε ἀρότρῳ ἀναρρηγνύντες αὔλακας ἔχουσι πόνους οὔτε σκάλλοντες οὔτε ἄλλο ἐργαζόμενοι οὐδὲν τῶν οἱ ἄλλοι ἄνθρωποι περὶ λήιον πονέουσι , ἀλλ’ ἐπεάν σφι ὁ ποταμὸς αὐτόματος ἐπελθὼν ἄρσῃ τὰς ἀρούρας , ἄρσας δὲ ἀπολίπῃ ὀπίσω , τότε σπείρας ἕκαστος τὴν ἑωυτοῦ ἄρουραν ἐσβάλλει ἐς αὐτὴν ὗς , ἐπεὰν δὲ καταπατήσῃ τῇσι ὑσὶ τὸ σπέρμα , ἄμητον τὸ ἀπὸ τούτου μένει , ἀποδινήσας δὲ τῇσι ὑσὶ τὸν σῖτον οὕτω κομίζεται .
they do not have to break the land up with the plough, or hoe, or do any other work that other men do to get a crop; the river rises of itself, waters the fields, and then sinks back again; then each man sows his field and sends swine into it to tread down the seed, and waits for the harvest; then he has the swine thresh his grain, and so garners it.


2.15.1
1637
εἰ ὦν βουλόμεθα γνώμῃσι τῇσι Ἰώνων χρᾶσθαι τὰ περὶ Αἴγυπτον , οἳ φασὶ τὸ Δέλτα μοῦνον εἶναι Αἴγυπτον , ἀπὸ Περσέος καλεομένης σκοπιῆς λέγοντες τὸ παρὰ θάλασσαν εἶναι αὐτῆς μέχρι Ταριχηίων τῶν Πηλουσιακῶν , τῇ δὴ τεσσεράκοντα εἰσὶ σχοῖνοι , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ θαλάσσης λεγόντων ἐς μεσόγαιαν τείνειν αὐτὴν μέχρι Κερκασώρου πόλιος , κατ’ ἣν σχίζεται ὁ Νεῖλος ἔς τε Πηλούσιον ῥέων καὶ ἐς Κάνωβον , τὰ δὲ ἄλλα λεγόντων τῆς Αἰγύπτου τὰ μὲν Λιβύης τὰ δὲ Ἀραβίης εἶναι , ἀποδεικνύοιμεν ἂν τούτῳ τῷ λόγῳ χρεώμενοι Αἰγυπτίοισι οὐκ ἐοῦσαν πρότερον χώρην .
Now if we agree with the opinion of the Ionians, who say that only the Delta is    Egypt   , and that its seaboard reaches from the so-called  Watchtower of Perseus   forty schoeni to the Salters' at    Pelusium   , while inland it stretches as far as the city of Cercasorus, where the    Nile    divides and flows to    Pelusium    and    Canobus   , and that all the rest of    Egypt    is partly    Libya    and partly    Arabia    — if we follow this account, we can show that there was once no land for the Egyptians;


2.15.2
1638
ἤδη γάρ σφι τό γε Δέλτα , ὡς αὐτοὶ λέγουσι Αἰγύπτιοι καὶ ἐμοὶ δοκέει , ἐστὶ κατάρρυτόν τε καὶ νεωστὶ ὡς λόγῳ εἰπεῖν ἀναπεφηνός .
for we have seen that (as the Egyptians themselves say, and as I myself judge) the Delta is alluvial land and but lately (so to speak) came into being.


2.15.2
1639
εἰ τοίνυν σφι χώρη γε μηδεμία ὑπῆρχε , τί περιεργάζοντο δοκέοντες πρῶτοι ἀνθρώπων γεγονέναι ;
Then if there was once no land for them, it was an idle notion that they were the oldest nation on earth,


2.15.2
1640
οὐδὲ ἔδει σφέας ἐς διάπειραν τῶν παιδίων ἰέναι , τίνα γλῶσσαν πρώτην ἀπήσουσι .
and they need not have made that trial to see what language the children would first speak.


2.15.3
1641
ἀλλ’ οὔτε Αἰγυπτίους δοκέω ἅμα τῷ Δέλτα τῷ ὑπὸ Ἰώνων καλεομένῳ γενέσθαι αἰεί τε εἶναι ἐξ οὗ ἀνθρώπων γένος ἐγένετο , προϊούσης δὲ τῆς χώρης πολλοὺς μὲν τοὺς ὑπολειπομένους αὐτῶν γενέσθαι πολλοὺς δὲ τοὺς ὑποκαταβαίνοντας .
I maintain, rather, that the Egyptians did not come into existence together with what the Ionians call the Delta, but have existed since the human race came into being;


2.15.3
1642
τὸ δ’ ὦν πάλαι αἱ Θῆβαι Αἴγυπτος ἐκαλέετο , τῆς τὸ περίμετρον στάδιοι εἰσὶ εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατὸν καὶ ἑξακισχίλιοι .
and as the land grew in extent, there were many of them who stayed behind, and many who spread down over it. Be that as it may, the Theban district, a land of seven hundred and sixty-five miles in circumference, was in the past called Egypt.


2.16.1
1643
εἰ ὦν ἡμεῖς ὀρθῶς περὶ αὐτῶν γινώσκομεν , Ἴωνες οὐκ εὖ φρονέουσι περὶ Αἰγύπτου ·
If, then, our judgment of this is right, the Ionians are in error concerning Egypt;


2.16.1
1644
εἰ δὲ ὀρθή ἐστι ἡ γνώμη τῶν Ἰώνων , Ἕλληνάς τε καὶ αὐτοὺς Ἴωνας ἀποδείκνυμι οὐκ ἐπισταμένους λογίζεσθαι , οἳ φασὶ τρία μόρια εἶναι γῆν πᾶσαν , Εὐρώπην τε καὶ Ἀσίην καὶ Λιβύην .
but if their opinion is right, then it is plain that they and the rest of the Greeks cannot reckon truly, when they divide the whole earth into three parts, Europe, Asia, and Libya;


2.16.2
1645
τέταρτον γὰρ δή σφεας δεῖ προσλογίζεσθαι Αἰγύπτου τὸ Δέλτα , εἰ μήτε γε ἐστὶ τῆς Ἀσίης μήτε τῆς Λιβύης ·
they must add to these a fourth part, the Delta of Egypt, if it belongs neither to Asia nor to Libya;


2.16.2
1646
οὐ γὰρ δὴ ὁ Νεῖλός γε ἐστὶ κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν λόγον ὁ τὴν Ἀσίην οὐρίζων τῇ Λιβύῃ , τοῦ Δέλτα δὲ τούτου κατὰ τὸ ὀξὺ περιρρήγνυται ὁ Νεῖλος , ὥστε ἐν τῷ μεταξὺ Ἀσίης τε καὶ Λιβύης γίνοιτ’ ἄν .
for by their showing the Nile is not the river that separates Asia and Libya; the Nile divides at the apex of this Delta, so that this land must be between Asia and Libya.


2.17.1
1647
καὶ τὴν μὲν Ἰώνων γνώμην ἀπίεμεν , ἡμεῖς δὲ ὧδε καὶ περὶ τούτων λέγομεν , Αἴγυπτον μὲν πᾶσαν εἶναι ταύτην τὴν ὑπ’ Αἰγυπτίων οἰκεομένην κατά περ Κιλικίην τὴν ὑπὸ Κιλίκων καὶ Ἀσσυρίην τὴν ὑπὸ Ἀσσυρίων , οὔρισμα δὲ Ἀσίῃ καὶ Λιβύῃ οἴδαμεν οὐδὲν ἐὸν ὀρθῷ λόγῳ εἰ μὴ τοὺς Αἰγυπτίων οὔρους .
We leave the Ionians' opinion aside, and our own judgment about the matter is this:    Egypt    is all that country which is inhabited by Egyptians, just as    Cilicia    and Assyria are the countries inhabited by Cilicians and Assyrians, and we know of no boundary line (rightly so called) below    Asia    and    Libya    except the borders of the Egyptians.


2.17.2
1648
εἰ δὲ τῷ ὑπ’ Ἑλλήνων νενομισμένῳ χρησόμεθα , νομιοῦμεν Αἴγυπτον πᾶσαν ἀρξαμένην ἀπὸ Καταδούπων τε καὶ Ἐλεφαντίνης πόλιος δίχα διαιρέεσθαι καὶ ἀμφοτερέων τῶν ἐπωνυμιέων ἔχεσθαι ·
But if we follow the belief of the Greeks, we shall consider all Egypt commencing from the Cataracts and the city of Elephantine to be divided into two parts,


2.17.2
1649
τὰ μὲν γὰρ αὐτῆς εἶναι τῆς Λιβύης τὰ δὲ τῆς Ἀσίης .
and to claim both the names, the one a part of Libya and the other of Asia.


2.17.3
1650
ὁ γὰρ δὴ Νεῖλος ἀρξάμενος ἐκ τῶν Καταδούπων ῥέει μέσην Αἴγυπτον σχίζων ἐς θάλασσαν .
For the Nile, beginning from the Cataracts, divides Egypt into two parts as it flows to the sea.


2.17.3
1651
μέχρι μέν νυν Κερκασώρου πόλιος ῥέει εἷς ἐὼν ὁ Νεῖλος , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ ταύτης τῆς πόλιος σχίζεται τριφασίας ὁδούς .
Now, as far as the city Cercasorus the Nile flows in one channel, but after that it parts into three.


2.17.4
1652
καὶ ἣ μὲν πρὸς ἠῶ τρέπεται , τὸ καλέεται Πηλούσιον στόμα , ἡ δὲ ἑτέρη τῶν ὁδῶν πρὸς ἑσπέρην ἔχει ·
One of these, which is called the Pelusian mouth, flows east;


2.17.4
1653
τοῦτο δὲ Κανωβικὸν στόμα κέκληται .
the second flows west, and is called the Canobic mouth.


2.17.4
1654
ἡ δὲ δὴ ἰθέα τῶν ὁδῶν τῷ Νείλῳ ἐστὶ ἥδε ·
But the direct channel of the Nile


2.17.4
1655
ἄνωθεν φερόμενος ἐς τὸ ὀξὺ τοῦ Δέλτα ἀπικνέεται , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτου σχίζων μέσον τὸ Δέλτα ἐς θάλασσαν ἐξιεῖ , οὔτε ἐλαχίστην μοῖραν τοῦ ὕδατος παρεχόμενος ταύτην οὔτε ἥκιστα ὀνομαστήν ·
when the river in its downward course reaches the apex of the Delta, flows thereafter clean through the middle of the Delta into the sea; in this is seen the greatest and most famous part of its waters,


2.17.4
1656
τὸ καλέεται Σεβεννυτικὸν στόμα .
and it is called the Sebennytic mouth.


2.17.5
1657
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἕτερα διφάσια στόματα ἀπὸ τοῦ Σεβεννυτικοῦ ἀποσχισθέντα , φέροντα ἐς θάλασσαν ·
There are also two channels which separate themselves from the Sebennytic and so flow into the sea:


2.17.5
1658
τοῖσι οὐνόματα κέεται τάδε , τῷ μὲν Σαϊτικὸν αὐτῶν τῷ δὲ Μενδήσιον .
by name, the Saïtic and the Mendesian.


2.17.6
1659
τὸ δὲ Βολβίτινον στόμα καὶ τὸ Βουκολικὸν οὐκ ἰθαγενέα στόματα ἐστὶ ἀλλ’ ὀρυκτά .
The Bolbitine and Bucolic mouths are not natural but excavated channels.


2.18.1
1660
μαρτυρέει δέ μοι τῇ γνώμῃ , ὅτι τοσαύτη ἐστὶ Αἴγυπτος ὅσην τινὰ ἐγὼ ἀποδείκνυμι τῷ λόγῳ , καὶ τὸ Ἄμμωνος χρηστήριον γενόμενον ·
The response of oracle of Ammon in fact bears witness to my opinion, that Egypt is of such an extent as I have argued;


2.18.1
1661
τὸ ἐγὼ τῆς ἐμεωυτοῦ γνώμης ὕστερον περὶ Αἴγυπτον ἐπυθόμην .
I learned this by inquiry after my judgment was already formed about Egypt.


2.18.2
1662
οἱ γὰρ δὴ ἐκ Μαρέης τε πόλιος καὶ Ἄπιος , οἰκέοντες Αἰγύπτου τὰ πρόσουρα Λιβύῃ , αὐτοί τε δοκέοντες εἶναι Λίβυες καὶ οὐκ Αἰγύπτιοι καὶ ἀχθόμενοι τῇ περὶ τὰ ἱρὰ θρησκηίῃ , βουλόμενοι θηλέων βοῶν μὴ ἔργεσθαι , ἔπεμψαν ἐς Ἄμμωνα φάμενοι οὐδὲν σφίσι τε καὶ Αἰγυπτίοισι κοινὸν εἶναι ·
The men of the cities of Marea and Apis, in the part of Egypt bordering on Libya, believing themselves to be Libyans and not Egyptians, and disliking the injunction of the religious law that forbade them to eat cows' meat, sent to Ammon saying that they had no part of or lot with Egypt:


2.18.2
1663
οἰκέειν τε γὰρ ἔξω τοῦ Δέλτα καὶ οὐδὲν ὁμολογέειν αὐτοῖσι , βούλεσθαί τε πάντων σφίσι ἐξεῖναι γεύεσθαι .
for they lived (they said) outside the Delta and did not consent to the ways of its people, and they wished to be allowed to eat all foods.


2.18.3
1664
ὁ δὲ θεός σφεας οὐκ ἔα ποιέειν ταῦτα , φὰς Αἴγυπτον εἶναι ταύτην τὴν ὁ Νεῖλος ἐπιὼν ἄρδει , καὶ Αἰγυπτίους εἶναι τούτους οἳ ἔνερθε Ἐλεφαντίνης πόλιος οἰκέοντες ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ τούτου πίνουσι .
But the god forbade them: all the land, he said, watered by the Nile in its course was Egypt,


2.18.3
1665
οὕτω σφι ταῦτα ἐχρήσθη .
and all who lived lower down than the city Elephantine and drank the river's water were Egyptians. Such was the oracle given to them.


2.19.1
1666
ἐπέρχεται δὲ ὁ Νεῖλος , ἐπεὰν πληθύῃ , οὐ μοῦνον τὸ Δέλτα ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ Λιβυκοῦ τε λεγομένου χωρίου εἶναι καὶ τοῦ Ἀραβίου ἐνιαχῇ καὶ ἐπὶ δύο ἡμερέων ἑκατέρωθι ὁδόν , καὶ πλέον ἔτι τούτου καὶ ἔλασσον .
When the Nile is in flood, it overflows not only the Delta but also the lands called Libyan and Arabian, as far as two days' journey from either bank in places, and sometimes more than this, sometimes less.


2.19.1
1667
τοῦ ποταμοῦ δὲ φύσιος πέρι οὔτε τι τῶν ἱρέων οὔτε ἄλλου οὐδενὸς παραλαβεῖν ἐδυνάσθην .
Concerning its nature, I could not learn anything either from the priests or from any others.


2.19.2
1668
πρόθυμος δὲ ἔα τάδε παρ’ αὐτῶν πυθέσθαι , ὅ τι κατέρχεται μὲν ὁ Νεῖλος πληθύων ἀπὸ τροπέων τῶν θερινέων ἀρξάμενος ἐπὶ ἑκατὸν ἡμέρας , πελάσας δὲ ἐς τὸν ἀριθμὸν τουτέων τῶν ἡμερέων ὀπίσω ἀπέρχεται ἀπολείπων τὸ ῥέεθρον , ὥστε βραχὺς τὸν χειμῶνα ἅπαντα διατελέει ἐὼν μέχρι οὗ αὖτις τροπέων τῶν θερινέων .
Yet I was anxious to learn from them why the    Nile    comes down with a rising flood for a hundred days from the summer solstice; and when this number of days is passed, sinks again with a diminishing stream, so that the river is low for the whole winter until the summer solstice again.


2.19.3
1669
τούτων ὦν πέρι οὐδενὸς οὐδὲν οἷός τε ἐγενόμην παραλαβεῖν παρὰ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων , ἱστορέων αὐτοὺς ἥντινα δύναμιν ἔχει ὁ Νεῖλος τὰ ἔμπαλιν πεφυκέναι τῶν ἄλλων ποταμῶν ·
I was not able to get any information from any of the Egyptians regarding this, when I asked them what power the Nile has to be contrary in nature to all other rivers.


2.19.3
1670
ταῦτά τε δὴ τὰ λελεγμένα βουλόμενος εἰδέναι ἱστόρεον καὶ ὅ τι αὔρας ἀποπνεούσας μοῦνος ποταμῶν πάντων οὐ παρέχεται .
I wished to know this, and asked; also, why no breezes blew from it as from every other river.


2.20.1
1671
ἀλλὰ Ἑλλῄνων μὲν τινὲς ἐπίσημοι βουλόμενοι γενέσθαι σοφίην ἔλεξαν περὶ τοῦ ὕδατος τούτου τριφασίας ὁδούς ·
But some of the Greeks, wishing to be notable for cleverness, put forward three opinions about this river,


2.20.1
1672
τῶν τὰς μὲν δύο τῶν ὁδῶν οὐδ’ ἀξιῶ μνησθῆναι εἰ μὴ ὅσον σημῆναι βουλόμενος μοῦνον ·
two of which I would not even mention except just to show what they are.


2.20.2
1673
τῶν ἡ ἑτέρη μὲν λέγει τοὺς ἐτησίας ἀνέμους εἶναι αἰτίους πληθύειν τὸν ποταμόν , κωλύοντας ἐς θάλασσαν ἐκρέειν τὸν Νεῖλον .
One of them maintains that the Etesian winds are the cause of the river being in flood, because they hinder the Nile from emptying into the sea.


2.20.2
1674
πολλάκις δὲ ἐτησίαι μὲν οὔκων ἔπνευσαν , ὁ δὲ Νεῖλος τ- αὐτὸ ἐργάζεται .
But there are many times when the Etesian winds do not blow, yet the Nile does the same as before.


2.20.3
1675
πρὸς δέ , εἰ ἐτησίαι αἴτιοι ἦσαν , χρῆν καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ποταμούς , ὅσοι τοῖσι ἐτησίῃσι ἀντίοι ῥέουσι , ὁμοίως πάσχειν καὶ κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ τῷ Νείλῳ , καὶ μᾶλλον ἔτι τοσούτῳ ὅσῳ ἐλάσσονες ἐόντες ἀσθενέστερα τὰ ῥεύματα παρέχονται .
And further, if the Etesian winds were the cause, then the other rivers which flow contrary to those winds should be affected like the Nile, and even more so, since being smaller they have a weaker current.


2.20.3
1676
εἰσὶ δὲ πολλοὶ μὲν ἐν τῇ Συρίῃ ποταμοὶ πολλοὶ δὲ ἐν τῇ Λιβύῃ , οἳ οὐδὲν τοιοῦτο πάσχουσι οἷόν τι καὶ ὁ Νεῖλος .
Yet there are many rivers in Syria and many in Libya, and they behave nothing like the Nile.


2.21.1
1677
ἡ δ’ ἑτέρη ἀνεπιστημονεστέρη μὲν ἐστὶ τῆς λελεγμένης , λόγῳ δὲ εἰπεῖν θωμασιωτέρη ·
The second opinion is less grounded on knowledge than the previous, though it is more marvellous to the ear:


2.21.1
1678
ἣ λέγει ἀπὸ τοῦ Ὠκεανοῦ ῥέοντα αὐτὸν ταῦτα μηχανᾶσθαι , τὸν δὲ Ὠκεανὸν γῆν περὶ πᾶσαν ῥέειν .
according to it, the river effects what it does because it flows from Ocean, which flows around the whole world.


2.22.1
1679
ἡ δὲ τρίτη τῶν ὁδῶν πολλὸν ἐπιεικεστάτη ἐοῦσα μάλιστα ἔψευσται ·
The third opinion is by far the most plausible, yet the most erroneous of all.


2.22.1
1680
λέγει γὰρ δὴ οὐδ’ αὕτη οὐδέν , φαμένη τὸν Νεῖλον ῥέειν ἀπὸ τηκομένης χιόνος ·
It has no more truth in it than the others. According to this, the Nile flows from where snows melt;


2.22.1
1681
ὃς ῥέει μὲν ἐκ Λιβύης διὰ μέσων Αἰθιόπων , ἐκδιδοῖ δὲ ἐς Αἴγυπτον .
but it flows from Libya through the midst of Ethiopia, and comes out into Egypt.


2.22.2
1682
κῶς ὦν δῆτα ῥέοι ἂν ἀπὸ χιόνος , ἀπὸ τῶν θερμοτάτων ῥέων ἐς τὰ ψυχρότερα τὰ πολλά ἐστι ;
How can it flow from snow, then, seeing that it comes from the hottest places to lands that are for the most part cooler?


2.22.2
1683
ἀνδρί γε λογίζεσθαι τοιούτων πέρι οἵῳ τε ἐόντι , ὡς οὐδὲ οἰκὸς ἀπὸ χιόνος μιν ῥέειν , πρῶτον μὲν καὶ μέγιστον μαρτύριον οἱ ἄνεμοι παρέχονται πνέοντες ἀπὸ τῶν χωρέων τουτέων θερμοί ·
In fact, for a man who can reason about such things, the principal and strongest evidence that the river is unlikely to flow from snows is that the winds blowing from Libya and Ethiopia are hot.


2.22.3
1684
δεύτερον δὲ ὅτι ἄνομβρος ἡ χώρη καὶ ἀκρύσταλλος διατελέει ἐοῦσα , ἐπὶ δὲ χιόνι πεσούσῃ πᾶσα ἀνάγκη ἐστὶ ὗσαι ἐν πέντε ἡμέρῃσι , ὥστε , εἰ ἐχιόνιζε , ὕετο ἂν ταῦτα τὰ χωρία ·
In the second place, the country is rainless and frostless; but after snow has fallen, it has to rain within five days; so that if it snowed, it would rain in these lands.


2.22.3
1685
τρίτα δὲ οἱ ἄνθρωποι ὑπὸ τοῦ καύματος μέλανες ἐόντες .
And thirdly, the men of the country are black because of the heat.


2.22.4
1686
ἰκτῖνοι δὲ καὶ χελιδόνες δι’ ἔτεος ἐόντες οὐκ ἀπολείπουσι , γέρανοι δὲ φεύγουσαι τὸν χειμῶνα τὸν ἐν τῇ Σκυθικῇ χώρῃ γινόμενον φοιτῶσι ἐς χειμασίην ἐς τοὺς τόπους τούτους .
Moreover, kites and swallows live there all year round, and cranes come every year to these places to winter there, flying from the wintry weather of Scythia.


2.22.4
1687
εἰ τοίνυν ἐχιόνιζε καὶ ὅσον ὦν ταύτην τὴν χώρην δι’ ἧς τε ῥέει καὶ ἐκ τῆς ἄρχεται ῥέων ὁ Νεῖλος , ἦν ἂν τούτων οὐδέν , ὡς ἡ ἀνάγκη ἐλέγχει .
Now, were there but the least fall of snow in this country through which the Nile flows and where it rises, none of these things would happen, as necessity proves.


2.23.1
1688
ὁ δὲ περὶ τοῦ Ὠκεανοῦ λέξας ἐς ἀφανὲς τὸν μῦθον ἀνενείκας οὐκ ἔχει ἔλεγχον ·
The opinion about Ocean is grounded in obscurity and needs no disproof;


2.23.1
1689
οὐ γὰρ τινὰ ἔγωγε οἶδα ποταμὸν Ὠκεανὸν ἐόντα , Ὅμηρον δὲ ἢ τινὰ τῶν πρότερον γενομένων ποιητέων δοκέω τὸ οὔνομα εὑρόντα ἐς ποίησιν ἐσενείκασθαι .
for I know of no Ocean river; and I suppose that Homer or some older poet invented this name and brought it into his poetry.


2.24.1
1690
εἰ δὲ δεῖ μεμψάμενον γνώμας τὰς προκειμένας αὐτὸν περὶ τῶν ἀφανέων γνώμην ἀποδέξασθαι , φράσω δι’ ὅ τι μοι δοκέει πληθύνεσθαι ὁ Νεῖλος τοῦ θέρεος ·
If, after having condemned the opinions proposed, I must indicate what I myself think about these obscure matters,


2.24.1
1691
τὴν χειμερινὴν ὥρην ἀπελαυνόμενος ὁ ἥλιος ἐκ τῆς ἀρχαίης διεξόδου ὑπὸ τῶν χειμώνων ἔρχεται τῆς Λιβύης τὰ ἄνω .
I shall say why I think the Nile floods in the summer. During the winter, the sun is driven by storms from his customary course and passes over the inland parts of Libya.


2.24.2
1692
ὡς μέν νυν ἐν ἐλαχίστῳ δηλῶσαι , πᾶν εἴρηται ·
For the briefest demonstration, everything has been said;


2.24.2
1693
τῆς γὰρ ἂν ἀγχοτάτω τε ᾖ χώρης οὗτος ὁ θεὸς καὶ κατὰ ἥντινα , ταύτην οἰκὸς διψῆν τε ὑδάτων μάλιστα καὶ τὰ ἐγχώρια ῥεύματα μαραίνεσθαι τῶν ποταμῶν .
for whatever country this god is nearest, or over, it is likely that that land is very thirsty for water and that the local rivers are dried up.


2.25.1
1694
ὡς δὲ ἐν πλέονι λόγῳ δηλῶσαι , ὧδε ἔχει .
A lengthier demonstration goes as follows.


2.25.1
1695
διεξιὼν τῆς Λιβύης τὰ ἄνω ὁ ἥλιος τάδε ποιέει ·
In its passage over the inland parts of Libya, the sun does this:


2.25.1
1696
ἅτε διὰ παντὸς τοῦ χρόνου αἰθρίου τε ἐόντος τοῦ ἠέρος τοῦ κατὰ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία καὶ ἀλεεινῆς τῆς χώρης ἐούσης καὶ ἀνέμων ψυχρῶν , διεξιὼν ποιέει οἷόν περ καὶ τὸ θέρος ἔωθε ποιέειν ἰὼν τὸ μέσον τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ·
as the air is always clear in that region, the land warm, and the winds cool, the sun does in its passage exactly as it would do in the summer passing through the middle of the heaven:


2.25.2
1697
ἕλκει γὰρ ἐπ’ ἑωυτὸν τὸ ὕδωρ , ἑλκύσας δὲ ἀπωθέει ἐς τὰ ἄνω χωρία , ὑπολαμβάνοντες δὲ οἱ ἄνεμοι καὶ διασκιδνάντες τήκουσι ·
it draws the water to itself, and having done so, expels it away to the inland regions, and the winds catch it and scatter and dissolve it;


2.25.2
1698
καὶ εἰσὶ οἰκότως οἱ ἀπὸ ταύτης τῆς χώρης πνέοντες , ὅ τε νότος καὶ ὁ λίψ , ἀνέμων πολλὸν τῶν πάντων ὑετιώτατοι δοκέει δέ μοι οὐδὲ πᾶν τὸ ὕδωρ τὸ ἐπέτειον ἑκάστοτε ἀποπέμπεσθαι τοῦ Νείλου ὁ ἥλιος , ἀλλὰ καὶ ὑπολείπεσθαι περὶ ἑωυτόν .
and, as is to be expected, those that blow from that country, the south and the southwest, are the most rainy of all winds.


2.25.3
1699
πρηϋνομένου δὲ τοῦ χειμῶνος ἀπέρχεται ὁ ἥλιος ἐς μέσον τὸν οὐρανὸν ὀπίσω , καὶ τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν ἤδη ὁμοίως ἀπὸ πάντων ἕλκει τῶν ποταμῶν .
Yet I think that the sun never lets go of all of the water that it draws up from the    Nile    yearly, but keeps some back near itself. Then, as the winter becomes milder, the sun returns to the middle of the heaven, and after that draws from all rivers alike.


2.25.4
1700
τέως δὲ οἳ μὲν ὀμβρίου ὕδατος συμμισγομένου πολλοῦ αὐτοῖσι , ἅτε ὑομένης τε τῆς χώρης καὶ κεχαραδρωμένης , ῥέουσι μεγάλοι ·
Meanwhile, the other rivers are swollen to high flood by the quantity of water that falls into them from the sky, because the country is rained on and cut into gullies;


2.25.4
1701
τοῦ δὲ θέρεος τῶν τε ὄμβρων ἐπιλειπόντων αὐτοὺς καὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου ἑλκόμενοι ἀσθενέες εἰσί .
but in the summer they are low, lacking the rain and being drawn up too by the sun.


2.25.5
1702
ὁ δὲ Νεῖλος ἐὼν ἄνομβρος , ἑλκόμενος δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου μοῦνος ποταμῶν τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον , οἰκότως αὐτὸς ἑωυτοῦ ῥέει πολλῷ ὑποδεέστερος ἢ τοῦ θέρεος ·
But the Nile, being fed by no rain, and being the only river drawn up by the sun in winter, at this time falls far short of the height that it had in summer;


2.25.5
1703
τότε μὲν γὰρ μετὰ πάντων τῶν ὑδάτων ἴσον ἕλκεται , τὸν δὲ χειμῶνα μοῦνος πιέζεται .
which is but natural; for in summer all other waters too and not it alone are attracted to the sun, but in the winter it alone is afflicted.


2.26.1
1704
οὕτω τὸν ἥλιον νενόμικα τούτων αἴτιον εἶναι .
I am convinced, therefore, that the sun is the cause of this phenomenon.


2.26.1
1705
αἴτιος δὲ ὁ αὐτὸς οὗτος κατὰ γνώμην τὴν ἐμὴν καὶ τὸν ἠέρα ξηρὸν τὸν ταύτῃ εἶναι , διακαίων τὴν διέξοδον ἑωυτοῦ ·
The dryness of the air in these parts is also caused by the sun, in my opinion, because it burns its way through it;


2.26.1
1706
οὕτω τῆς Λιβύης τὰ ἄνω θέρος αἰεὶ κατέχει .
hence, it is always summer in the inland part of Libya.


2.26.2
1707
εἰ δὲ ἡ στάσις ἤλλακτο τῶν ὡρέων , καὶ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ τῇ μὲν νῦν ὁ βορέης τε καὶ ὁ χειμὼν ἑστᾶσι , ταύτῃ μὲν τοῦ νότου ἦν ἡ στάσις καὶ τῆς μεσαμβρίης , τῇ δὲ ὁ νότος νῦν ἕστηκε , ταύτῃ δὲ ὁ βορέης , εἰ ταῦτα οὕτω εἶχε , ὁ ἥλιος ἂν ἀπελαυνόμενος ἐκ μέσου τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ὑπὸ τοῦ χειμῶνος καὶ τοῦ βορέω ἤιε ἂν τὰ ἄνω τῆς Εὐρώπης κατά περ νῦν τῆς Λιβύης ἔρχεται , διεξιόντα δ’ ἄν μιν διὰ πάσης Εὐρώπης ἔλπομαι ποιέειν ἂν τὸν Ἴστρον τά περ νῦν ἐργάζεται τὸν Νεῖλον .
But were the stations of the seasons changed, so that the south wind and the summer had their station where the north wind and winter are now set, and the north wind was where the south wind is now — if this were so, the sun, when driven from mid-heaven by the winter and the north wind, would pass over the inland parts of    Europe    as it now passes over    Libya   , and I think that in its passage over all    Europe    it would have the same effect on the Ister as it now does on the    Nile   .


2.27.1
1708
τῆς αὔρης δὲ πέρι , ὅτι οὐκ ἀποπνέει , τήνδε ἔχω γνώμην , ὡς κάρτα ἀπὸ θερμέων χωρέων οὐκ οἰκός ἐστι οὐδὲν ἀποπνέειν , αὔρη δὲ ἀπὸ ψυχροῦ τινος φιλέει πνέειν .
And as to why no breeze blows from the river, this is my opinion: it is not natural that any breeze blow from very hot places; breezes always come from that which is very cold.


2.28.1
1709
ταῦτα μέν νυν ἔστω ὡς ἔστι τε καὶ ὡς ἀρχὴν ἐγένετο ·
Let this be, then, as it is and as it was in the beginning.


2.28.1
1710
τοῦ δὲ Νείλου τὰς πηγὰς οὔτε Αἰγυπτίων οὔτε Λιβύων οὔτε Ἑλλήνων τῶν ἐμοὶ ἀπικομένων ἐς λόγους οὐδεὶς ὑπέσχετο εἰδέναι , εἰ μὴ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἐν Σάι πόλι ὁ γραμματιστὴς τῶν ἱρῶν χρημάτων τῆς Ἀθηναίης .
But as to the sources of the Nile, no one that conversed with me, Egyptian, Libyan, or Greek, professed to know them, except the recorder of the sacred treasures of Athena in the Egyptian city of Saïs.


2.28.2
1711
οὗτος δ’ ἔμοιγε παίζειν ἐδόκεε φάμενος εἰδέναι ἀτρεκέως ·
I thought he was joking when he said that he had exact knowledge,


2.28.2
1712
ἔλεγε δὲ ὧδε , εἶναι δύο ὄρεα ἐς ὀξὺ τὰς κορυφὰς ἀπηγμένα , μεταξὺ Συήνης τε πόλιος κείμενα τῆς Θηβαΐδος καὶ Ἐλεφαντίνης , οὐνόματα δὲ εἶναι τοῖσι ὄρεσι τῷ μὲν Κρῶφι τῷ δὲ Μῶφι ·
but this was his story. Between the city of Syene in the Thebaid and Elephantine, there are two hills with sharp peaks, one called Crophi and the other Mophi.


2.28.3
1713
τὰς ὦν δὴ πηγὰς τοῦ Νείλου ἐούσας ἀβύσσους ἐκ τοῦ μέσου τῶν ὀρέων τούτων ῥέειν , καὶ τὸ μὲν ἥμισυ τοῦ ὕδατος ἐπ’ Αἰγύπτου ῥέειν καὶ πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον , τὸ δ’ ἕτερον ἥμισυ ἐπ’ Αἰθιοπίης τε καὶ νότου .
The springs of the    Nile   , which are bottomless, rise between these hills; half the water flows north towards    Egypt   , and the other half south towards    Ethiopia   .


2.28.4
1714
ὡς δὲ ἄβυσσοι εἰσι αἱ πηγαί , ἐς διάπειραν ἔφη τούτου Ψαμμήτιχον Αἰγύπτου βασιλέα ἀπικέσθαι ·
He said that Psammetichus king of Egypt had put to the test whether the springs are bottomless:


2.28.4
1715
πολλέων γὰρ αὐτὸν χιλιάδων ὀργυιέων πλεξάμενον κάλον κατεῖναι ταύτῃ καὶ οὐκ ἐξικέσθαι ἐς βυσσόν .
for he had a rope of many thousand fathoms' length woven and let down into the spring, but he could not reach to the bottom.


2.28.5
1716
οὕτω μὲν δὴ ὁ γραμματιστής , εἰ ἄρα ταῦτα γινόμενα ἔλεγε , ἀπέφαινε , ὡς ἐμὲ κατανοέειν , δίνας τινὰς ταύτῃ ἐούσας ἰσχυρὰς καὶ παλιρροίην , οἷα δὲ ἐμβάλλοντος τοῦ ὕδατος τοῖσι ὄρεσι , μὴ δύνασθαι κατιεμένην καταπειρητηρίην ἐς βυσσὸν ἰέναι .
This recorder, then, if he spoke the truth, showed, I think, that there are strong eddies and an upward flow of water, such that with the stream rushing against the hills the sounding-line when let down cannot reach bottom.


2.29.1
1717
ἄλλου δὲ οὐδενὸς οὐδὲν ἐδυνάμην πυθέσθαι .
I was unable to learn anything from anyone else,


2.29.1
1718
ἀλλὰ τοσόνδε μὲν ἄλλο ἐπὶ μακρότατον ἐπυθόμην , μέχρι μὲν Ἐλεφαντίνης πόλιος αὐτόπτης ἐλθών , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτου ἀκοῇ ἤδη ἱστορέων .
but this much further I did learn by the most extensive investigation that I could make, going as far as the city of Elephantine to look myself, and beyond that by question and hearsay.


2.29.2
1719
ἀπὸ Ἐλεφαντίνης πόλιος ἄνω ἰόντι ἄναντες ἐστὶ χωρίον ·
Beyond Elephantine, as one travels inland, the land rises.


2.29.2
1720
ταύτῃ ὦν δεῖ τὸ πλοῖον διαδήσαντας ἀμφοτέρωθεν κατά περ βοῦν πορεύεσθαι ·
Here one must pass with the boat roped on both sides as men harness an ox;


2.29.2
1721
ἢν δὲ ἀπορραγῇ τὸ πλοῖον οἴχεται φερόμενον ὑπὸ ἰσχύος τοῦ ῥόου .
and if the rope breaks, the boat will be carried away by the strength of the current.


2.29.3
1722
τὸ δὲ χωρίον τοῦτο ἐστὶ ἐπ’ ἡμέρας τέσσερας πλόος , σκολιὸς δὲ ταύτῃ κατά περ ὁ Μαίανδρος ἐστὶ ὁ Νεῖλος ·
This part of the river is a four days' journey by boat,


2.29.3
1723
σχοῖνοι δὲ δυώδεκα εἰσὶ οὗτοι τοὺς δεῖ τούτῳ τῷ τρόπῳ διεκπλῶσαι .
and the Nile here is twisty just as the Maeander; a distance of twelve schoeni must be passed in the foregoing manner.


2.29.3
1724
καὶ ἔπειτα ἀπίξεαι ἐς πεδίον λεῖον , ἐν τῷ νῆσον περιρρέει ὁ Νεῖλος ·
After that, you come to a level plain, where there is an island in the Nile;


2.29.3
1725
Ταχομψὼ οὔνομα αὐτῇ ἐστι .
called Takhompso.


2.29.4
1726
οἰκέουσι δὲ τὰ ἀπὸ Ἐλεφαντίνης ἄνω Αἰθίοπες ἤδη καὶ τῆς νήσου τὸ ἥμισυ , τὸ δὲ ἥμισυ Αἰγύπτιοι .
The country above Elephantine now begins to be inhabited by Ethiopians: half the people of the island are Ethiopians, and half Egyptians.


2.29.4
1727
ἔχεται δὲ τῆς νήσου λίμνην μεγάλη , τὴν πέριξ νομάδες Αἰθίοπες νέμονται ·
Near the island is a great lake, on whose shores live nomadic Ethiopians.


2.29.4
1728
τὴν διεκπλώσας ἐς τοῦ Νείλου τὸ ῥέεθρον ἥξεις , τὸ ἐς τὴν λίμνην ταύτην ἐκδιδοῖ .
After crossing this, you come to the stream of the Nile, which empties into this lake.


2.29.5
1729
καὶ ἔπειτα ἀποβὰς παρὰ τὸν ποταμὸν ὁδοιπορίην ποιήσεαι ἡμερέων τεσσεράκοντα ·
Then you disembark and journey along the river bank for forty days;


2.29.5
1730
σκόπελοί τε γὰρ ἐν τῷ Νείλῳ ὀξέες ἀνέχουσι καὶ χοιράδες πολλαί εἰσι , δι’ ὧν οὐκ οἷά τε ἐστὶ πλέειν .
for there are sharp projecting rocks in the Nile and many reefs, through which no boat can pass.


2.29.6
1731
διεξελθὼν δὲ ἐν τῇσι τεσσεράκοντα ἡμέρῃσι τοῦτο τὸ χωρίον , αὖτις ἐς ἕτερον πλοῖον ἐσβὰς δυώδεκα ἡμέρας πλεύσεαι , καὶ ἔπειτα ἥξεις ἐς πόλιν μεγάλην τῇ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Μερόη ·
Having traversed this part in forty days as I have said, you take boat again and so travel for twelve days until you come to a great city called Meroe;


2.29.6
1732
λέγεται δὲ αὕτη ἡ πόλις εἶναι μητρόπολις τῶν ἄλλων Αἰθιόπων .
which is said to be the capital of all Ethiopia.


2.29.7
1733
οἱ δ’ ἐν ταύτῃ Δία θεῶν καὶ Διόνυσον μούνους σέβονται , τούτους τε μεγάλως τιμῶσι , καί σφι μαντήιον Διὸς κατέστηκε ·
The people of the place worship no other gods but Zeus and Dionysus;


2.29.7
1734
στρατεύονται δὲ ἐπεάν σφεας ὁ θεὸς οὗτος κελεύῃ διὰ θεσπισμάτων , καὶ τῇ ἂν κελεύῃ , ἐκεῖσε .
these they greatly honor, and they have a place of divination sacred to Zeus; they send out armies whenever and wherever this god through his oracle commands them.


2.30.1
1735
ἀπὸ δὲ ταύτης τῆς πόλιος πλέων ἐν ἴσῳ χρόνῳ ἄλλῳ ἥξεις ἐς τοὺς αὐτομόλους ἐν ὅσῳ περ ἐξ Ἐλεφαντίνης ἦλθες ἐς τὴν μητρόπολιν τὴν Αἰθιόπων .
From this city you make a journey by water equal in distance to that by which you came from Elephantine to the capital city of Ethiopia,


2.30.1
1736
τοῖσι δὲ αὐτομόλοισι τούτοισι οὔνομα ἐστὶ Ἀσμάχ , δύναται δὲ τοῦτο τὸ ἔπος κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλήνων γλῶσσαν οἱ ἐξ ἀριστερῆς χειρὸς παριστάμενοι βασιλέι .
and you come to the land of the Deserters. These Deserters are called Asmakh, which translates, in Greek, as “those who stand on the left hand of the king”.


2.30.2
1737
ἀπέστησαν δὲ αὗται τέσσερες καὶ εἴκοσι μυριάδες Αἰγυπτίων τῶν μαχίμων ἐς τοὺς Αἰθίοπας τούτους δι’ αἰτίην τοιήνδε .
These once revolted and joined themselves to the Ethiopians, two hundred and forty thousand Egyptians of fighting age.


2.30.2
1738
ἐπὶ Ψαμμητίχου βασιλέος φυλακαὶ κατέστησαν ἔν τε Ἐλεφαντίνῃ πόλι πρὸς Αἰθιόπων καὶ ἐν Δάφνῃσι τῇσι Πηλουσίῃσι ἄλλη πρὸς Ἀραβίων τε καὶ Ἀσσυρίων , καὶ ἐν Μαρέῃ πρὸς Λιβύης ἄλλη .
The reason was as follows. In the reign of Psammetichus, there were watchposts at Elephantine facing Ethiopia, at Daphnae of Pelusium facing Arabia and Assyria, and at Marea facing Libya.


2.30.3
1739
ἔτι δὲ ἐπ’ ἐμεῦ καὶ Περσέων κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ αἱ φυλακαὶ ἔχουσι ὡς καὶ ἐπὶ Ψαμμητίχου ἦσαν ·
And still in my time the Persians hold these posts as they were held in the days of Psammetichus;


2.30.3
1740
καὶ γὰρ ἐν Ἐλεφαντίνῃ Πέρσαι φρουρέουσι καὶ ἐν Δάφνῃσι .
there are Persian guards at Elephantine and at Daphnae.


2.30.3
1741
τοὺς ὦν δὴ Αἰγυπτίους τρία ἔτεα φρουρήσαντας ἀπέλυε οὐδεὶς τῆς φρουρῆς ·
Now the Egyptians had been on guard for three years, and no one came to relieve them;


2.30.3
1742
οἳ δὲ βουλευσάμενοι καὶ κοινῷ λόγῳ χρησάμενοι πάντες ἀπὸ τοῦ Ψαμμητίχου ἀποστάντες ἤισαν ἐς Αἰθιοπίην .
so, organizing and making common cause, they revolted from Psammetichus and went to Ethiopia.


2.30.4
1743
Ψαμμήτιχος δὲ πυθόμενος ἐδίωκε ·
Psammetichus heard of it and pursued them;


2.30.4
1744
ὡς δὲ κατέλαβε , ἐδέετο πολλὰ λέγων καί σφεας θεοὺς πατρωίους ἀπολιπεῖν οὐκ ἔα καὶ τέκνα καὶ γυναῖκας .
and when he overtook them, he asked them in a long speech not to desert their children and wives and the gods of their fathers.


2.30.4
1745
τῶν δὲ τινὰ λέγεται δέξαντα τὸ αἰδοῖον εἰπεῖν , ἔνθα ἂν τοῦτο ᾖ , ἔσεσθαι αὐτοῖσι ἐνθαῦτα καὶ τέκνα καὶ γυναῖκας .
Then one of them, the story goes, pointed to his genitals and said that wherever that was, they would have wives and children.


2.30.5
1746
οὗτοι ἐπείτε ἐς Αἰθιοπίην ἀπίκοντο , διδοῦσι σφέας αὐτοὺς τῷ Αἰθιόπων βασιλέι , ὁ δὲ σφέας τῷδε ἀντιδωρέεται ·
So they came to Ethiopia, and gave themselves up to the king of the country; he made a gift in exchage.


2.30.5
1747
ἦσάν οἱ διάφοροι τινὲς γεγονότες τῶν Αἰθιόπων ·
There were certain Ethiopians with whom he was feuding.


2.30.5
1748
τούτους ἐκέλευε ἐξελόντας τὴν ἐκείνων γῆν οἰκέειν .
He told them to drive out, and to settle the land of, those people.


2.30.5
1749
τούτων δὲ ἐσοικισθέντων ἐς τοὺς Αἰθίοπας ἡμερώτεροι γεγόνασι Αἰθίοπες , ἤθεα μαθόντες Αἰγύπτια .
These Ethiopians then learned Egyptian customs and have become milder-mannered by intermixture with the Egyptians.


2.31.1
1750
μέχρι μέν νυν τεσσέρων μηνῶν πλόου καὶ ὁδοῦ γινώσκεται ὁ Νεῖλος πάρεξ τοῦ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ῥεύματος ·
To a distance of four months' travel by land and water, then, there is knowledge of the Nile, besides the part of it that is in Egypt.


2.31.1
1751
τοσοῦτοι γὰρ συμβαλλομένῳ μῆνες εὑρίσκονται ἀναισιμούμενοι ἐξ Ἐλεφαντίνης πορευομένῳ ἐς τοὺς αὐτομόλους τούτους .
So many months, as reckoning shows, are found to be spent by one going from Elephantine to the country of the Deserters.


2.31.1
1752
ῥέει δὲ ἀπὸ ἑσπέρης τε καὶ ἡλίου δυσμέων .
The river flows from the west and the sun's setting.


2.31.1
1753
τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦδε οὐδεὶς ἔχει σαφέως φράσαι ·
Beyond this, no one has clear information to declare;


2.31.1
1754
ἔρημος γὰρ ἐστὶ ἡ χώρη αὕτη ὑπὸ καύματος .
for all that country is desolate because of the heat.


2.32.1
1755
ἀλλὰ τάδε μὲν ἤκουσα ἀνδρῶν Κυρηναίων φαμένων ἐλθεῖν τε ἐπὶ τὸ Ἄμμωνος χρηστήριον καὶ ἀπικέσθαι ἐς λόγους Ἐτεάρχῳ τῷ Ἀμμωνίων βασιλέι , καί κως ἐκ λόγων ἄλλων ἀπικέσθαι ἐς λέσχην περὶ τοῦ Νείλου , ὡς οὐδεὶς αὐτοῦ οἶδε τὰς πηγάς , καὶ τὸν Ἐτέαρχον φάναι ἐλθεῖν κοτε παρ’ αὐτὸν Νασαμῶνας ἄνδρας .
But I heard this from some men of    Cyrene   , who told me that they had gone to the oracle of Ammon, and conversed there with Etearchus king of the Ammonians, and that from other subjects the conversation turned to the    Nile   , how no one knows the source of it. Then Etearchus told them that once he had been visited by some Nasamonians.


2.32.2
1756
τὸ δὲ ἔθνος τοῦτο ἐστὶ μὲν Λιβυκόν , νέμεται δὲ τὴν Σύρτιν τε καὶ τὴν πρὸς ἠῶ χώρην τῆς Σύρτιος οὐκ ἐπὶ πολλόν .
These are a Libyan people, inhabiting the country of the    Syrtis    and a little way to the east of the    Syrtis   .


2.32.3
1757
ἀπικομένους δὲ τοὺς Νασαμῶνας καὶ εἰρωτωμένους εἴ τι ἔχουσι πλέον λέγειν περὶ τῶν ἐρήμων τῆς Λιβύης , φάναι παρὰ σφίσι γενέσθαι ἀνδρῶν δυναστέων παῖδας ὑβριστάς , τοὺς ἄλλα τε μηχανᾶσθαι ἀνδρωθέντας περισσὰ καὶ δὴ καὶ ἀποκληρῶσαι πέντε ἑωυτῶν ὀψομένους τὰ ἔρημα τῆς Λιβύης , καὶ εἴ τι πλέον ἴδοιεν τῶν τὰ μακρότατα ἰδομένων .
When these Nasamonians were asked on their arrival if they brought any news concerning the Libyan desert, they told Etearchus that some sons of their leading men, proud and violent youths, when they came to manhood, besides planning other wild adventures, had chosen by lot five of their company to visit the deserts of    Libya    and see whether they could see any farther than those who had seen the farthest.


2.32.4
1758
τῆς γὰρ Λιβύης τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν βορηίην θάλασσαν ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου ἀρξάμενοι μέχρι Σολόεντος ἄκρης , ἣ τελευτᾷ τῆς Λιβύης , παρήκουσι παρὰ πᾶσαν Λίβυες καὶ Λιβύων ἔθνεα πολλά , πλὴν ὅσον Ἕλληνες καὶ Φοίνικες ἔχουσι ·
It must be known that the whole northern seacoast of Libya, from Egypt as far as the promontory of Soloeis, which is the end of Libya, is inhabited throughout its length by Libyans, many tribes of them, except the part held by Greeks and Phoenicians;


2.32.4
1759
τὰ δὲ ὑπὲρ θαλάσσης τε καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ θάλασσαν κατηκόντων ἀνθρώπων , τὰ κατύπερθε θηριώδης ἐστὶ ἡ Λιβύη ·
the region of Libya that is above the sea and the inhabitants of the coast is infested by wild beasts;


2.32.4
1760
τὰ δὲ κατύπερθε τῆς θηριώδεος ψάμμος τε ἐστὶ καὶ ἄνυδρος δεινῶς καὶ ἔρημος πάντων .
and farther inland than the wild-beast country everything is sand, waterless and desolate.


2.32.5
1761
εἶπαι ὦν τοὺς νεηνίας ἀποπεμπομένους ὑπὸ τῶν ἡλίκων , ὕδασί τε καὶ σιτίοισι εὖ ἐξηρτυμένους , ἰέναι τὰ πρῶτα μὲν διὰ τῆς οἰκεομένης , ταύτην δὲ διεξελθόντας ἐς τὴν θηριώδεα ἀπικέσθαι , ἐκ δὲ ταύτης τὴν ἔρημον διεξιέναι , τὴν ὁδὸν ποιευμένους πρὸς ζέφυρον ἄνεμον , διεξελθόντας δὲ χῶρον πολλὸν ψαμμώδεα καὶ ἐν πολλῇσι ἡμέρῃσι ἰδεῖν δή κοτε δένδρεα ἐν πεδίῳ πεφυκότα , καί σφεας προσελθόντας ἅπτεσθαι τοῦ ἐπεόντος ἐπὶ τῶν δενδρέων καρποῦ , ἁπτομένοισι δέ σφι ἐπελθεῖν ἄνδρας μικρούς , μετρίων ἐλάσσονας ἀνδρῶν , λαβόντας δὲ ἄγειν σφέας ·
When the young men left their companions, being well supplied with water and provisions, they journeyed first through the inhabited country, and after passing this they came to the region of wild beasts.


2.32.6
1762
φωνῆς δὲ οὔτε τι τῆς ἐκείνων τοὺς Νασαμῶνας γινώσκειν οὔτε τοὺς ἄγοντας τῶν Νασαμώνων ·
After this, they travelled over the desert, towards the west, and crossed a wide sandy region, until after many days they saw trees growing in a plain; when they came to these and were picking the fruit of the trees, they were met by little men of less than common stature, who took them and led them away. The Nasamonians did not know these men's language nor did the escort know the language of the Nasamonians.


2.32.7
1763
ἄγειν τε δὴ αὐτοὺς δι’ ἑλέων μεγίστων , καὶ διεξελθόντας ταῦτα ἀπικέσθαι ἐς πόλιν ἐν τῇ πάντας εἶναι τοῖσι ἄγουσι τὸ μέγαθος ἴσους , χρῶμα δὲ μέλανας .
The men led them across great marshes, after crossing which they came to a city where all the people were of a stature like that of the guides, and black.


2.32.7
1764
παρὰ δὲ τὴν πόλιν ῥέειν ποταμὸν μέγαν , ῥέειν δὲ ἀπὸ ἑσπέρης αὐτὸν πρὸς ἥλιον ἀνατέλλοντα , φαίνεσθαι δὲ ἐν αὐτῷ κροκοδείλους .
A great river ran past this city, from the west towards the rising sun; crocodiles could be seen in it.


2.33.1
1765
ὁ μὲν δὴ τοῦ Ἀμμωνίου Ἐτεάρχου λόγος ἐς τοῦτό μοι δεδηλώσθω , πλὴν ὅτι ἀπονοστῆσαί τε ἔφασκε τοὺς Νασαμῶνας , ὡς οἱ Κυρηναῖοι ἔλεγον , καὶ ἐς τοὺς οὗτοι ἀπίκοντο ἀνθρώπους , γόητας εἶναι ἅπαντας .
This is enough of the story told by Etearchus the Ammonian; except he said that the Nasamonians returned, as the men of    Cyrene    told me, and that the people to whose country they came were all wizards;


2.33.2
1766
τὸν δὲ δὴ ποταμὸν τοῦτον τὸν παραρρέοντα καὶ Ἐτέαρχος συνεβάλλετο εἶναι Νεῖλον , καὶ δὴ καὶ ὁ λόγος οὕτω αἱρέει .
As to the river that ran past the city, Etearchus guessed it to be the Nile; and reason proves as much.


2.33.2
1767
ῥέει γὰρ ἐκ Λιβύης ὁ Νεῖλος καὶ μέσην τάμνων Λιβύην , καὶ ὡς ἐγὼ συμβάλλομαι τοῖσι ἐμφανέσι τὰ μὴ γινωσκόμενα τεκμαιρόμενος , τῷ Ἴστρῳ ἐκ τῶν ἴσων μέτρων ὁρμᾶται .
For the Nile flows from Libya, right through the middle of it; and as I guess, reasoning about things unknown from visible signs, it rises proportionally as far away as does the Ister.


2.33.3
1768
Ἴστρος τε γὰρ ποταμὸς ἀρξάμενος ἐκ Κελτῶν καὶ Πυρήνης πόλιος ῥέει μέσην σχίζων τὴν Εὐρώπην ·
For the Ister flows from the land of the Celts and the city of Pyrene through the very middle of Europe;


2.33.3
1769
οἱ δὲ Κελτοὶ εἰσὶ ἔξω Ἡρακλέων στηλέων , ὁμουρέουσι δὲ Κυνησίοισι , οἳ ἔσχατοι πρὸς δυσμέων οἰκέουσι τῶν ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ κατοικημένων ·
now the Celts live beyond the Pillars of Heracles, being neighbors of the Cynesii, who are the westernmost of all the peoples inhabiting Europe.


2.33.4
1770
τελευτᾷ δὲ ὁ Ἴστρος ἐς θάλασσαν ῥέων τὴν τοῦ Εὐξείνου πόντου διὰ πάσης Εὐρώπης , τῇ Ἰστρίην οἱ Μιλησίων οἰκέουσι ἄποικοι .
The Ister, then, flows clean across    Europe    and ends its course in the    Euxine sea   , at    Istria   , which is inhabited by Milesian colonists.


2.34.1
1771
ὁ μὲν δὴ Ἴστρος , ῥέει γὰρ δι’ οἰκεομένης , πρὸς πολλῶν γινώσκεται , περὶ δὲ τῶν τοῦ Νείλου πηγέων οὐδεὶς ἔχει λέγειν ·
The Ister, since it flows through inhabited country, is known from many reports;


2.34.1
1772
ἀοίκητός τε γὰρ καὶ ἔρημος ἐστὶ ἡ Λιβύη δι’ ἧς ῥέει .
but no one can speak of the source of the Nile; for Libya, though which it runs, is uninhabited and desert.


2.34.1
1773
περὶ δὲ τοῦ ῥεύματος αὐτοῦ , ἐπ’ ὅσον μακρότατον ἱστορεῦντα ἦν ἐξικέσθαι , εἴρηται ·
Regarding its course, I have related everything that I could learn by inquiry;


2.34.1
1774
ἐκδιδοῖ δὲ ἐς Αἴγυπτον .
and it issues into Egypt.


2.34.1
1775
ἡ δὲ Αἴγυπτος τῆς ὀρεινῆς Κιλικίης μάλιστά κῃ ἀντίη κέεται ·
Now Egypt lies about opposite to the mountainous part of Cilicia;


2.34.2
1776
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ἐς Σινώπην τὴν ἐν τῷ Εὐξείνῳ πόντῳ πέντε ἡμερέων ἰθέα ὁδὸς εὐζώνῳ ἀνδρί ·
from there, it is a straight five days' journey for an unencumbered man to Sinope on the Euxine;


2.34.2
1777
ἡ δὲ Σινώπη τῷ Ἴστρῳ ἐκδιδόντι ἐς θάλασσαν ἀντίον κέεται .
and Sinope lies opposite the place where the Ister falls into the sea.


2.34.2
1778
οὕτω τὸν Νεῖλον δοκέω διὰ πάσης τῆς Λιβύης διεξιόντα ἐξισοῦσθαι τῷ Ἴστρῳ .
Thus I suppose the course of the Nile in its passage through Libya to be like the course of the Ister.


2.35.1
1779
Νείλου μέν νυν πέρι τοσαῦτα εἰρήσθω ·
It is sufficient to say this much concerning the Nile.


2.35.1
1780
ἔρχομαι δὲ περὶ Αἰγύπτου μηκυνέων τὸν λόγον , ὅτι πλεῖστα θωμάσια ἔχει ἢ ἡ ἄλλη πᾶσα χώρη καὶ ἔργα λόγου μέζω παρέχεται πρὸς πᾶσαν χώρην τούτων εἵνεκα πλέω περὶ αὐτῆς εἰρήσεται .
But concerning Egypt, I am going to speak at length, because it has the most wonders, and everywhere presents works beyond description; therefore, I shall say the more concerning Egypt.


2.35.2
1781
Αἰγύπτιοι ἅμα τῷ οὐρανῷ τῷ κατὰ σφέας ἐόντι ἑτεροίῳ καὶ τῷ ποταμῷ φύσιν ἀλλοίην παρεχομένῳ ἢ οἱ ἄλλοι ποταμοί , τὰ πολλὰ πάντα ἔμπαλιν τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ἀνθρώποισι ἐστήσαντο ἤθεά τε καὶ νόμους ·
Just as the Egyptians have a climate peculiar to themselves, and their river is different in its nature from all other rivers,


2.35.2
1782
ἐν τοῖσι αἱ μὲν γυναῖκες ἀγοράζουσι καὶ καπηλεύουσι , οἱ δὲ ἄνδρες κατ’ οἴκους ἐόντες ὑφαίνουσι ·
so, too, have they instituted customs and laws contrary for the most part to those of the rest of mankind. Among them, the women buy and sell, the men stay at home and weave;


2.35.2
1783
ὑφαίνουσι δὲ οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι ἄνω τὴν κρόκην ὠθέοντες , Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ κάτω .
and whereas in weaving all others push the woof upwards, the Egyptians push it downwards.


2.35.3
1784
τὰ ἄχθεα οἱ μὲν ἄνδρες ἐπὶ τῶν κεφαλέων φορέουσι , αἱ δὲ γυναῖκες ἐπὶ τῶν ὤμων .
Men carry burdens on their heads, women on their shoulders.


2.35.3
1785
οὐρέουσι αἱ μὲν γυναῖκες ὀρθαί , οἱ δὲ ἄνδρες κατήμενοι .
Women pass water standing, men sitting.


2.35.3
1786
εὐμαρείῃ χρέωνται ἐν τοῖσι οἴκοισι , ἐσθίουσι δὲ ἔξω ἐν τῇσι ὁδοῖσι ἐπιλέγοντες ὡς τὰ μὲν αἰσχρὰ ἀναγκαῖα δὲ ἐν ἀποκρύφῳ ἐστὶ ποιέειν χρεόν , τὰ δὲ μὴ αἰσχρὰ ἀναφανδόν .
They ease their bowels indoors, and eat out of doors in the streets, explaining that things unseemly but necessary should be done alone in private, things not unseemly should be done openly.


2.35.4
1787
ἱρᾶται γυνὴ μὲν οὐδεμία οὔτε ἔρσενος θεοῦ οὔτε θηλέης , ἄνδρες δὲ πάντων τε καὶ πασέων .
No woman is dedicated to the service of any god or goddess;


2.35.4
1788
τρέφειν τοὺς τοκέας τοῖσι μὲν παισὶ οὐδεμία ἀνάγκη μὴ βουλομένοισι , τῇσι δὲ θυγατράσι πᾶσα ἀνάγκη καὶ μὴ βουλομένῃσι .
men are dedicated to all deities male or female. Sons are not compelled against their will to support their parents, but daughters must do so though they be unwilling.


2.36.1
1789
οἱ ἱρέες τῶν θεῶν τῇ μὲν ἄλλῃ κομέουσι , ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ δὲ ξυρῶνται .
Everywhere else, priests of the gods wear their hair long; in Egypt, they are shaven.


2.36.1
1790
τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ἀνθρώποισι νόμος ἅμα κήδεϊ κεκάρθαι τὰς κεφαλὰς τοὺς μάλιστα ἱκνέεται , Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ ὑπὸ τοὺς θανάτους ἀνιεῖσι τὰς τρίχας αὔξεσθαι τάς τε ἐν τῇ κεφαλῇ καὶ τῷ γενείῳ , τέως ἐξυρημένοι .
For all other men, the rule in mourning for the dead is that those most nearly concerned have their heads shaven; Egyptians are shaven at other times, but after a death they let their hair and beard grow.


2.36.2
1791
τοῖσι μὲν ἄλλοισι ἀνθρώποισι χωρὶς θηρίων ἡ δίαιτα ἀποκέκριται , Αἰγυπτίοισι δὲ ὁμοῦ θηρίοισι ἡ δίαιτα ἐστί .
The Egyptians are the only people who keep their animals with them in the house.


2.36.2
1792
ἀπὸ πυρῶν καὶ κριθέων ὧλλοι ζώουσι , Αἰγυπτίων δὲ τῷ ποιευμένῳ ἀπὸ τούτων τὴν ζόην ὄνειδος μέγιστον ἐστί , ἀλλὰ ἀπὸ ὀλυρέων ποιεῦνται σιτία , τὰς ζειὰς μετεξέτεροι καλέουσι .
Whereas all others live on wheat and barley, it is the greatest disgrace for an Egyptian to live so; they make food from a coarse grain which some call spelt.


2.36.3
1793
φυρῶσι τὸ μὲν σταῖς τοῖσι ποσί , τὸν δὲ πηλὸν τῇσι χερσί , καὶ τὴν κόπρον ἀναιρέονται .
They knead dough with their feet, and gather mud and dung with their hands.


2.36.3
1794
τὰ αἰδοῖα ὧλλοι μὲν ἐῶσι ὡς ἐγένοντο , πλὴν ὅσοι ἀπὸ τούτων ἔμαθον , Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ περιτάμνονται .
The Egyptians and those who have learned it from them are the only people who practise circumcision.


2.36.3
1795
εἵματα τῶν μὲν ἀνδρῶν ἕκαστος ἔχει δύο , τῶν δὲ γυναικῶν ἓν ἑκάστη .
Every man has two garments, every woman only one.


2.36.4
1796
τῶν ἱστίων τοὺς κρίκους καὶ τοὺς κάλους οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι ἔξωθεν προσδέουσι , Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ ἔσωθεν .
The rings and sheets of sails are made fast outside the boat elsewhere, but inside it in Egypt.


2.36.4
1797
γράμματα γράφουσι καὶ λογίζονται ψήφοισι Ἕλληνες μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν ἀριστερῶν ἐπὶ τὰ δεξιὰ φέροντες τὴν χεῖρα , Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν δεξιῶν ἐπὶ τὰ ἀριστερά ·
The Greeks write and calculate from left to right; the Egyptians do the opposite;


2.36.4
1798
καὶ ποιεῦντες ταῦτα αὐτοὶ μὲν φασὶ ἐπὶ δεξιὰ ποιέειν , Ἕλληνας δὲ ἐπ’ ἀριστερά .
yet they say that their way of writing is towards the right, and the Greek way towards the left.


2.36.4
1799
διφασίοισι δὲ γράμμασι χρέωνται , καὶ τὰ μὲν αὐτῶν ἱρὰ τὰ δὲ δημοτικὰ καλέεται .
They employ two kinds of writing; one is called sacred, the other demotic.


2.37.1
1800
θεοσεβέες δὲ περισσῶς ἐόντες μάλιστα πάντων ἀνθρώπων νόμοισι τοιοῖσιδε χρέωνται .
They are religious beyond measure, more than any other people; and the following are among their customs.


2.37.1
1801
ἐκ χαλκέων ποτηρίων πίνουσι , διασμῶντες ἀνὰ πᾶσαν ἡμέρην , οὐκ ὃ μὲν ὃ δ’ οὔ , ἀλλὰ πάντες .
They drink from cups of bronze, which they clean out daily; this is done not by some but by all.


2.37.2
1802
εἵματα δὲ λίνεα φορέουσι αἰεὶ νεόπλυτα , ἐπιτηδεύοντες τοῦτο μάλιστα , τά τε αἰδοῖα περιτάμνονται καθαρειότητος εἵνεκεν , προτιμῶντες καθαροὶ εἶναι ἢ εὐπρεπέστεροι .
They are especially careful always to wear newly-washed linen.


2.37.2
1803
οἱ δὲ ἱρέες ξυρῶνται πᾶν τὸ σῶμα διὰ τρίτης ἡμέρης , ἵνα μήτε φθεὶρ μήτε ἄλλο μυσαρὸν μηδὲν ἐγγίνηταί σφι θεραπεύουσι τοὺς θεούς .
They practise circumcision for cleanliness' sake; for they would rather be clean than more becoming. Their priests shave the whole body every other day, so that no lice or anything else foul may infest them as they attend upon the gods.


2.37.3
1804
ἐσθῆτα δὲ φορέουσι οἱ ἱρέες λινέην μούνην καὶ ὑποδήματα βύβλινα ·
The priests wear a single linen garment and sandals of papyrus;


2.37.3
1805
ἄλλην δέ σφι ἐσθῆτα οὐκ ἔξεστι λαβεῖν οὐδὲ ὑποδήματα ἄλλα .
they may have no other kind of clothing or footwear.


2.37.3
1806
λοῦνται δὲ δὶς τῆς ἡμέρης ἑκάστης ψυχρῷ καὶ δὶς ἑκάστης νυκτός , ἄλλας τε θρησκηίας ἐπιτελέουσι μυρίας ὡς εἰπεῖν λόγῳ .
Twice a day and twice every night they wash in cold water. Their religious observances are, one may say, innumerable.


2.37.4
1807
πάσχουσι δὲ καὶ ἀγαθὰ οὐκ ὀλίγα ·
But also they receive many benefits:


2.37.4
1808
οὔτε τι γὰρ τῶν οἰκηίων τρίβουσι οὔτε δαπανῶνται , ἀλλὰ καὶ σιτία σφι ἐστὶ ἱρὰ πεσσόμενα , καὶ κρεῶν βοέων καὶ χηνέων πλῆθός τι ἑκάστῳ γίνεται πολλὸν ἡμέρης ἑκάστης , δίδοται δέ σφι καὶ οἶνος ἀμπέλινος ·
they do not consume or spend anything of their own; sacred food is cooked for them, beef and goose are brought in great abundance to each man every day, and wine of grapes is given to them, too.


2.37.4
1809
ἰχθύων δὲ οὔ σφι ἔξεστι πάσασθαι .
They may not eat fish.


2.37.5
1810
κυάμους δὲ οὔτε τι μάλα σπείρουσι Αἰγύπτιοι ἐν τῇ χώρῃ , τούς τε γινομένους οὔτε τρώγουσι οὔτε ἕψοντες πατέονται , οἱ δὲ δὴ ἱρέες οὐδὲ ὁρέοντες ἀνέχονται , νομίζοντες οὐ καθαρὸν εἶναί μιν ὄσπριον .
The Egyptians sow no beans in their country;


2.37.5
1811
ἱρᾶται δὲ οὐκ εἷς ἑκάστου τῶν θεῶν ἀλλὰ πολλοί , τῶν εἷς ἐστι ἀρχιερεύς ·
if any grow, they will not eat them either raw or cooked; the priests cannot endure even to see them, considering beans an unclean kind of legume.


2.37.5
1812
ἐπεὰν δέ τις ἀποθάνῃ , τούτου ὁ παῖς ἀντικατίσταται .
Many (not only one) are dedicated to the service of each god. One of these is the high priest; and when a high priest dies, his son succeeds to his office.


2.38.1
1813
τοὺς δὲ βοῦς τοὺς ἔρσενας τοῦ Ἐπάφου εἶναι νομίζουσι , καὶ τούτου εἵνεκα δοκιμάζουσι αὐτοὺς ὧδε ·
They believe that bulls belong to Epaphus, and for this reason scrutinize them as follows;


2.38.1
1814
τρίχα ἢν καὶ μίαν ἴδηται ἐπεοῦσαν μέλαιναν , οὐ καθαρὸν εἶναι νομίζει .
if they see even one black hair on them, the bull is considered impure.


2.38.2
1815
δίζηται δὲ ταῦτα ἐπὶ τούτῳ τεταγμένος τῶν τις ἱρέων καὶ ὀρθοῦ ἑστεῶτος τοῦ κτήνεος καὶ ὑπτίου , καὶ τὴν γλῶσσαν ἐξειρύσας , εἰ καθαρὴ τῶν προκειμένων σημηίων , τὰ ἐγὼ ἐν ἄλλῳ λόγῳ ἐρέω ·
One of the priests, appointed to the task, examines the beast, making it stand and lie, and drawing out its tongue, to determine whether it is clean of the stated signs which I shall indicate hereafter.


2.38.2
1816
κατορᾷ δὲ καὶ τὰς τρίχας τῆς οὐρῆς εἰ κατὰ φύσιν ἔχει πεφυκυίας .
He looks also to the hairs of the tail, to see if they grow naturally.


2.38.3
1817
ἢν δὲ τούτων πάντων ᾖ καθαρός , σημαίνεται βύβλῳ περὶ τὰ κέρεα εἱλίσσων καὶ ἔπειτα γῆν σημαντρίδα ἐπιπλάσας ἐπιβάλλει τὸν δακτύλιον , καὶ οὕτω ἀπάγουσι .
If it is clean in all these respects, the priest marks it by wrapping papyrus around the horns, then smears it with sealing-earth and stamps it with his ring;


2.38.3
1818
ἀσήμαντον δὲ θύσαντι θάνατος ἡ ζημίη ἐπικέεται .
and after this they lead the bull away.


2.38.3
1819
δοκιμάζεται μέν νυν τὸ κτῆνος τρόπῳ τοιῷδε , θυσίη δέ σφι ἥδε κατέστηκε .
But the penalty is death for sacrificing a bull that the priest has not marked. Such is the manner of approving the beast; I will now describe how it is sacrificed.


2.39.1
1820
ἀγαγόντες τὸ σεσημασμένον κτῆνος πρὸς τὸν βωμὸν ὅκου ἂν θύωσι , πῦρ ἀνακαίουσι , ἔπειτα δὲ ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ οἶνον κατὰ τοῦ ἱρηίου ἐπισπείσαντες καὶ ἐπικαλέσαντες τὸν θεὸν σφάζουσι , σφάξαντες δὲ ἀποτάμνουσι τὴν κεφαλήν .
After leading the marked beast to the altar where they will sacrifice it, they kindle a fire; then they pour wine on the altar over the victim and call upon the god; then they cut its throat, and having done so sever the head from the body.


2.39.2
1821
σῶμα μὲν δὴ τοῦ κτήνεος δείρουσι , κεφαλῇ δὲ κείνῃ πολλὰ καταρησάμενοι φέρουσι , τοῖσι μὲν ἂν ᾖ ἀγορὴ καὶ Ἕλληνές σφι ἔωσι ἐπιδήμιοι ἔμποροι , οἳ δὲ φέροντες ἐς τὴν ἀγορὴν ἀπ’ ὦν ἔδοντο , τοῖσι δὲ ἂν μὴ παρέωσι Ἕλληνες , οἳ δ’ ἐκβάλλουσι ἐς τὸν ποταμόν ·
They flay the carcass of the victim, then invoke many curses on its head, which they carry away. Where there is a market, and Greek traders in it, the head is taken to the market and sold; where there are no Greeks, it is thrown into the river.


2.39.3
1822
καταρῶνται δὲ τάδε λέγοντες τῇσι κεφαλῇσι , εἴ τι μέλλοι ἢ σφίσι τοῖσι θύουσι ἢ Αἰγύπτῳ τῇ συναπάσῃ κακὸν γενέσθαι , ἐς κεφαλὴν ταύτην τραπέσθαι .
The imprecation which they utter over the heads is that whatever ill threatens those who sacrifice, or the whole of    Egypt   , fall upon that head.


2.39.4
1823
κατὰ μέν νυν τὰς κεφαλὰς τῶν θυομένων κτηνέων καὶ τὴν ἐπίσπεισιν τοῦ οἴνου πάντες Αἰγύπτιοι νόμοισι τοῖσι αὐτοῖσι χρέωνται ὁμοίως ἐς πάντα τὰ ἱρά , καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου τοῦ νόμου οὐδὲ ἄλλου οὐδενὸς ἐμψύχου κεφαλῆς γεύσεται Αἰγυπτίων οὐδείς .
In respect of the heads of sacrificed beasts and the libation of wine, the practice of all Egyptians is the same in all sacrifices; and from this ordinance no Egyptian will taste of the head of anything that had life.


2.40.1
1824
ἡ δὲ δὴ ἐξαίρεσις τῶν ἱρῶν καὶ ἡ καῦσις ἄλλη περὶ ἄλλο ἱρόν σφι κατέστηκε ·
But in regard to the disembowelling and burning of the victims, there is a different way for each sacrifice.


2.40.1
1825
τὴν δ’ ὦν μεγίστην τε δαίμονα ἥγηνται εἶναι καὶ μεγίστην οἱ ὁρτὴν ἀνάγουσι , ταύτην ἔρχομαι ἐρέων G? ἐπεὰν ἀποδείρωσι τὸν βοῦν , κατευξάμενοι κοιλίην μὲν κείνην πᾶσαν ἐξ ὦν εἷλον , σπλάγχνά δὲ αὐτοῦ λείπουσι ἐν τῷ σώματι καὶ τὴν πιμελήν , σκέλεα δὲ ἀποτάμνουσι καὶ τὴν ὀσφὺν ἄκρην καὶ τοὺς ὤμους τε καὶ τὸν τράχηλον .
I shall now, however, speak of that goddess whom they consider the greatest, and in whose honor they keep highest festival.


2.40.3
1826
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσαντες τὸ ἄλλο σῶμα τοῦ βοὸς πιμπλᾶσι ἄρτων καθαρῶν καὶ μέλιτος καὶ ἀσταφίδος καὶ σύκων καὶ λιβανωτοῦ καὶ σμύρνης καὶ τῶν ἄλλων θυωμάτων , πλήσαντες δὲ τούτων καταγίζουσι , ἔλαιον ἄφθονον καταχέοντες ·
Having done this, they fill what remains of the carcass with pure bread, honey, raisins, figs, frankincense, myrrh, and other kinds of incense, and then burn it, pouring a lot of oil on it.


2.40.4
1827
προνηστεύσαντες δὲ θύουσι , καιομένων δὲ τῶν ἱρῶν τύπτονται πάντες , ἐπεὰν δὲ ἀποτύψωνται , δαῖτα προτίθενται τὰ ἐλίποντο τῶν ἱρῶν .
They fast before the sacrifice, and while it is burning, they all make lamentation; and when their lamentation is over, they set out a meal of what is left of the victim.


2.41.1
1828
τοὺς μέν νυν καθαροὺς βοῦς τοὺς ἔρσενας καὶ τοὺς μόσχους οἱ πάντες Αἰγύπτιοι θύουσι , τὰς δὲ θηλέας οὔ σφι ἔξεστι θύειν , ἀλλὰ ἱραί εἰσι τῆς Ἴσιος ·
All Egyptians sacrifice unblemished bulls and bull-calves; they may not sacrifice cows: these are sacred to Isis.


2.41.2
1829
τὸ γὰρ τῆς Ἴσιος ἄγαλμα ἐὸν γυναικήιον βούκερων ἐστὶ κατά περ Ἕλληνες τὴν Ἰοῦν γράφουσι , καὶ τὰς βοῦς τὰς θηλέας Αἰγύπτιοι πάντες ὁμοίως σέβονται προβάτων πάντων μάλιστα μακρῷ .
For the images of Isis are in woman's form, horned like a cow, exactly as the Greeks picture Io, and cows are held by far the most sacred of all beasts of the herd by all Egyptians alike.


2.41.3
1830
τῶν εἵνεκα οὔτε ἀνὴρ Αἰγύπτιος οὔτε γυνὴ ἄνδρα Ἕλληνα φιλήσειε ἂν τῷ στόματι , οὐδὲ μαχαίρῃ ἀνδρὸς Ἕλληνος χρήσεται οὐδὲ ὀβελοῖσι οὐδὲ λέβητι , οὐδὲ κρέως καθαροῦ βοὸς διατετμημένου Ἑλληνικῇ μαχαίρῃ γεύσεται .
For this reason, no Egyptian man or woman will kiss a Greek man, or use a knife, or a spit, or a cauldron belonging to a Greek, or taste the flesh of an unblemished bull that has been cut up with a Greek knife.


2.41.4
1831
θάπτουσι δὲ τοὺς ἀποθνήσκοντας βοῦς τρόπον τόνδε ·
Cattle that die are dealt with in the following way.


2.41.4
1832
τὰς μὲν θηλέας ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν ἀπιεῖσι , τοὺς δὲ ἔρσενας κατορύσσουσι ἕκαστοι ἐν τοῖσι προαστείοισι , τὸ κέρας τὸ ἕτερον ἢ καὶ ἀμφότερα ὑπερέχοντα σημηίου εἵνεκεν ·
Cows are cast into the river, bulls are buried by each city in its suburbs, with one or both horns uncovered for a sign;


2.41.4
1833
ἐπεὰν δὲ σαπῇ καὶ προσίῃ ὁ τεταγμένος χρόνος , ἀπικνέεται ἐς ἑκάστην πόλιν βᾶρις ἐκ τῆς Προσωπίτιδος καλευμένης νήσου .
then, when the carcass is decomposed, and the time appointed is at hand, a boat comes to each city from the island called Prosopitis,


2.41.5
1834
ἣ δ’ ἔστι μὲν ἐν τῷ Δέλτα , περίμετρον δὲ αὐτῆς εἰσὶ σχοῖνοι ἐννέα .
an island in the Delta, nine schoeni in circumference.


2.41.5
1835
ἐν ταύτῃ ὦ τῇ Προσωπίτιδι νήσῳ ἔνεισι μὲν καὶ ἄλλαι πόλιες συχναί , ἐκ τῆς δὲ αἱ βάριες παραγίνονται ἀναιρησόμεναι τὰ ὀστέα τῶν βοῶν , οὔνομα τῇ πόλι Ἀτάρβηχις , ἐν δ’ αὐτῇ Ἀφροδίτης ἱρὸν ἅγιον ἵδρυται .
There are many other towns on Prosopitis; the one from which the boats come to gather the bones of the bulls is called Atarbekhis; a temple of Aphrodite stands in it of great sanctity.


2.41.6
1836
ἐκ ταύτης τῆς πόλιος πλανῶνται πολλοὶ ἄλλοι ἐς ἄλλας πόλις , ἀνορύξαντες δὲ τὰ ὀστέα ἀπάγουσι καὶ θάπτουσι ἐς ἕνα χῶρον πάντες .
From this town many go out, some to one town and some to another, to dig up the bones, which they then carry away and all bury in one place.


2.41.6
1837
κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ δὲ τοῖσι βουσὶ καὶ τ- ἄλλα κτήνεα θάπτουσι ἀποθνήσκοντα ·
As they bury the cattle, so do they all other beasts at death.


2.41.6
1838
καὶ γὰρ περὶ ταῦτα οὕτω σφι νενομοθέτηται ·
Such is their ordinance respecting these also;


2.41.6
1839
κτείνουσι γὰρ δὴ οὐδὲ ταῦτα .
for they, too, may not be killed.


2.42.1
1840
ὅσοι μὲν δὴ Διὸς Θηβαιέος ἵδρυνται ἱρὸν ἤ νομοῦ τοῦ Θηβαίου εἰσί , οὗτοι μέν νυν πάντες ὀίων ἀπεχόμενοι αἶγας θύουσι .
All that have a temple of Zeus of    Thebes    or are of the Theban district sacrifice goats, but will not touch sheep.


2.42.2
1841
θεοὺς γὰρ δὴ οὐ τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἅπαντες ὁμοίως Αἰγύπτιοι σέβονται , πλὴν Ἴσιός τε καὶ Ὀσίριος , τὸν δὴ Διόνυσον εἶναι λέγουσι ·
For no gods are worshipped by all Egyptians in common except Isis and Osiris, who they say is Dionysus;


2.42.2
1842
τούτους δὲ ὁμοίως ἅπαντες σέβονται .
these are worshipped by all alike.


2.42.2
1843
ὅσοι δὲ τοῦ Μένδητος ἔκτηνται ἱρὸν ἢ νομοῦ τοῦ Μενδησίου εἰσί , οὗτοι δὲ αἰγῶν ἀπεχόμενοι ὄις θύουσι .
Those who have a temple of Mendes or are of the Mendesian district sacrifice sheep, but will not touch goats.


2.42.3
1844
Θηβαῖοι μέν νυν καὶ ὅσοι διὰ τούτους ὀίων ἀπέχονται , διὰ τάδε λέγουσι τὸν νόμον τόνδε σφίσι τεθῆναι .
The Thebans, and those who by the Theban example will not touch sheep, give the following reason for their ordinance:


2.42.3
1845
Ἡρακλέα θελῆσαι πάντως ἰδέσθαι τὸν Δία , καὶ τὸν οὐκ ἐθέλειν ὀφθῆναι ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ ·
they say that Heracles wanted very much to see Zeus and that Zeus did not want to be seen by him,


2.42.3
1846
τέλος δέ , ἐπείτε λιπαρέειν τὸν Ἡρακλέα , τάδε τὸν Δία μηχανήσασθαι ·
but that finally, when Heracles prayed, Zeus contrived


2.42.4
1847
κριὸν ἐκδείραντα προσχέσθαι τε τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποταμόντα τοῦ κριοῦ καὶ ἐνδύντα τὸ νάκος οὕτω οἱ ἑωυτὸν ἐπιδέξαι .
to show himself displaying the head and wearing the fleece of a ram which he had flayed and beheaded.


2.42.4
1848
ἀπὸ τούτου κριοπρόσωπον τοῦ Διὸς τ- ἄγαλμα ποιεῦσι Αἰγύπτιοι , ἀπὸ δὲ Αἰγυπτίων Ἀμμώνιοι , ἐόντες Αἰγυπτίων τε καὶ Αἰθιόπων ἄποικοι καὶ φωνὴν μεταξὺ ἀμφοτέρων νομίζοντες .
It is from this that the Egyptian images of Zeus have a ram's head; and in this, the Egyptians are imitated by the Ammonians, who are colonists from Egypt and Ethiopia and speak a language compounded of the tongues of both countries.


2.42.5
1849
δοκέειν δέ μοι , καὶ τὸ οὔνομα Ἀμμώνιοι ἀπὸ τοῦδε σφίσι τὴν ἐπωνυμίην ἐποιήσαντο ·
It was from this, I think, that the Ammonians got their name, too;


2.42.5
1850
Ἀμοῦν γὰρ Αἰγύπτιοι καλέουσι τὸν Δία .
for the Egyptians call Zeus “Amon”.


2.42.5
1851
τοὺς δὲ κριοὺς οὐ θύουσι Θηβαῖοι , ἀλλ’ εἰσί σφι ἱροὶ διὰ τοῦτο .
The Thebans, then, consider rams sacred for this reason, and do not sacrifice them.


2.42.6
1852
μιῇ δὲ ἡμέρῃ τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ , ἐν ὁρτῇ τοῦ Διός , κριὸν ἕνα κατακόψαντες καὶ ἀποδείραντες κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ ἐνδύουσι τ- ἄγαλμα τοῦ Διός , καὶ ἔπειτα ἄλλο ἄγαλμα Ἡρακλέος προσάγουσι πρὸς αὐτό .
But one day a year, at the festival of Zeus, they cut in pieces and flay a single ram and put the fleece on the image of Zeus, as in the story;


2.42.6
1853
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσαντες τύπτονται οἱ περὶ τὸ ἱρὸν ἅπαντες τὸν κριὸν καὶ ἔπειτα ἐν ἱρῇ θήκῃ θάπτουσι αὐτόν .
then they bring an image of Heracles near it. Having done this, all that are at the temple mourn for the ram, and then bury it in a sacred coffin.


2.43.1
1854
Ἡρακλέος δὲ πέρι τόνδε τὸν λόγον ἤκουσα , ὅτι εἴη τῶν δυώδεκα θεῶν ·
Concerning Heracles, I heard it said that he was one of the twelve gods.


2.43.1
1855
τοῦ ἑτέρου δὲ πέρι Ἡρακλέος , τὸν Ἕλληνες οἴδασι , οὐδαμῇ Αἰγύπτου ἐδυνάσθην ἀκοῦσαι .
But nowhere in Egypt could I hear anything about the other Heracles, whom the Greeks know.


2.43.2
1856
καὶ μὴν ὅτι γε οὐ παρ’ Ἑλλήνων ἔλαβον τὸ οὔνομα Αἰγύπτιοι τοῦ Ἡρακλέος , ἀλλὰ Ἕλληνες μᾶλλον παρ’ Αἰγυπτίων καὶ Ἑλλήνων οὗτοι οἱ θέμενοι τῷ Ἀμφιτρύωνος γόνῳ τ- ὄνομα Ἡρακλέα , πολλά μοι καὶ ἄλλα τεκμήρια ἐστὶ τοῦτο οὕτω ἔχειν , ἐν δὲ καὶ τόδε , ὅτι τε τοῦ Ἡρακλέος τούτου οἱ γονέες ἀμφότεροι ἦσαν Ἀμφιτρύων καὶ Ἀλκμήνη γεγονότες τὸ ἀνέκαθεν ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου , καὶ διότι Αἰγύπτιοι οὔτε Ποσειδέωνος οὔτε Διοσκούρων τὰ οὐνόματα φασὶ εἰδέναι , οὐδέ σφι θεοὶ οὗτοι ἐν τοῖσι ἄλλοισι θεοῖσι ἀποδεδέχαται .
I have indeed a lot of other evidence that the name of Heracles did not come from    Hellas    to    Egypt   , but from    Egypt    to    Hellas    (and in    Hellas    to those Greeks who gave the name Heracles to the son of Amphitryon), besides this: that Amphitryon and Alcmene, the parents of this Heracles, were both Egyptian by descent ; and that the Egyptians deny knowing the names Poseidon and the Dioscuri, nor are these gods reckoned among the gods of    Egypt   .


2.43.3
1857
καὶ μὴν εἴ γε παρ’ Ἑλλήνων ἔλαβον οὔνομά τευ δαίμονος , τούτων οὐκ ἥκιστα ἀλλὰ μάλιστα ἔμελλον μνήμην ἕξειν , εἴ περ καὶ τότε ναυτιλίῃσι ἐχρέωντο καὶ ἦσαν Ἑλλήνων τινὲς ναυτίλοι , ὡς ἔλπομαί τε καὶ ἐμὴ γνώμη αἱρέει ·
Yet if they got the name of any deity from the Greeks, of these not least but in particular would they preserve a recollection, if indeed they were already making sea voyages and some Greeks, too, were seafaring men, as I expect and judge;


2.43.3
1858
ὥστε τούτων ἂν καὶ μᾶλλον τῶν θεῶν τὰ οὐνόματα ἐξεπιστέατο Αἰγύπτιοι ἢ τοῦ Ἡρακλέος .
so that the names of these gods would have been even better known to the Egyptians than the name of Heracles.


2.43.4
1859
ἀλλά τις ἀρχαῖος ἐστὶ θεὸς Αἰγυπτίοισι Ἡρακλέης ·
But Heracles is a very ancient god in Egypt;


2.43.4
1860
ὡς δὲ αὐτοὶ λέγουσι , ἔτεα ἐστὶ ἑπτακισχίλια καὶ μύρια ἐς Ἄμασιν βασιλεύσαντα , ἐπείτε ἐκ τῶν ὀκτὼ θεῶν οἱ δυώδεκα θεοὶ ἐγένοντο τῶν Ἡρακλέα ἕνα νομίζουσι .
as the Egyptians themselves say, the change of the eight gods to the twelve, one of whom they acknowledge Heracles to be, was made seventeen thousand years before the reign of Amasis.


2.44.1
1861
καὶ θέλων δὲ τούτων πέρι σαφές τι εἰδέναι ἐξ ὧν οἷόν τε ἦν , ἔπλευσα καὶ ἐς Τύρον τῆς Φοινίκης , πυνθανόμενος αὐτόθι εἶναι ἱρὸν Ἡρακλέος ἅγιον .
Moreover, wishing to get clear information about this matter where it was possible so to do, I took ship for    Tyre    in    Phoenicia   , where I had learned by inquiry that there was a holy temple of Heracles.


2.44.2
1862
καὶ εἶδον πλουσίως κατεσκευασμένον ἄλλοισί τε πολλοῖσι ἀναθήμασι , καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ ἦσαν στῆλαι δύο , ἣ μὲν χρυσοῦ ἀπέφθου , ἣ δὲ σμαράγδου λίθου λάμποντος τὰς νύκτας μέγαθος .
There I saw it, richly equipped with many other offerings, besides two pillars, one of refined gold, one of emerald: a great pillar that shone at night;


2.44.2
1863
ἐς λόγους δὲ ἐλθὼν τοῖσι ἱρεῦσι τοῦ θεοῦ εἰρόμην ὁκόσος χρόνος εἴη ἐξ οὗ σφι τὸ ἱρὸν ἵδρυται .
and in conversation with the priests, I asked how long it was since their temple was built.


2.44.3
1864
εὗρον δὲ οὐδὲ τούτους τοῖσι Ἕλλησι συμφερομένους ·
I found that their account did not tally with the belief of the Greeks, either;


2.44.3
1865
ἔφασαν γὰρ ἅμα Τύρῳ οἰκιζομένῃ καὶ τὸ ἱρὸν τοῦ θεοῦ ἱδρυθῆναι , εἶναι δὲ ἔτεα ἀπ’ οὗ Τύρον οἰκέουσι τριηκόσια καὶ δισχίλια .
for they said that the temple of the god was founded when Tyre first became a city, and that was two thousand three hundred years ago.


2.44.3
1866
εἶδον δὲ ἐν τῇ Τύρῳ καὶ ἄλλο ἱρὸν Ἡρακλέος ἐπωνυμίην ἔχοντος Θασίου εἶναι ·
At Tyre I saw yet another temple of the so-called Thasian Heracles.


2.44.4
1867
ἀπικόμην δὲ καὶ ἐς Θάσον , ἐν τῇ εὗρον ἱρὸν Ἡρακλέος ὑπὸ Φοινίκων ἱδρυμένον , οἳ κατ’ Εὐρώπης ζήτησιν ἐκπλώσαντες Θάσον ἔκτισαν ·
Then I went to Thasos, too, where I found a temple of Heracles built by the Phoenicians, who made a settlement there when they voyaged in search of Europe;


2.44.4
1868
καὶ ταῦτα καὶ πέντε γενεῇσι ἀνδρῶν πρότερα ἐστὶ ἢ τὸν Ἀμφιτρύωνος Ἡρακλέα ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι γενέσθαι .
now they did so as much as five generations before the birth of Heracles the son of Amphitryon in Hellas.


2.44.5
1869
τὰ μέν νυν ἱστορημένα δηλοῖ σαφέως παλαιὸν θεὸν Ἡρακλέα ἐόντα , καὶ δοκέουσι δέ μοι οὗτοι ὀρθότατα Ἑλλήνων ποιέειν , οἳ διξὰ Ἡράκλεια ἱδρυσάμενοι ἔκτηνται , καὶ τῷ μὲν ὡς ἀθανάτῳ Ὀλυμπίῳ δὲ ἐπωνυμίην θύουσι , τῷ δὲ ἑτέρῳ ὡς ἥρωι ἐναγίζουσι .
Therefore, what I have discovered by inquiry plainly shows that Heracles is an ancient god. And furthermore, those Greeks, I think, are most in the right, who have established and practise two worships of Heracles, sacrificing to one Heracles as to an immortal, and calling him the Olympian, but to the other bringing offerings as to a dead hero .


2.45.1
1870
λέγουσι δὲ πολλὰ καὶ ἄλλα ἀνεπισκέπτως οἱ Ἕλληνες , εὐήθης δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ ὅδε ὁ μῦθος ἐστὶ τὸν περὶ τοῦ Ἡρακλέος λέγουσι , ὡς αὐτὸν ἀπικόμενον ἐς Αἴγυπτον στέψαντες οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι ὑπὸ πομπῆς ἐξῆγον ὡς θύσοντες τῷ Διί ·
And the Greeks say many other ill-considered things, too; among them, this is a silly story which they tell about Heracles:


2.45.1
1871
τὸν δὲ τέως μὲν ἡσυχίην ἔχειν , ἐπεὶ δὲ αὐτοῦ πρὸς τῷ βωμῷ κατάρχοντο , ἐς ἀλκὴν τραπόμενον πάντας σφέας καταφονεῦσαι .
that when he came to Egypt, the Egyptians crowned him and led him out in a procession to sacrifice him to Zeus; and for a while (they say) he followed quietly, but when they started in on him at the altar, he resisted and killed them all.


2.45.2
1872
ἐμοὶ μέν νυν δοκέουσι ταῦτα λέγοντες τῆς Αἰγυπτίων φύσιος καὶ τῶν νόμων πάμπαν ἀπείρως ἔχειν οἱ Ἕλληνες ·
Now it seems to me that by this story the Greeks show themselves altogether ignorant of the character and customs of the Egyptians;


2.45.2
1873
τοῖσι γὰρ οὐδὲ κτήνεα ὁσίη θύειν ἐστὶ χωρὶς ὑῶν καὶ ἐρσένων βοῶν καὶ μόσχων , ὅσοι ἂν καθαροὶ ἔωσι , καὶ χηνῶν , κῶς ἂν οὗτοι ἀνθρώπους θύοιεν ;
for how should they sacrifice men when they are forbidden to sacrifice even beasts, except swine and bulls and bull-calves, if they are unblemished, and geese?


2.45.3
1874
ἔτι δὲ ἕνα ἐόντα τὸν Ἡρακλέα καὶ ἔτι ἄνθρωπον , ὡς δὴ φασί , κῶς φύσιν ἔχει πολλὰς μυριάδας φονεῦσαι ;
And furthermore, as Heracles was alone, and, still, only a man, as they say, how is it natural that he should kill many myriads?


2.45.3
1875
καὶ περὶ μὲν τούτων τοσαῦτα ἡμῖν εἰποῦσι καὶ παρὰ τῶν θεῶν καὶ παρὰ τῶν ἡρώων εὐμένεια εἴη .
In talking so much about this, may I keep the goodwill of gods and heroes!


2.46.1
1876
τὰς δὲ δὴ αἶγας καὶ τοὺς τράγους τῶνδε εἵνεκα οὐ θύουσι Αἰγυπτίων οἱ εἰρημένοι ·
This is why the Egyptians of whom I have spoken sacrifice no goats, male or female:


2.46.1
1877
τὸν Πᾶνα τῶν ὀκτὼ θεῶν λογίζονται εἶναι οἱ Μενδήσιοι , τοὺς δὲ ὀκτὼ θεοὺς τούτους προτέρους τῶν δυώδεκα θεῶν φασι γενέσθαι .
the Mendesians reckon Pan among the eight gods who, they say, were before the twelve gods.


2.46.2
1878
γράφουσί τε δὴ καὶ γλύφουσι οἱ ζωγράφοι καὶ οἱ ἀγαλματοποιοὶ τοῦ Πανὸς τ- ἄγαλμα κατά περ Ἕλληνες αἰγοπρόσωπον καὶ τραγοσκελέα , οὔτι τοιοῦτον νομίζοντες εἶναί μιν ἀλλὰ ὁμοῖον τοῖσι ἄλλοισι θεοῖσι ·
Now in their painting and sculpture, the image of Pan is made with the head and the legs of a goat, as among the Greeks;


2.46.2
1879
ὅτευ δὲ εἵνεκα τοιοῦτον γράφουσι αὐτόν , οὔ μοι ἥδιον ἐστὶ λέγειν .
not that he is thought to be in fact such, or unlike other gods; but why they represent him so, I have no wish to say.


2.46.3
1880
σέβονται δὲ πάντας τοὺς αἶγας οἱ Μενδήσιοι , καὶ μᾶλλον τοὺς ἔρσενας τῶν θηλέων , καὶ τούτων οἱ αἰπόλοι τιμὰς μέζονας ἔχουσι ·
The Mendesians consider all goats sacred, the male even more than the female, and goatherds are held in special estimation:


2.46.3
1881
ἐκ δὲ τούτων ἕνα μάλιστα , ὅστις ἐπεὰν ἀποθάνῃ , πένθος μέγα παντὶ τῷ Μενδησίῳ νομῷ τίθεται .
one he-goat is most sacred of all; when he dies, it is ordained that there should be great mourning in all the Mendesian district.


2.46.4
1882
καλέεται δὲ ὅ τε τράγος καὶ ὁ Πὰν Αἰγυπτιστὶ Μένδης .
In the Egyptian language Mendes is the name both for the he-goat and for Pan.


2.46.4
1883
ἐγένετο δὲ ἐν τῷ νομῷ τούτῳ ἐπ’ ἐμεῦ τοῦτο τὸ τέρας ·
In my lifetime a strange thing occurred in this district:


2.46.4
1884
γυναικὶ τράγος ἐμίσγετο ἀναφανδόν .
a he-goat had intercourse openly with a woman.


2.46.4
1885
τοῦτο ἐς ἐπίδεξιν ἀνθρώπων ἀπίκετο .
This came to be publicly known.


2.47.1
1886
ὗν δὲ Αἰγύπτιοι μιαρὸν ἥγηνται θηρίον εἶναι , καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ἤν τις ψαύσῃ αὐτῶν παριὼν αὐτοῖσι τοῖσι ἱματίοισι ἀπ’ ὦν ἔβαψε ἑωυτὸν βὰς ἐς τὸν ποταμόν ·
Swine are held by the Egyptians to be unclean beasts.


2.47.1
1887
τοῦτο δὲ οἱ συβῶται ἐόντες Αἰγύπτιοι ἐγγενέες ἐς ἱρὸν οὐδὲν τῶν ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἐσέρχονται μοῦνοι πάντων , οὐδέ σφι ἐκδίδοσθαι οὐδεὶς θυγατέρα ἐθέλει οὐδ’ ἄγεσθαι ἐξ αὐτῶν , ἀλλ’ ἐκδίδονταί τε οἱ συβῶται καὶ ἄγονται ἐξ ἀλλήλων .
In the first place, if an Egyptian touches a hog in passing, he goes to the river and dips himself in it, clothed as he is; and in the second place, swineherds, though native born Egyptians, are alone of all men forbidden to enter any Egyptian temple; nor will any give a swineherd his daughter in marriage, nor take a wife from their women; but swineherds intermarry among themselves.


2.47.2
1888
τοῖσι μέν νυν ἄλλοισι θεοῖσι θύειν ὗς οὐ δικαιοῦσι Αἰγύπτιοι , Σελήνῃ δὲ καὶ Διονύσῳ μούνοισι τοῦ αὐτοῦ χρόνου , τῇ αὐτῇ πανσελήνῳ , τοὺς ὗς θύσαντες πατέονται τῶν κρεῶν .
Nor do the Egyptians think it right to sacrifice swine to any god except the Moon and Dionysus;


2.47.2
1889
διότι δὲ τοὺς ὗς ἐν μὲν τῇσι ἄλλῃσι ὁρτῇσι ἀπεστυγήκασι ἐν δὲ ταύτῃ θύουσι , ἔστι μὲν λόγος περὶ αὐτοῦ ὑπ’ Αἰγυπτίων λεγόμενος , ἐμοὶ μέντοι ἐπισταμένῳ οὐκ εὐπρεπέστερος ἐστὶ λέγεσθαι .
to these, they sacrifice their swine at the same time, in the same season of full moon; then they eat the meat. The Egyptians have an explanation of why they sacrifice swine at this festival, yet abominate them at others; I know it, but it is not fitting that I relate it.


2.47.3
1890
θυσίη δὲ ἥδε τῶν ὑῶν τῇ Σελήνῃ ποιέεται ·
But this is how they sacrifice swine to the Moon:


2.47.3
1891
ἐπεὰν θύσῃ , τὴν οὐρὴν ἄκρην καὶ τὸν σπλῆνα καὶ τὸν ἐπίπλοον συνθεὶς ὁμοῦ κατ’ ὦν ἐκάλυψε πάσῃ τοῦ κτήνεος τῇ πιμελῇ τῇ περὶ τὴν νηδὺν γινομένῃ , καὶ ἔπειτα καταγίζει πυρί ·
the sacrificer lays the end of the tail and the spleen and the caul together and covers them up with all the fat that he finds around the belly, then consigns it all to the fire;


2.47.3
1892
τὰ δὲ ἄλλα κρέα σιτέονται ἐν τῇ πανσελήνῳ ἐν τῇ ἂν τὰ ἱρὰ θύσωσι , ἐν ἄλλῃ δὲ ἡμέρῃ οὐκ ἂν ἔτι γευσαίατο .
as for the rest of the flesh, they eat it at the time of full moon when they sacrifice the victim; but they will not taste it on any other day.


2.47.3
1893
οἱ δὲ πένητες αὐτῶν ὑπ’ ἀσθενείης βίου σταιτίνας πλάσαντες ὗς καὶ ὀπτήσαντες ταύτας θύουσι .
Poor men, with but slender means, mold swine out of dough, which they then take and sacrifice.


2.48.1
1894
τῷ δὲ Διονύσῳ τῆς ὁρτῆς τῇ δορπίῃ χοῖρον πρὸ τῶν θυρέων σφάξας ἕκαστος διδοῖ ἀποφέρεσθαι τὸν χοῖρον αὐτῷ τῷ ἀποδομένῳ τῶν συβωτέων .
To Dionysus, on the evening of his festival, everyone offers a piglet which he kills before his door and then gives to the swineherd who has sold it, for him to take away.


2.48.2
1895
τὴν δὲ ἄλλην ἀνάγουσι ὁρτὴν τῷ Διονύσῳ οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι πλὴν χορῶν κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ σχεδὸν πάντα Ἕλλησι ·
The rest of the festival of Dionysus is observed by the Egyptians much as it is by the Greeks, except for the dances;


2.48.2
1896
ἀντὶ δὲ φαλλῶν ἄλλα σφι ἐστὶ ἐξευρημένα , ὅσον τε πηχυαῖα ἀγάλματα νευρόσπαστα , τὰ περιφορέουσι κατὰ κώμας γυναῖκες , νεῦον τὸ αἰδοῖον , οὐ πολλῷ τεῳ ἔλασσον ἐὸν τοῦ ἄλλου σώματος ·
but in place of the phallus, they have invented the use of puppets two feet high moved by strings, the male member nodding and nearly as big as the rest of the body, which are carried about the villages by women;


2.48.2
1897
προηγέεται δὲ αὐλός , αἳ δὲ ἕπονται ἀείδουσαι τὸν Διόνυσον .
a flute-player goes ahead, the women follow behind singing of Dionysus.


2.48.3
1898
διότι δὲ μέζον τε ἔχει τὸ αἰδοῖον καὶ κινέει μοῦνον τοῦ σώματος , ἔστι λόγος περὶ αὐτοῦ ἱρὸς λεγόμενος .
Why the male member is so large and is the only part of the body that moves, there is a sacred legend that explains.


2.49.1
1899
ἤδη ὦν δοκέει μοι Μελάμπους ὁ Ἀμυθέωνος τῆς θυσίης ταύτης οὐκ εἶναι ἀδαὴς ἀλλ’ ἔμπειρος .
Now then, it seems to me that Melampus son of Amytheon was not ignorant of but was familiar with this sacrifice.


2.49.1
1900
Ἕλλησι γὰρ δὴ Μελάμπους ἐστὶ ὁ ἐξηγησάμενος τοῦ Διονύσου τό τε οὔνομα καὶ τὴν θυσίην καὶ τὴν πομπὴν τοῦ φαλλοῦ ·
For Melampus was the one who taught the Greeks the name of Dionysus and the way of sacrificing to him and the phallic procession;


2.49.1
1901
ἀτρεκέως μὲν οὐ πάντα συλλαβὼν τὸν λόγον ἔφηνε , ἀλλ’ οἱ ἐπιγενόμενοι τούτῳ σοφισταὶ μεζόνως ἐξέφηναν ·
he did not exactly unveil the subject taking all its details into consideration, for the teachers who came after him made a fuller revelation;


2.49.1
1902
τὸν δ’ ὦν φαλλὸν τὸν τῷ Διονύσῳ πεμπόμενον Μελάμπους ἐστὶ ὁ κατηγησάμενος , καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου μαθόντες ποιεῦσι τὰ ποιεῦσι Ἕλληνες .
but it was from him that the Greeks learned to bear the phallus along in honor of Dionysus, and they got their present practice from his teaching.


2.49.2
1903
ἐγὼ μέν νυν φημὶ Μελάμποδα γενόμενον ἄνδρα σοφὸν μαντικήν τε ἑωυτῷ συστῆσαι καὶ πυθόμενον ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου ἄλλα τε πολλὰ ἐσηγήσασθαι Ἕλλησι καὶ τὰ περὶ τὸν Διόνυσον , ὀλίγα αὐτῶν παραλλάξαντα .
I say, then, that Melampus acquired the prophetic art, being a discerning man, and that, besides many other things which he learned from Egypt, he also taught the Greeks things concerning Dionysus, altering few of them;


2.49.2
1904
οὐ γὰρ δὴ συμπεσεῖν γε φήσω τά τε ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ποιεύμενα τῷ θεῷ καὶ τὰ ἐν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι ·
for I will not say that what is done in Egypt in connection with the god and what is done among the Greeks originated independently:


2.49.2
1905
ὁμότροπα γὰρ ἂν ἦν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι καὶ οὐ νεωστὶ ἐσηγμένα .
for they would then be of an Hellenic character and not recently introduced.


2.49.3
1906
οὐ μὲν οὐδὲ φήσω ὅκως Αἰγύπτιοι παρ’ Ἑλλήνων ἔλαβον ἢ τοῦτο ἢ ἄλλο κού τι νόμαιον .
Nor again will I say that the Egyptians took either this or any other custom from the Greeks.


2.49.3
1907
πυθέσθαι δέ μοι δοκέει μάλιστα Μελάμπους τὰ περὶ τὸν Διόνυσον παρὰ Κάδμου τε τοῦ Τυρίου καὶ τῶν σὺν αὐτῷ ἐκ Φοινίκης ἀπικομένων ἐς τὴν νῦν Βοιωτίην καλεομένην χώρην .
But I believe that Melampus learned the worship of Dionysus chiefly from Cadmus of Tyre and those who came with Cadmus from Phoenicia to the land now called Boeotia.


2.50.1
1908
σχεδὸν δὲ καὶ πάντων τὰ οὐνόματα τῶν θεῶν ἐξ Αἰγύπτου ἐλήλυθε ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
In fact, the names of nearly all the gods came to Hellas from Egypt.


2.50.1
1909
διότι μὲν γὰρ ἐκ τῶν βαρβάρων ἥκει , πυνθανόμενος οὕτω εὑρίσκω ἐόν ·
For I am convinced by inquiry that they have come from foreign parts,


2.50.1
1910
δοκέω δ’ ὦν μάλιστα ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου ἀπῖχθαι .
and I believe that they came chiefly from Egypt.


2.50.2
1911
ὅτι γὰρ δὴ μὴ Ποσειδέωνος καὶ Διοσκούρων , ὡς καὶ πρότερόν μοι ταῦτα εἴρηται , καὶ Ἥρης καὶ Ἱστίης καὶ Θέμιος καὶ Χαρίτων καὶ Νηρηίδων , τῶν ἄλλων θεῶν Αἰγυπτίοισι αἰεί κοτε τὰ οὐνόματα ἐστὶ ἐν τῇ χώρῃ .
Except the names of Poseidon and the Dioscuri, as I have already said, and Hera, and Hestia, and Themis, and the Graces, and the Nereids, the names of all the gods have always existed in Egypt.


2.50.2
1912
λέγω δὲ τὰ λέγουσι αὐτοὶ Αἰγύπτιοι .
I only say what the Egyptians themselves say.


2.50.2
1913
τῶν δὲ οὔ φασι θεῶν γινώσκειν τὰ οὐνόματα , οὗτοι δέ μοι δοκέουσι ὑπὸ Πελασγῶν ὀνομασθῆναι , πλὴν Ποσειδέωνος ·
The gods whose names they say they do not know were, as I think, named by the Pelasgians, except Poseidon,


2.50.2
1914
τοῦτον δὲ τὸν θεὸν παρὰ Λιβύων ἐπύθοντο ·
the knowledge of whom they learned from the Libyans.


2.50.3
1915
οὐδαμοὶ γὰρ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς Ποσειδέωνος οὔνομα ἔκτηνται εἰ μὴ Λίβυες καὶ τιμῶσι τὸν θεὸν τοῦτον αἰεί .
Alone of all nations the Libyans have had among them the name of Poseidon from the beginning, and they have always honored this god.


2.50.3
1916
νομίζουσι δ’ ὦν Αἰγύπτιοι οὐδ’ ἥρωσι οὐδέν .
The Egyptians, however, are not accustomed to pay any honors to heroes.


2.51.1
1917
ταῦτα μέν νυν καὶ ἄλλα πρὸς τούτοισι , τὰ ἐγὼ φράσω , Ἕλληνες ἀπ’ Αἰγυπτίων νενομίκασι ·
These customs, then, and others besides, which I shall indicate, were taken by the Greeks from the Egyptians.


2.51.1
1918
τοῦ δὲ Ἑρμέω τὰ ἀγάλματα ὀρθὰ ἔχειν τὰ αἰδοῖα ποιεῦντες οὐκ ἀπ’ Αἰγυπτίων μεμαθήκασι , ἀλλ’ ἀπὸ Πελασγῶν πρῶτοι μὲν Ἑλλήνων ἁπάντων Ἀθηναῖοι παραλαβόντες , παρὰ δὲ τούτων ὧλλοι .
It was not so with the ithyphallic images of Hermes; the production of these came from the Pelasgians, from whom the Athenians were the first Greeks to take it, and then handed it on to others.


2.51.2
1919
Ἀθηναίοισι γὰρ ἤδη τηνικαῦτα ἐς Ἕλληνας τελέουσι Πελασγοὶ σύνοικοι ἐγένοντο ἐν τῇ χώρῃ , ὅθεν περ καὶ Ἕλληνες ἤρξαντο νομισθῆναι .
For the Athenians were then already counted as Greeks when the Pelasgians came to live in the land with them and thereby began to be considered as Greeks.


2.51.2
1920
ὅστις δὲ τὰ Καβείρων ὄργια μεμύηται , τὰ Σαμοθρήικες ἐπιτελέουσι παραλαβόντες παρὰ Πελασγῶν , οὗτος ὡνὴρ οἶδε τὸ λέγω ·
Whoever has been initiated into the rites of the Cabeiri, which the Samothracians learned from the Pelasgians and now practice, understands what my meaning is.


2.51.3
1921
τὴν γὰρ Σαμοθρηίκην οἴκεον πρότερον Πελασγοὶ οὗτοι οἵ περ Ἀθηναίοισι σύνοικοι ἐγένοντο , καὶ παρὰ τούτων Σαμοθρήικες τὰ ὄργια παραλαμβάνουσι .
Samothrace    was formerly inhabited by those Pelasgians who came to live among the Athenians, and it is from them that the Samothracians take their rites.


2.51.4
1922
ὀρθὰ ὦν ἔχειν τὰ αἰδοῖα τ- ἀγάλματα τοῦ Ἑρμέω Ἀθηναῖοι πρῶτοι Ἑλλήνων μαθόντες παρὰ Πελασγῶν ἐποιήσαντο ·
The Athenians, then, were the first Greeks to make ithyphallic images of Hermes, and they did this because the Pelasgians taught them.


2.51.4
1923
οἱ δὲ Πελασγοὶ ἱρόν τινα λόγον περὶ αὐτοῦ ἔλεξαν , τὰ ἐν τοῖσι ἐν Σαμοθρηίκῃ μυστηρίοισι δεδήλωται .
The Pelasgians told a certain sacred tale about this, which is set forth in the Samothracian mysteries.


2.52.1
1924
ἔθυον δὲ πάντα πρότερον οἱ Πελασγοὶ θεοῖσι ἐπευχόμενοι , ὡς ἐγὼ ἐν Δωδώνῃ οἶδα ἀκούσας , ἐπωνυμίην δὲ οὐδ’ οὔνομα ἐποιεῦντο οὐδενὶ αὐτῶν ·
Formerly, in all their sacrifices, the Pelasgians called upon gods without giving name or appellation to any (I know this, because I was told at Dodona);


2.52.1
1925
οὐ γὰρ ἀκηκόεσάν κω .
for as yet they had not heard of such.


2.52.1
1926
θεοὺς δὲ προσωνόμασαν σφέας ἀπὸ τοῦ τοιούτου , ὅτι κόσμῳ θέντες τὰ πάντα πρήγματα καὶ πάσας νομὰς εἶχον .
They called them gods from the fact that, besides setting everything in order, they maintained all the dispositions.


2.52.2
1927
ἔπειτα δὲ χρόνου πολλοῦ διεξελθόντος ἐπύθοντο ἐκ τῆς Αἰγύπτου ἀπικόμενα τὰ οὐνόματα τῶν θεῶν τῶν ἄλλων , Διονύσου δὲ ὕστερον πολλῷ ἐπύθοντο .
Then, after a long while, first they learned the names of the rest of the gods, which came to them from Egypt, and, much later, the name of Dionysus;


2.52.2
1928
καὶ μετὰ χρόνον ἐχρηστηριάζοντο περὶ τῶν οὐνομάτων ἐν Δωδώνῃ ·
and presently they asked the oracle at Dodona about the names;


2.52.2
1929
τὸ γὰρ δὴ μαντήιον τοῦτο νενόμισται ἀρχαιότατον τῶν ἐν Ἕλλησι χρηστηρίων εἶναι , καὶ ἦν τὸν χρόνον τοῦτον μοῦνον .
for this place of divination, held to be the most ancient in Hellas, was at that time the only one.


2.52.3
1930
ἐπεὶ ὦν ἐχρηστηριάζοντο ἐν τῇ Δωδώνῃ οἱ Πελασγοὶ εἰ ἀνέλωνται τὰ οὐνόματα τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων ἥκοντα , ἀνεῖλε τὸ μαντήιον χρᾶσθαι .
When the Pelasgians, then, asked at Dodona whether they should adopt the names that had come from foreign parts, the oracle told them to use the names.


2.52.3
1931
ἀπὸ μὲν δὴ τούτου τοῦ χρόνου ἔθυον τοῖσι οὐνόμασι τῶν θεῶν χρεώμενοι ·
From that time onwards they used the names of the gods in their sacrifices;


2.52.3
1932
παρὰ δὲ Πελασγῶν Ἕλληνες ἐξεδέξαντο ὕστερον .
and the Greeks received these later from the Pelasgians.


2.53.1
1933
ἔνθεν δὲ ἐγένοντο ἕκαστος τῶν θεῶν , εἴτε αἰεὶ ἦσαν πάντες , ὁκοῖοί τε τινὲς τὰ εἴδεα , οὐκ ἠπιστέατο μέχρι οὗ πρώην τε καὶ χθὲς ὡς εἰπεῖν λόγῳ .
But whence each of the gods came to be, or whether all had always been, and how they appeared in form, they did not know until yesterday or the day before, so to speak;


2.53.2
1934
Ἡσίοδον γὰρ καὶ Ὅμηρον ἡλικίην τετρακοσίοισι ἔτεσι δοκέω μευ πρεσβυτέρους γενέσθαι καὶ οὐ πλέοσι ·
for I suppose Hesiod and Homer flourished not more than four hundred years earlier than I;


2.53.2
1935
οὗτοι δὲ εἰσὶ οἱ ποιήσαντες θεογονίην Ἕλλησι καὶ τοῖσι θεοῖσι τὰς ἐπωνυμίας δόντες καὶ τιμάς τε καὶ τέχνας διελόντες καὶ εἴδεα αὐτῶν σημήναντες .
and these are the ones who taught the Greeks the descent of the gods, and gave the gods their names, and determined their spheres and functions, and described their outward forms.


2.53.3
1936
οἱ δὲ πρότερον ποιηταὶ λεγόμενοι τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν γενέσθαι ὕστερον , ἔμοιγε δοκέειν , ἐγένοντο .
But the poets who are said to have been earlier than these men were, in my opinion, later.


2.53.3
1937
τούτων τὰ μὲν πρῶτα αἱ Δωδωνίδες ἱρεῖαι λέγουσι , τὰ δὲ ὕστερα τὰ ἐς Ἡσίοδόν τε καὶ Ὅμηρον ἔχοντα ἐγὼ λέγω .
The earlier part of all this is what the priestesses of Dodona tell; the later, that which concerns Hesiod and Homer, is what I myself say.


2.54.1
1938
χρηστηρίων δὲ πέρι τοῦ τε ἐν Ἕλλησι καὶ τοῦ ἐν Λιβύῃ τόνδε Αἰγύπτιοι λόγον λέγουσι .
But about the oracles in Hellas, and that one which is in Libya, the Egyptians give the following account.


2.54.1
1939
ἔφασαν οἱ ἱρέες τοῦ Θηβαιέος Διὸς δύο γυναῖκας ἱρείας ἐκ Θηβέων ἐξαχθῆναι ὑπὸ Φοινίκων , καὶ τὴν μὲν αὐτέων πυθέσθαι ἐς Λιβύην πρηθεῖσαν τὴν δὲ ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας ·
The priests of Zeus of Thebes told me that two priestesses had been carried away from Thebes by Phoenicians; one, they said they had heard was taken away and sold in Libya, the other in Hellas;


2.54.1
1940
ταύτας δὲ τὰς γυναῖκας εἶναι τὰς ἱδρυσαμένας τὰ μαντήια πρώτας ἐν τοῖσι εἰρημένοισι ἔθνεσι .
these women, they said, were the first founders of places of divination in the aforesaid countries.


2.54.2
1941
εἰρομένου δέ μευ ὁκόθεν οὕτω ἀτρεκέως ἐπιστάμενοι λέγουσι , ἔφασαν πρὸς ταῦτα ζήτησιν μεγάλην ἀπὸ σφέων γενέσθαι τῶν γυναικῶν τουτέων , καὶ ἀνευρεῖν μὲν σφέας οὐ δυνατοὶ γενέσθαι , πυθέσθαι δὲ ὕστερον ταῦτα περὶ αὐτέων τά περ δὴ ἔλεγον .
When I asked them how it was that they could speak with such certain knowledge, they said in reply that their people had sought diligently for these women, and had never been able to find them, but had learned later the story which they were telling me.


2.55.1
1942
ταῦτα μέν νυν τῶν ἐν Θήβῃσι ἱρέων ἤκουον , τάδε δὲ Δωδωναίων φασὶ αἱ προμάντιες ·
That, then, I heard from the Theban priests; and what follows, the prophetesses of Dodona say:


2.55.1
1943
δύο πελειάδας μελαίνας ἐκ Θηβέων τῶν Αἰγυπτιέων ἀναπταμένας τὴν μὲν αὐτέων ἐς Λιβύην τὴν δὲ παρὰ σφέας ἀπικέσθαι , ἱζομένην δέ μιν ἐπὶ φηγὸν αὐδάξασθαι φωνῇ ἀνθρωπηίῃ ὡς χρεὸν εἴη μαντήιον αὐτόθι Διὸς γενέσθαι , καὶ αὐτοὺς ὑπολαβεῖν θεῖον εἶναι τὸ ἐπαγγελλόμενον αὐτοῖσι , καί σφεας ἐκ τούτου ποιῆσαι .
that two black doves had come flying from Thebes in Egypt, one to Libya and one to Dodona;


2.55.3
1944
τὴν δὲ ἐς τοὺς Λίβυας οἰχομένην πελειάδα λέγουσι Ἄμμωνος χρηστήριον κελεῦσαι τοὺς Λίβυας ποιέειν ·
The dove which came to Libya told the Libyans (they say) to make an oracle of Ammon;


2.55.3
1945
ἔστι δὲ καὶ τοῦτο Διός .
this also is sacred to Zeus.


2.55.3
1946
Δωδωναίων δὲ αἱ ἱρεῖαι , τῶν τῇ πρεσβυτάτῃ οὔνομα ἦν Προμένεια , τῇ δὲ μετὰ ταύτην Τιμαρέτη , τῇ δὲ νεωτάτῃ Νικάνδρη , ἔλεγον ταῦτα ·
Such was the story told by the Dodonaean priestesses, the eldest of whom was Promeneia and the next Timarete and the youngest Nicandra;


2.55.3
1947
συνωμολόγεον δέ σφι καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι Δωδωναῖοι οἱ περὶ τὸ ἱρόν .
and the rest of the servants of the temple at Dodona similarly held it true.


2.56.1
1948
ἐγὼ δ’ ἔχω περὶ αὐτῶν γνώμην τήνδε ·
But my own belief about it is this.


2.56.1
1949
εἰ ἀληθέως οἱ Φοίνικες ἐξήγαγον τὰς ἱρὰς γυναῖκας καὶ τὴν μὲν αὐτέων ἐς Λιβύην τὴν δὲ ἐς τὴν Ἐλλάδα ἀπέδοντο , δοκέει ἐμοί ἡ γυνὴ αὕτη τῆς νῦν Ἑλλάδος , πρότερον δὲ Πελασγίης καλευμένης τῆς αὐτῆς ταύτης , πρηθῆναι ἐς Θεσπρωτούς , ἔπειτα δουλεύουσα αὐτόθι ἱδρύσασθαι ὑπὸ φηγῷ πεφυκυίῃ ἱρὸν Διός , ὥσπερ ἦν οἰκὸς ἀμφιπολεύουσαν ἐν Θήβῃσι ἱρὸν Διός , ἔνθα ἀπίκετο , ἐνθαῦτα μνήμην αὐτοῦ ἔχειν ·
If the Phoenicians did in fact carry away the sacred women and sell one in Libya and one in Hellas, then, in my opinion, the place where this woman was sold in what is now Hellas, but was formerly called Pelasgia, was Thesprotia;


2.56.3
1950
ἐκ δὲ τούτου χρηστήριον κατηγήσατο , ἐπείτε συνέλαβε τὴν Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν ·
After this, as soon as she understood the Greek language, she taught divination;


2.56.3
1951
φάναι δέ οἱ ἀδελφεὴν ἐν Λιβύῃ πεπρῆσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν αὐτῶν Φοινίκων ὑπ’ ὧν καὶ αὐτὴ ἐπρήθη .
and she said that her sister had been sold in Libya by the same Phoenicians who sold her.


2.57.1
1952
πελειάδες δέ μοι δοκέουσι κληθῆναι πρὸς Δωδωναίων ἐπὶ τοῦδε αἱ γυναῖκες , διότι βάρβαροι ἦσαν , ἐδόκεον δέ σφι ὁμοίως ὄρνισι φθέγγεσθαι ·
I expect that these women were called “doves” by the people of    Dodona    because they spoke a strange language, and the people thought it like the cries of birds;


2.57.2
1953
μετὰ δὲ χρόνον τὴν πελειάδα ἀνθρωπηίῃ φωνῇ αὐδάξασθαι λέγουσι , ἐπείτε συνετά σφι ηὔδα ἡ γυνή ·
then the woman spoke what they could understand, and that is why they say that the dove uttered human speech;


2.57.2
1954
ἕως δὲ ἐβαρβάριζε , ὄρνιθος τρόπον ἐδόκεέ σφι φθέγγεσθαι , ἐπεὶ τέῳ ἂν τρόπῳ πελειάς γε ἀνθρωπηίῃ φωνῇ φθέγξαιτο ;
as long as she spoke in a foreign tongue, they thought her voice was like the voice of a bird.


2.57.2
1955
μέλαιναν δὲ λέγοντες εἶναι τὴν πελειάδα σημαίνουσι ὅτι Αἰγυπτίη ἡ γυνὴ ἦν .
For how could a dove utter the speech of men? The tale that the dove was black signifies that the woman was Egyptian.


2.57.3
1956
ἡ δὲ μαντηίη ἥ τε ἐν Θήβῃσι τῇσι Αἰγυπτίῃσι καὶ ἐν Δωδώνῃ παραπλήσιαι ἀλλήλῃσι τυγχάνουσι ἐοῦσαι .
The fashions of divination at Thebes of Egypt and at Dodona are like one another;


2.57.3
1957
ἔστι δὲ καὶ τῶν ἱρῶν ἡ μαντικὴ ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου ἀπιγμένη .
moreover, the practice of divining from the sacrificed victim has also come from Egypt.


2.58.1
1958
πανηγύρις δὲ ἄρα καὶ πομπὰς καὶ προσαγωγὰς πρῶτοι ἀνθρώπων Αἰγύπτιοι εἰσὶ οἱ ποιησάμενοι , καὶ παρὰ τούτων Ἕλληνες μεμαθήκασι .
It would seem, too, that the Egyptians were the first people to establish solemn assemblies, and processions, and services;


2.58.1
1959
τεκμήριον δέ μοι τούτου τόδε ·
the Greeks learned all that from them.


2.58.1
1960
αἱ μὲν γὰρ φαίνονται ἐκ πολλοῦ τευ χρόνου ποιεύμεναι , αἱ δὲ Ἑλληνικαὶ νεωστὶ ἐποιήθησαν .
I consider this proved, because the Egyptian ceremonies are manifestly very ancient, and the Greek are of recent origin.


2.59.1
1961
πανηγυρίζουσι δὲ Αἰγύπτιοι οὐκ ἅπαξ τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ , πανηγύρις δὲ συχνάς , μάλιστα μὲν καὶ προθυμότατα ἐς Βούβαστιν πόλιν τῇ Ἀρτέμιδι , δεύτερα δὲ ἐς Βούσιριν πόλιν τῇ Ἴσι ·
The Egyptians hold solemn assemblies not once a year, but often. The principal one of these and the most enthusiastically celebrated is that in honor of Artemis at the town of    Bubastis    , and the next is that in honor of Isis at Busiris.


2.59.2
1962
ἐν ταύτῃ γὰρ δὴ τῇ πόλι ἐστὶ μέγιστον Ἴσιος ἱρόν , ἵδρυται δὲ ἡ πόλις αὕτη τῆς Αἰγύπτου ἐν μέσῳ τῷ Δέλτα ·
This town is in the middle of the Egyptian Delta,


2.59.2
1963
Ἶσις δὲ ἐστὶ κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλήνων γλῶσσαν Δημήτηρ .
and there is in it a very great temple of Isis, who is Demeter in the Greek language.


2.59.3
1964
τρίτα δὲ ἐς Σάιν πόλιν τῇ Ἀθηναίῃ πανηγυρίζουσι , τέταρτα δὲ ἐς Ἡλίου πόλιν τῷ Ἡλίω , πέμπτα δὲ ἐς Βουτοῦν πόλιν τῇ Λητοῖ , ἕκτα δὲ ἐς Πάπρημιν πόλιν τῷ Ἄρεϊ .
The third greatest festival is at Saïs in honor of Athena; the fourth is the festival of the sun at    Heliopolis   , the fifth of Leto at    Buto   , and the sixth of Ares at Papremis.


2.60.1
1965
ἐς μέν νυν Βούβαστιν πόλιν ἐπεὰν κομίζωνται , ποιεῦσι τοιάδε .
When the people are on their way to Bubastis, they go by river, a great number in every boat, men and women together.


2.60.1
1966
πλέουσί τε γὰρ δὴ ἅμα ἄνδρες γυναιξὶ καὶ πολλόν τι πλῆθος ἑκατέρων ἐν ἑκάστῃ βάρι ·
Some of the women make a noise with rattles, others play flutes all the way,


2.60.1
1967
αἳ μὲν τινὲς τῶν γυναικῶν κρόταλα ἔχουσαι κροταλίζουσι , οἳ δὲ αὐλέουσι κατὰ πάντα τὸν πλόον , αἱ δὲ λοιπαὶ γυναῖκες καὶ ἄνδρες ἀείδουσι καὶ τὰς χεῖρας κροτέουσι .
while the rest of the women, and the men, sing and clap their hands.


2.60.2
1968
ἐπεὰν δὲ πλέοντες κατά τινα πόλιν ἄλλην γένωνται , ἐγχρίμψαντες τὴν βᾶριν τῇ γῇ ποιεῦσι τοιάδε ·
As they travel by river to Bubastis, whenever they come near any other town they bring their boat near the bank;


2.60.2
1969
αἳ μὲν τινὲς τῶν γυναικῶν ποιεῦσι τά περ εἴρηκα , αἳ δὲ τωθάζουσι βοῶσαι τὰς ἐν τῇ πόλι ταύτῃ γυναῖκας , αἳ δὲ ὀρχέονται , αἳ δὲ ἀνασύρονται ἀνιστάμεναι .
then some of the women do as I have said, while some shout mockery of the women of the town; others dance, and others stand up and lift their skirts.


2.60.2
1970
ταῦτα παρὰ πᾶσαν πόλιν παραποταμίην ποιεῦσι ·
They do this whenever they come alongside any riverside town.


2.60.3
1971
ἐπεὰν δὲ ἀπίκωνται ἐς τὴν Βούβαστιν , ὁρτάζουσι μεγάλας ἀνάγοντες θυσίας , καὶ οἶνος ἀμπέλινος ἀναισιμοῦται πλέων ἐν τῇ ὁρτῇ ταύτῃ ἢ ἐν τῷ ἅπαντι ἐνιαυτῷ τῷ ἐπιλοίπῳ .
But when they have reached Bubastis, they make a festival with great sacrifices, and more wine is drunk at this feast than in the whole year besides.


2.60.3
1972
συμφοιτῶσι δέ , ὅ τι ἀνὴρ καὶ γυνή ἐστι πλὴν παιδίων , καὶ ἐς ἑβδομήκοντα μυριάδας , ὡς οἱ ἐπιχώριοι λέγουσι .
It is customary for men and women (but not children) to assemble there to the number of seven hundred thousand, as the people of the place say.


2.61.1
1973
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ ταύτῃ ποιέεται , ἐν δὲ Βουσίρι πόλι ὡς ἀνάγουσι τῇ Ἴσι τὴν ὁρτήν , εἴρηται προτερόν μοι ·
This is what they do there;


2.61.1
1974
τύπτονται μὲν γὰρ δὴ μετὰ τὴν θυσίην πάντες καὶ πᾶσαι , μυριάδες κάρτα πολλαὶ ἀνθρώπων ·
I have already described how they keep the feast of Isis at Busiris. There, after the sacrifice, all the men and women lament, in countless numbers;


2.61.1
1975
τὸν δὲ τύπτονται , οὔ μοι ὅσιον ἐστὶ λέγειν .
but it is not pious for me to say who it is for whom they lament.


2.61.2
1976
ὅσοι δὲ Καρῶν εἰσι ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ οἰκέοντες , οὗτοι δὲ τοσούτῳ ἔτι πλέω ποιεῦσι τούτων ὅσῳ καὶ τὰ μέτωπα κόπτονται μαχαίρῃσι , καὶ τούτῳ εἰσὶ δῆλοι ὅτι εἰσὶ ξεῖνοι καὶ οὐκ Αἰγύπτιοι .
Carians who live in    Egypt    do even more than this, inasmuch as they cut their foreheads with knives; and by this they show that they are foreigners and not Egyptians.


2.62.1
1977
ἐς Σάιν δὲ πόλιν ἐπεὰν συλλεχθέωσι , τῆς θυσίης ἐν τῇ νυκτὶ λύχνα καίουσι πάντες πολλὰ ὑπαίθρια περὶ τὰ δώματα κύκλῳ ·
When they assemble at Saïs on the night of the sacrifice, they keep lamps burning outside around their houses.


2.62.1
1978
τὰ δὲ λύχνα ἐστὶ ἐμβάφια ἔμπλεα ἁλὸς καὶ ἐλαίου , ἐπιπολῆς δὲ ἔπεστι αὐτὸ τὸ ἐλλύχνιον , καὶ τοῦτο καίεται παννύχιον , καὶ τῇ ὁρτῇ οὔνομα κέεται λυχνοκαΐη .
These lamps are saucers full of salt and oil on which the wick floats, and they burn all night. This is called the Feast of Lamps.


2.62.2
1979
οἳ δ’ ἂν μὴ ἔλθωσι τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἐς τὴν πανήγυριν ταύτην , φυλάσσοντες τὴν νύκτα τῆς θυσίης καίουσι καὶ αὐτοὶ πάντες τὰ λύχνα , καὶ οὕτω οὐκ ἐν Σάι μούνῃ καίεται ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀνὰ πᾶσαν Αἴγυπτον .
Egyptians who do not come to this are mindful on the night of sacrifice to keep their own lamps burning, and so they are alight not only at Saïs but throughout Egypt.


2.62.2
1980
ὅτευ δὲ εἵνεκα φῶς ἔλαχε καὶ τιμὴν ἡ νὺξ αὕτη , ἔστι ἱρὸς περὶ αὐτοῦ λόγος λεγόμενος .
A sacred tale is told showing why this night is lit up thus and honored.


2.63.1
1981
ἐς δὲ Ἡλίου τε πόλιν καὶ Βουτοῦν θυσίας μούνας ἐπιτελέουσι φοιτέοντες .
When the people go to Heliopolis and Buto, they offer sacrifice only.


2.63.1
1982
ἐν δὲ Παπρήμι θυσίας μὲν καὶ ἱρὰ κατά περ καὶ τῇ ἄλλῃ ποιεῦσι ·
At Papremis sacrifice is offered and rites performed just as elsewhere;


2.63.1
1983
εὖτ’ ἂν δὲ γίνηται καταφερὴς ὁ ἥλιος , ὀλίγοι μὲν τινὲς τῶν ἱρέων περὶ τ- ἄγαλμα πεπονέαται , οἱ δὲ πολλοὶ αὐτῶν ξύλων κορύνας ἔχοντες ἑστᾶσι τοῦ ἱροῦ ἐν τῇ ἐσόδῳ , ἄλλοι τε εὐχωλὰς ἐπιτελέοντες πλεῦνες χιλίων ἀνδρῶν , ἕκαστοι ἔχοντες ξύλα καὶ οὗτοι , ἐπὶ τὰ ἕτερα ἁλέες ἑστᾶσι .
but when the sun is setting, a few of the priests hover about the image, while most of them go and stand in the entrance to the temple with clubs of wood in their hands; others, more than a thousand men fulfilling vows, who also carry wooden clubs, stand in a mass opposite.


2.63.2
1984
τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα ἐὸν ἐν νηῷ μικρῷ ξυλίνῳ κατακεχρυσωμένῳ προεκκομίζουσι τῇ προτεραίῃ ἐς ἄλλο οἴκημα ἱρόν .
The image of the god, in a little gilded wooden shrine, they carry away on the day before this to another sacred building.


2.63.2
1985
οἱ μὲν δὴ ὀλίγοι οἱ περὶ τ- ἄγαλμα λελειμμένοι ἕλκουσι τετράκυκλον ἅμαξαν ἄγουσαν τὸν νηόν τε καὶ τὸ ἐν τῷ νηῷ ἐνεὸν ἄγαλμα , οἳ δὲ οὐκ ἐῶσι ἐν τοῖσι προπυλαίοισι ἑστεῶτες ἐσιέναι , οἱ δὲ εὐχωλιμαῖοι τιμωρέοντες τῷ θεῷ παίουσι αὐτοὺς ἀλεξομένους .
The few who are left with the image draw a four-wheeled wagon conveying the shrine and the image that is in the shrine; the others stand in the space before the doors and do not let them enter, while the vow-keepers, taking the side of the god, strike them, who defend themselves.


2.63.3
1986
ἐνθαῦτα μάχη ξύλοισι καρτερὴ γίνεται κεφαλάς τε συναράσσονται , καὶ ὡς ἐγὼ δοκέω πολλοὶ καὶ ἀποθνήσκουσι ἐκ τῶν τρωμάτων ·
A fierce fight with clubs breaks out there, and they are hit on their heads, and many, I expect, even die from their wounds;


2.63.3
1987
οὐ μέντοι οἵ γε Αἰγύπτιοι ἔφασαν ἀποθνήσκειν οὐδένα .
although the Egyptians said that nobody dies.


2.63.4
1988
τὴν δὲ πανήγυριν ταύτην ἐκ τοῦδε νομίσαι φασὶ οἱ ἐπιχώριοι ·
The natives say that they made this assembly a custom from the following incident:


2.63.4
1989
οἰκέειν ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ τούτῳ τοῦ Ἄρεος τὴν μητέρα , καὶ τὸν Ἄρεα ἀπότροφον γενόμενον ἐλθεῖν ἐξανδρωμένον ἐθέλοντα τῇ μητρὶ συμμῖξαι , καὶ τοὺς προπόλους τῆς μητρός , οἷα οὐκ ὀπωπότας αὐτὸν πρότερον , οὐ περιορᾶν παριέναι ἀλλὰ ἀπερύκειν , τὸν δὲ ἐξ ἄλλης πόλιος ἀγαγόμενον ἀνθρώπους τούς τε προπόλους τρηχέως περισπεῖν καὶ ἐσελθεῖν παρὰ τὴν μητέρα .
the mother of Ares lived in this temple; Ares had been raised apart from her and came, when he grew up, wishing to visit his mother; but as her attendants kept him out and would not let him pass, never having seen him before, Ares brought men from another town, manhandled the attendants, and went in to his mother.


2.63.4
1990
ἀπὸ τούτου τῷ Ἄρεϊ ταύτην τὴν πληγὴν ἐν τῇ ὁρτῇ νενομικέναι φασί .
From this, they say, this hitting for Ares became a custom in the festival.


2.64.1
1991
καὶ τὸ μὴ μίσγεσθαι γυναιξὶ ἐν ἱροῖσι μηδὲ ἀλούτους ἀπὸ γυναικῶν ἐς ἱρὰ ἐσιέναι οὗτοι εἰσὶ οἱ πρῶτοι θρησκεύσαντες .
Furthermore, it was the Egyptians who first made it a matter of religious observance not to have intercourse with women in temples or to enter a temple after such intercourse without washing.


2.64.1
1992
οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἄλλοι σχεδὸν πάντες ἄνθρωποι , πλὴν Αἰγυπτίων καὶ Ἑλλήνων , μίσγονται ἐν ἱροῖσι καὶ ἀπὸ γυναικῶν ἀνιστάμενοι ἄλουτοι ἐσέρχονται ἐς ἱρόν , νομίζοντες ἀνθρώπους εἶναι κατά περ τὰ ἄλλα κτήνεα ·
Nearly all other peoples are less careful in this matter than are the Egyptians and Greeks, and consider a man to be like any other animal;


2.64.2
1993
καὶ γὰρ τὰ ἄλλα κτήνεα ὁρᾶν καὶ ὀρνίθων γένεα ὀχευόμενα ἔν τε τοῖσι νηοῖσι τῶν θεῶν καὶ ἐν τοῖσι τεμένεσι ·
for beasts and birds (they say) are seen to mate both in the temples and in the sacred precincts;


2.64.2
1994
εἰ ὦν εἶναι τῷ θεῷ τοῦτο μὴ φίλον , οὐκ ἂν οὐδὲ τὰ κτήνεα ποιέειν .
now were this displeasing to the god, the beasts would not do so.


2.64.2
1995
οὗτοι μέν νυν τοιαῦτα ἐπιλέγοντες ποιεῦσι ἔμοιγε οὐκ ἀρεστά ·
This is the reason given by others for practices which I, for my part, dislike.


2.65.1
1996
Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ θρησκεύουσι περισσῶς τά τε ἄλλα περὶ τὰ ἱρὰ καὶ δὴ καὶ τάδε .
but the Egyptians in this and in all other matters are exceedingly strict against desecration of their temples.


2.65.2
1997
ἐοῦσα ἡ Αἴγυπτος ὅμουρος τῇ Λιβύῃ οὐ μάλα θηριώδης ἐστί ·
Although Egypt has Libya on its borders, it is not a country of many animals.


2.65.2
1998
τὰ δὲ ἐόντα σφι ἅπαντα ἱρὰ νενόμισται , καὶ τὰ μὲν σύντροφα αὐτοῖσι τοῖσι ἀνθρώποισι , τὰ δὲ οὔ .
All of them are held sacred; some of these are part of men's households and some not;


2.65.2
1999
τῶν δὲ εἵνεκεν ἀνεῖται τὰ θηρία ἱρὰ εἰ λέγοιμι , καταβαίην ἂν τῷ λόγῳ ἐς τὰ θεῖα πρήγματα , τὰ ἐγὼ φεύγω μάλιστα ἀπηγέεσθαι ·
but if I were to say why they are left alone as sacred, I should end up talking of matters of divinity, which I am especially averse to treating;


2.65.2
2000
τὰ δὲ καὶ εἴρηκα αὐτῶν ἐπιψαύσας , ἀναγκαίῃ καταλαμβανόμενος εἶπον .
I have never touched upon such except where necessity has compelled me.


2.65.3
2001
νόμος δὲ ἐστὶ περὶ τῶν θηρίων ὧδε ἔχων ·
But I will indicate how it is customary to deal with the animals.


2.65.3
2002
μελεδωνοὶ ἀποδεδέχαται τῆς τροφῆς χωρὶς ἑκάστων καὶ ἔρσενες καὶ θήλεαι τῶν Αἰγυπτίων , τῶν παῖς παρὰ πατρὸς ἐκδέκεται τὴν τιμήν .
Men and women are appointed guardians to provide nourishment for each kind respectively; a son inherits this office from his father.


2.65.4
2003
οἳ δὲ ἐν τῇσι πόλισι ἕκαστοι εὐχὰς τάσδε σφι ἀποτελέουσι ·
Townsfolk in each place, when they pay their vows, pray to the god to whom the animal is dedicated,


2.65.4
2004
εὐχόμενοι τῷ θεῷ τοῦ ἂν ᾖ τὸ θηρίον , ξυρῶντες τῶν παιδίων ἢ πᾶσαν τὴν κεφαλὴν ἢ τὸ ἥμισυ ἢ τὸ τρίτον μέρος τῆς κεφαλῆς , ἱστᾶσι σταθμῷ πρὸς ἀργύριον τὰς τρίχας ·
shaving all or one half or one third of their children's heads, and weighing the hair in a balance against a sum of silver;


2.65.4
2005
τὸ δ’ ἂν ἑλκύσῃ , τοῦτο τῇ μελεδωνῷ τῶν θηρίων διδοῖ , ἣ δὲ ἀντ’ αὐτοῦ τάμνουσα ἰχθῦς παρέχει βορὴν τοῖσι θηρίοισι .
then the weight in silver of the hair is given to the female guardian of the creatures, who buys fish with it and feeds them.


2.65.5
2006
τροφὴ μὲν δὴ αὐτοῖσι τοιαύτη ἀποδέδεκται ·
Thus, food is provided for them.


2.65.5
2007
τὸ δ’ ἄν τις τῶν θηρίων τούτων ἀποκτείνῃ , ἢν μὲν ἑκών , θάνατος ἡ ζημίη , ἢν δὲ ἀέκων , ἀποτίνει ζημίην τὴν ἂν οἱ ἱρέες τάξωνται .
Whoever kills one of these creatures intentionally is punished with death; if he kills accidentally, he pays whatever penalty the priests appoint.


2.65.5
2008
ὃς δ’ ἂν ἶβιν ἢ ἴρηκα ἀποκτείνῃ , ἤν τε ἑκὼν ἤν τε ἀέκων , τεθνάναι ἀνάγκη .
Whoever kills an ibis or a hawk, intentionally or not, must die for it.


2.66.1
2009
πολλῶν δὲ ἐόντων ὁμοτρόφων τοῖσι ἀνθρώποισι θηρίων πολλῷ ἂν ἔτι πλέω ἐγίνετο , εἰ μὴ κατελάμβανε τοὺς αἰελούρους τοιάδε ·
There are many household animals; and there would be many more, were it not for what happens among the cats.


2.66.1
2010
ἐπεὰν τέκωσι αἱ θήλεαι , οὐκέτι φοιτέουσι παρὰ τοὺς ἔρσενας ·
When the females have a litter, they are no longer receptive to the males;


2.66.1
2011
οἳ δὲ διζήμενοι μίσγεσθαι αὐτῇσι οὐκ ἔχουσι .
those that seek to have intercourse with them cannot;


2.66.2
2012
πρὸς ὦν ταῦτα σοφίζονται τάδε ·
so their recourse is to steal and carry off and kill the kittens (but they do not eat what they have killed).


2.66.2
2013
ἁρπάζοντες ἀπὸ τῶν θηλέων καὶ ὑπαιρεόμενοι τὰ τέκνα κτείνουσι , κτείναντες μέντοι οὐ πατέονται ·
The mothers, deprived of their young and desiring to have more, will then approach the males;


2.66.2
2014
αἳ δὲ στερισκόμεναι τῶν τέκνων , ἄλλων δὲ ἐπιθυμέουσαι , οὕτω δὴ ἀπικνέονται παρὰ τοὺς ἔρσενας ·
for they are creatures that love offspring.


2.66.2
2015
φιλότεκνον γὰρ τὸ θηρίον .
so their recourse is to steal and carry off and kill the kittens (but they do not eat what they have killed).


2.66.3
2016
πυρκαϊῆς δὲ γενομένης θεῖα πρήγματα καταλαμβάνει τοὺς αἰελούρους ·
And when a fire breaks out, very strange things happen among the cats.


2.66.3
2017
οἱ μὲν γὰρ Αἰγύπτιοι διαστάντες φυλακὰς ἔχουσι τῶν αἰελούρων , ἀμελήσαντες σβεννύναι τὸ καιόμενον , οἱ δὲ αἰέλουροι διαδύνοντες καὶ ὑπερθρώσκοντες τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἐσάλλονται ἐς τὸ πῦρ .
The Egyptians stand around in a broken line, thinking more of the cats than of quenching the burning; but the cats slip through or leap over the men and spring into the fire.


2.66.4
2018
ταῦτα δὲ γινόμενα πένθεα μεγάλα τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους καταλαμβάνει .
When this happens, there is great mourning in Egypt.


2.66.4
2019
ἐν ὁτέοισι δ’ ἂν οἰκίοισι αἰέλουρος ἀποθάνῃ ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτομάτου , οἱ ἐνοικέοντες πάντες ξυρῶνται τὰς ὀφρύας μούνας , παρ’ ὁτέοισι δ’ ἂν κύων , πᾶν τὸ σῶμα καὶ τὴν κεφαλήν .
The occupants of a house where a cat has died a natural death shave their eyebrows and no more; where a dog has died, the head and the whole body are shaven.


2.67.1
2020
ἀπάγονται δὲ οἱ αἰέλουροι ἀποφανόντες ἐς ἱρὰς στέγας , ἔνθα θάπτονται ταριχευθέντες , ἐν Βουβάστιπόλι ·
Dead cats are taken away to sacred buildings in the town of Bubastis, where they are embalmed and buried;


2.67.1
2021
τὰς δὲ κύνας ἐν τῇ ἑωυτῶν ἕκαστοι πόλι θάπτουσι ἐν ἱρῇσι θήκῃσι .
female dogs are buried by the townsfolk in their own towns in sacred coffins;


2.67.1
2022
ὣς δὲ αὕτως τῇσι κυσὶ οἱ ἰχνευταὶ θάπτονται .
and the like is done with mongooses.


2.67.1
2023
τὰς δὲ μυγαλᾶς καὶ τοὺς ἴρηκας ἀπάγουσι ἐς Βουτοῦν πόλιν , τὰς δὲ ἴβις ἐς Ἑρμέω πόλιν .
Shrewmice and hawks are taken away to Buto, ibises to the city of Hermes.


2.67.2
2024
τὰς δὲ ἄρκτους ἐούσας σπανίας καὶ τοὺς λύκους οὐ πολλῷ τεῳ ἐόντας ἀλωπέκων μέζονας αὐτοῦ θάπτουσι τῇ ἂν εὑρεθέωσι κείμενοι .
There are few bears, and the wolves are little bigger than foxes; both these are buried wherever they are found lying.


2.68.1
2025
τῶν δὲ κροκοδείλων φύσις ἐστὶ τοιήδε .
The nature of crocodiles is as follows.


2.68.1
2026
τοὺς χειμεριωτάτους μῆνας τέσσερας ἐσθίει οὐδέν , ἐὸν δὲ τετράπουν χερσαῖον καὶ λιμναῖον ἐστί .
For the four winter months, it eats nothing.


2.68.1
2027
τίκτει μὲν γὰρ ᾠὰ ἐν γῇ καὶ ἐκλέπει , καὶ τὸ πολλὸν τῆς ἡμέρης διατρίβει ἐν τῷ ξηρῷ , τὴν δὲ νύκτα πᾶσαν ἐν τῷ ποταμῷ ·
It has four feet, and lives both on land and in the water, for it lays eggs and hatches them out on land and spends the greater part of the day on dry ground, and the night in the river.


2.68.1
2028
θερμότερον γὰρ δή ἐστι τὸ ὕδωρ τῆς τε αἰθρίης καὶ τῆς δρόσου .
For the water is warmer than the air and dew.


2.68.2
2029
πάντων δὲ τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν θνητῶν τοῦτο ἐξ ἐλαχίστου μέγιστον γίνεται ·
No mortal creature of all which we know grows from so small a beginning to such greatness;


2.68.2
2030
τὰ μὲν γὰρ ᾠὰ χηνέων οὐ πολλῷ μέζονα τίκτει , καὶ ὁ νεοσσὸς κατὰ λόγον τοῦ ᾠοῦ γίνεται , αὐξανόμενος δὲ γίνεται καὶ ἐς ἑπτακαίδεκα πήχεας καὶ μέζων ἔτι .
for its eggs are not much bigger than goose eggs, and the young crocodile is of a proportional size, but it grows to a length of twenty-eight feet and more.


2.68.3
2031
ἔχει δὲ ὀφθαλμοὺς μὲν ὑός , ὀδόντας δὲ μεγάλους καὶ χαυλιόδοντας κατὰ λόγον τοῦ σώματος .
It has eyes like pigs' eyes, and long, protruding teeth.


2.68.3
2032
γλῶσσαν δὲ μοῦνον θηρίων οὐκ ἔφυσε , οὐδὲ κινέει τὴν κάτω γνάθον , ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦτο μοῦνον θηρίων τὴν ἄνω γνάθον προσάγει τῇ κάτω .
It is the only animal that has no tongue. It does not move the lower jaw, but brings the upper jaw down upon the lower, uniquely among beasts.


2.68.4
2033
ἔχει δὲ καὶ ὄνυχας καρτεροὺς καὶ δέρμα λεπιδωτὸν ἄρρηκτον ἐπὶ τοῦ νώτου .
It also has strong claws, and a scaly, impenetrable hide on its back.


2.68.4
2034
τυφλὸν δὲ ἐν ὕδατι , ἐν δὲ τῇ αἰθρίῃ ὀξυδερκέστατον .
It is blind in the water, but very keen of sight in the air.


2.68.4
2035
ἅτε δὴ ὦν ἐν ὕδατι δίαιταν ποιεύμενον , τὸ στόμα ἔνδοθεν φονέει πᾶν μεστὸν βδελλέων .
Since it lives in the water, its mouth is all full of leeches.


2.68.4
2036
τὰ μὲν δὴ ἄλλα ὄρνεα καὶ θηρία φεύγει μιν , ὁ δὲ τροχίλος εἰρηναῖόν οἱ ἐστὶ ἅτε ὠφελεομένῳ πρὸς αὐτοῦ ·
All birds and beasts flee from it, except the sandpiper, with which it is at peace because this bird does the crocodile a service;


2.68.5
2037
ἐπεὰν γὰρ ἐς τὴν γῆν ἐκβῇ ἐκ τοῦ ὕδατος ὁ κροκόδειλος καὶ ἔπειτα χάνῃ ( ἔωθε γὰρ τοῦτο ὡς ἐπίπαν ποιέειν πρὸς τὸν ζέφυρον ) , ἐνθαῦτα ὁ τροχίλος ἐσδύνων ἐς τὸ στόμα αὐτοῦ καταπίνει τὰς βδέλλας ·
for whenever the crocodile comes ashore out of the water and then opens its mouth (and it does this mostly to catch the west wind),


2.68.5
2038
ὁ δὲ ὠφελεύμενος ἥδεται καὶ οὐδὲν σίνεται τὸν τροχίλον .
the sandpiper goes into its mouth and eats the leeches; the crocodile is pleased by this service and does the sandpiper no harm.


2.69.1
2039
τοῖσι μὲν δὴ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἱροί εἰσι οἱ κροκόδειλοι , τοῖσι δὲ οὔ , ἀλλ’ ἅτε πολεμίους περιέπουσι ·
Some of the Egyptians consider crocodiles sacred; others do not, but treat them as enemies.


2.69.1
2040
οἱ δὲ περί τε Θήβας καὶ τὴν Μοίριος λίμνην οἰκέοντες καὶ κάρτα ἥγηνται αὐτοὺς εἶναι ἱρούς ·
Those who live near Thebes and lake Moeris consider them very sacred.


2.69.2
2041
ἐκ πάντων δὲ ἕνα ἑκάτεροι τρέφουσι κροκόδειλον δεδιδαγμένον εἶναι χειροήθεα , ἀρτήματά τε λίθινα χυτὰ καὶ χρύσεα ἐς τὰ ὦτα ἐνθέντες καὶ ἀμφιδέας περὶ τοὺς ἐμπροσθίους πόδας , καὶ σιτία ἀποτακτὰ διδόντες καὶ ἱρήια , καὶ περιέποντες ὡς κάλλιστα ζῶντας ·
Every household raises one crocodile, trained to be tame; they put ornaments of glass and gold on its ears and bracelets on its forefeet, provide special food and offerings for it, and give the creatures the best of treatment while they live;


2.69.2
2042
ἀποθανόντας δὲ θάπτουσι ταριχεύσαντες ἐν ἱρῇσι θήκῃσι .
after death, the crocodiles are embalmed and buried in sacred coffins.


2.69.3
2043
οἱ δὲ περὶ Ἐλεφαντίνην πόλιν οἰκέοντες καὶ ἐσθίουσι αὐτοὺς οὐκ ἡγεόμενοι ἱροὺς εἶναι .
But around Elephantine they are not held sacred, and are even eaten.


2.69.3
2044
καλέονται δὲ οὐ κροκόδειλοι ἀλλὰ χάμψαι ·
The Egyptians do not call them crocodiles, but khampsae.


2.69.3
2045
κροκοδείλους δὲ Ἴωνες ὠνόμασαν , εἰκάζοντες αὐτῶν τὰ εἴδεα τοῖσι παρὰ σφίσι γινομένοισι κροκοδείλοισι τοῖσι ἐν τῇσι αἱμασιῇσι .
The Ionians named them crocodiles, from their resemblance to the lizards which they have in their walls.


2.70.1
2046
ἄγραι δὲ σφέων πολλαὶ κατεστᾶσι καὶ παντοῖαι ·
There are many different ways of crocodile hunting;


2.70.1
2047
ἣ δ’ ὦν ἔμοιγε δοκέει ἀξιωτάτη ἀπηγήσιος εἶναι , ταύτην γράφω .
I will write of the way that I think most worth mentioning.


2.70.1
2048
ἐπεὰν νῶτον ὑὸς δελεάσῃ περὶ ἄγκιστρον , μετιεῖ ἐς μέσον τὸν ποταμόν , αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ χείλεος τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἔχων δέλφακα ζωὴν ταύτην τύπτει .
The hunter baits a hook with a hog's back, and lets it float into the midst of the river; he himself stays on the bank with a young live pig, which he beats.


2.70.2
2049
ἐπακούσας δὲ τῆς φωνῆς ὁ κροκόδειλος ἵεται κατὰ τὴν φωνήν , ἐντυχὼν δὲ τῷ νώτῳ καταπίνει ·
Hearing the squeals of the pig, the crocodile goes after the sound, and meets the bait, which it swallows;


2.70.2
2050
οἳ δὲ ἕλκουσι .
then the hunters pull the line.


2.70.2
2051
ἐπεὰν δὲ ἐξελκυσθῇ ἐς γῆν , πρῶτον ἁπάντων ὁ θηρευτὴς πηλῷ κατ’ ὦν ἔπλασε αὐτοῦ τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς ·
When the crocodile is drawn ashore, first of all the hunter smears its eyes over with mud;


2.70.2
2052
τοῦτο δὲ ποιήσας κάρτα εὐπετέως τὰ λοιπὰ χειροῦται , μὴ ποιήσας δὲ τοῦτο σὺν πόνῳ .
when this is done, the quarry is very easily mastered — no light matter, without that.


2.71.1
2053
οἱ δὲ ἵπποι οἱ ποτάμιοι νομῷ μὲν τῷ Παπρημίτῃ ἱροί εἰσι , τοῖσι δὲ ἄλλοισι Αἰγυπτίοισι οὐκ ἱροί .
Hippopotamuses are sacred in the district of Papremis, but not elsewhere in Egypt.


2.71.1
2054
φύσιν δὲ παρέχονται ἰδέης τοιήνδε ·
They present the following appearance:


2.71.1
2055
τετράπουν ἐστί , δίχηλον , ὁπλαὶ βοός , σιμόν , λοφιὴν ἔχον ἵππου , χαυλιόδοντας φαῖνον , οὐρὴν ἵππου καὶ φωνήν , μέγαθος ὅσον τε βοῦς ὁ μέγιστος ·
four-footed, with cloven hooves like cattle; blunt-nosed; with a horse's mane, visible tusks, a horse's tail and voice; big as the biggest bull.


2.71.1
2056
τὸ δέρμα δ’ αὐτοῦ οὕτω δή τι παχύ ἐστι ὥστε αὔου γενομένου ξυστὰ ποιέεσθαι ἀκόντια ἐξ αὐτοῦ .
Their hide is so thick that, when it is dried, spearshafts are made of it.


2.72.1
2057
γίνονται δὲ καὶ ἐνύδριες ἐν τῷ ποταμῷ , τὰς ἱρὰς ἥγηνται εἶναι .
Otters are found in the river, too, which the Egyptians consider sacred;


2.72.1
2058
νομίζουσι δὲ καὶ τῶν ἰχθύων τὸν καλεύμενον λεπιδωτὸν ἱρὸν εἶναι καὶ τὴν ἔγχελυν , ἱροὺς δὲ τούτους τοῦ Νείλου φασὶ εἶναι , καὶ τῶν ὀρνίθων τοὺς χηναλώπεκας .
and they consider sacred that fish, too, which is called the scale-fish, and the eel. These, and the fox-goose among birds, are said to be sacred to the god of the Nile.


2.73.1
2059
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλος ὄρνις ἱρός , τῷ οὔνομα φοῖνιξ .
There is another sacred bird, too, whose name is phoenix.


2.73.1
2060
ἐγὼ μέν μιν οὐκ εἶδον εἰ μὴ ὅσον γραφῇ ·
I myself have never seen it, only pictures of it;


2.73.1
2061
καὶ γὰρ δὴ καὶ σπάνιος ἐπιφοιτᾷ σφι , δι’ ἐτέων , ὡς Ἡλιοπολῖται λέγουσι , πεντακοσίων ·
for the bird seldom comes into Egypt: once in five hundred years, as the people of Heliopolis say.


2.73.2
2062
φοιτᾶν δὲ τότε φασὶ ἐπεάν οἱ ἀποθάνῃ ὁ πατήρ .
It is said that the phoenix comes when his father dies.


2.73.2
2063
ἔστι δέ , εἰ τῇ γραφῇ παρόμοιος , τοσόσδε καὶ τοιόσδε ·
If the picture truly shows his size and appearance, he is of such a size and such a kind.


2.73.2
2064
τὰ μὲν αὐτοῦ χρυσόκομα τῶν πτερῶν τὰ δὲ ἐρυθρὰ ἐς τὰ μάλιστα ·
His plumage is partly golden and partly red.


2.73.2
2065
αἰετῷ περιήγησιν ὁμοιότατος καὶ τὸ μέγαθος .
He is most like an eagle in shape and size.


2.73.3
2066
τοῦτον δὲ λέγουσι μηχανᾶσθαι τάδε , ἐμοὶ μὲν οὐ πιστὰ λέγοντες ·
What they say this bird manages to do is incredible to me.


2.73.3
2067
ἐξ Ἀραβίης ὁρμώμενον ἐς τὸ ἱρὸν τοῦ Ἡλίου κομίζειν τὸν πατέρα ἐν σμύρνῃ ἐμπλάσσοντα καὶ θάπτειν ἐν τοῦ Ἡλίου τῷ ἱρῷ , κομίζειν δὲ οὕτω ·
Flying from Arabia to the temple of the sun, they say, he conveys his father encased in myrrh and buries him at the temple of the Sun.


2.73.4
2068
πρῶτον τῆς σμύρνης ᾠὸν πλάσσειν ὅσον τε δυνατός ἐστι φέρειν , μετὰ δὲ πειρᾶσθαι αὐτὸ φορέοντα , ἐπεὰν δὲ ἀποπειρηθῇ , οὕτω δὴ κοιλήναντα τὸ ᾠὸν τὸν πατέρα ἐς αὐτὸ ἐντιθέναι , σμύρνῃ δὲ ἄλλῃ ἐμπλάσσειν τοῦτο κατ’ ὅ τι τοῦ ᾠοῦ ἐκκοιλήνας ἐνέθηκε τὸν πατέρα ·
This is how he conveys him: he first molds an egg of myrrh as heavy as he can carry, then tries lifting it, and when he has tried it, he then hollows out the egg and puts his father into it, and plasters over with more myrrh the hollow of the egg into which he has put his father,


2.73.4
2069
ἐσκειμένου δὲ τοῦ πατρὸς γίνεσθαι τ- αὐτὸ βάρος ·
which is the same in weight with his father lying in it,


2.73.4
2070
ἐμπλάσαντα δὲ κομίζειν μιν ἐπ’ Αἰγύπτου ἐς τοῦ Ἡλίου τὸ ἱρόν .
and he conveys him encased to the temple of the Sun in Egypt.


2.73.4
2071
ταῦτα μὲν τοῦτον τὸν ὄρνιν λέγουσι ποιέειν .
This is what they say this bird does.


2.74.1
2072
εἰσὶ δὲ περὶ Θήβας ἱροὶ ὄφιες , ἀνθρώπων οὐδαμῶς δηλήμονες , οἳ μεγάθεϊ ἐόντες μικροὶ δύο κέρεα φορέουσι πεφυκότα ἐξ ἄκρης τῆς κεφαλῆς ·
Near Thebes there are sacred snakes, harmless to men, small in size, and bearing two horns on the top of their heads.


2.74.1
2073
τοὺς θάπτουσι ἀποθανόντας ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ τοῦ Διός ·
These, when they die, are buried in the temple of Zeus,


2.74.1
2074
τούτου γὰρ σφέας τοῦ θεοῦ φασι εἶναι ἱρούς .
to whom they are said to be sacred.


2.75.1
2075
ἔστι δὲ χῶρος τῆς Ἀραβίης κατὰ Βουτοῦν πόλιν μάλιστά κῃ κείμενος , καὶ ἐς τοῦτο τὸ χωρίον ἦλθον πυνθανόμενος περὶ τῶν πτερωτῶν ὀφίων ·
There is a place in Arabia not far from the town of Buto where I went to learn about the winged serpents.


2.75.1
2076
ἀπικόμενος δὲ εἶδον ὀστέα ὀφίων καὶ ἀκάνθας πλήθεϊ μὲν ἀδύνατα ἀπηγήσασθαι , σωροὶ δὲ ἦσαν ἀκανθέων καὶ μεγάλοι καὶ ὑποδεέστεροι καὶ ἐλάσσονες ἔτι τούτων , πολλοὶ δὲ ἦσαν οὗτοι .
When I arrived there, I saw innumerable bones and backbones of serpents: many heaps of backbones, great and small and even smaller.


2.75.2
2077
ἔστι δὲ ὁ χῶρος οὗτος , ἐν τῷ αἱ ἄκανθαι κατακεχύαται , τοιόσδε τις , ἐσβολὴ ἐξ ὀρέων στεινῶν ἐς πεδίον μέγα , τὸ δὲ πεδίον τοῦτο συνάπτει τῷ Αἰγυπτίῳ πεδίῳ .
This place, where the backbones lay scattered, is where a narrow mountain pass opens into a great plain, which adjoins the plain of    Egypt   .


2.75.3
2078
λόγος δὲ ἐστὶ ἅμα τῷ ἔαρι πτερωτοὺς ὄφις ἐκ τῆς Ἀραβίης πέτεσθαι ἐπ’ Αἰγύπτου , τὰς δὲ ἴβις τὰς ὄρνιθας ἀπαντώσας ἐς τὴν ἐσβολὴν ταύτης τῆς χώρης οὐ παριέναι τοὺς ὄφις ἀλλὰ κατακτείνειν .
Winged serpents are said to fly from    Arabia    at the beginning of spring, making for    Egypt   ; but the ibis birds encounter the invaders in this pass and kill them.


2.75.4
2079
καὶ τὴν ἶβιν διὰ τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον τετιμῆσθαι λέγουσι Ἀράβιοι μεγάλως πρὸς Αἰγυπτίων ·
The Arabians say that the ibis is greatly honored by the Egyptians for this service,


2.75.4
2080
ὁμολογέουσι δὲ καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι διὰ ταῦτα τιμᾶν τὰς ὄρνιθας ταύτας .
and the Egyptians give the same reason for honoring these birds.


2.76.1
2081
εἶδος δὲ τῆς μὲν ἴβιος τόδε ·
Now this is the appearance of the ibis.


2.76.1
2082
μέλαινα δεινῶς πᾶσα , σκέλεα δὲ φορέει γεράνου , πρόσωπον δὲ ἐς τὰ μάλιστα ἐπίγρυπον , μέγαθος ὅσον κρέξ .
It is all quite black, with the legs of a crane, and a beak sharply hooked, and is as big as a landrail.


2.76.1
2083
τῶν μὲν δὴ μελαινέων τῶν μαχομενέων πρὸς τοὺς ὄφις ἥδε ἰδέη , τῶν δ’ ἐν ποσὶ μᾶλλον εἱλευμενέων τοῖσι ἀνθρώποισι ( διξαὶ γὰρ δή εἰσι ἴβιες ) ψιλὴ τὴν κεφαλὴν καὶ τὴν δειρὴν πᾶσαν , λευκὴ πτεροῖσι πλὴν κεφαλῆς καὶ αὐχένος καὶ ἀκρέων τῶν πτερύγων καὶ τοῦ πυγαίου ἄκρου ( ταῦτα δὲ τὰ εἶπον πάντα μέλανα ἐστὶ δεινῶς ) , σκέλεα δὲ καὶ πρόσωπον ἐμφερὴς τῇ ἑτέρῃ .
Such is the appearance of the ibis which fights with the serpents. Those that most associate with men (for there are two kinds of ibis)


2.76.2
2084
τοῦ δὲ ὄφιος ἡ μορφὴ οἵη περ τῶν ὕδρων , πτίλα δὲ οὐ πτερωτὰ φορέει ἀλλὰ τοῖσι τῆς νυκτερίδος πτεροῖσι μάλιστά κῃ ἐμφερέστατα .
have the whole head and neck bare of feathers; their plumage is white, except the head and neck and wingtips and tail (these being quite black); the legs and beak of the bird are like those of the other ibis. The serpents are like water-snakes.


2.76.3
2085
Τοσαῦτα μὲν θηρίων πέρι ἱρῶν εἰρήσθω .
Their wings are not feathered but very like the wings of a bat. I have now said enough concerning creatures that are sacred.


2.77.1
2086
αὐτῶν δὲ δὴ Αἰγυπτίων οἳ μὲν περὶ τὴν σπειρομένην Αἴγυπτον οἰκέουσι , μνήμην ἀνθρώπων πάντων ἐπασκέοντες μάλιστα λογιώτατοι εἰσὶ μακρῷ τῶν ἐγὼ ἐς διάπειραν ἀπικόμην , τρόπῳ δὲ ζόης τοιῷδε διαχρέωνται ·
Among the Egyptians themselves, those who live in the cultivated country are the most assiduous of all men at preserving the memory of the past, and none whom I have questioned are so skilled in history.


2.77.2
2087
συρμαΐζουσι τρεῖς ἡμέρας ἐπεξῆς μηνὸς ἑκάστου , ἐμέτοισι θηρώμενοι τὴν ὑγιείην καὶ κλύσμασι , νομίζοντες ἀπὸ τῶν τρεφόντων σιτίων πάσας τὰς νούσους τοῖσι ἀνθρώποισι γίνεσθαι .
They practice the following way of life. For three consecutive days in every month they purge themselves, pursuing health by means of emetics and drenches; for they think that it is from the food they eat that all sicknesses come to men.


2.77.3
2088
εἰσὶ μὲν γὰρ καὶ ἄλλως Αἰγύπτιοι μετὰ Λίβυας ὑγιηρέστατοι πάντων ἀνθρώπων τῶν ὡρέων δοκέειν ἐμοὶ εἵνεκα , ὅτι οὐ μεταλλάσσουσι αἱ ὧραι ·
Even without this, the Egyptians are the healthiest of all men, next to the Libyans;


2.77.3
2089
ἐν γὰρ τῇσι μεταβολῇσι τοῖσι ἀνθρώποισι αἱ νοῦσοι μάλιστα γίνονται τῶν τε ἄλλων πάντων καὶ δὴ καὶ τῶν ὡρέων μάλιστα .
the explanation of which, in my opinion, is that the climate in all seasons is the same: for change is the great cause of men's falling sick, more especially changes of seasons.


2.77.4
2090
ἀρτοφαγέουσι δὲ ἐκ τῶν ὀλυρέων ποιεῦντες ἄρτους , τοὺς ἐκεῖνοι κυλλήστις ὀνομάζουσι .
They eat bread, making loaves which they call “cyllestis,” of coarse grain.


2.77.4
2091
οἴνῳ δὲ ἐκ κριθέων πεποιημένῳ διαχρέωνται ·
For wine, they use a drink made from barley,


2.77.4
2092
οὐ γάρ σφι εἰσὶ ἐν τῇ χώρῃ ἄμπελοι .
for they have no vines in their country.


2.77.4
2093
ἰχθύων δὲ τοὺς μὲν πρὸς ἥλιον αὐήναντες ὠμοὺς σιτέονται , τοὺς δὲ ἐξ ἅλμης τεταριχευμένους .
They eat fish either raw and sun-dried, or preserved with brine.


2.77.5
2094
ὀρνίθων δὲ τούς τε ὄρτυγας καὶ τὰς νήσσας καὶ τὰ μικρὰ τῶν ὀρνίθων ὠμὰ σιτέονται προταριχεύσαντες .
Quails and ducks and small birds are salted and eaten raw;


2.77.5
2095
τὰ δὲ ἄλλα ὅσα ἢ ὀρνίθων ἢ ἰχθύων σφι ἐστὶ ἐχόμενα , χωρὶς ἢ ὁκόσοι σφι ἱροὶ ἀποδεδέχαται , τοὺς λοιποὺς ὀπτοὺς καὶ ἑφθοὺς σιτέονται .
all other kinds of birds, as well as fish (except those that the Egyptians consider sacred) are eaten roasted or boiled.


2.78.1
2096
ἐν δὲ τῇσι συνουσίῃσι τοῖσι εὐδαίμοσι αὐτῶν , ἐπεὰν ἀπὸ δείπνου γένωνται , περιφέρει ἀνὴρ νεκρὸν ἐν σορῷ ξύλινον πεποιημένον , μεμιμημένον ἐς τὰ μάλιστα καὶ γραφῇ καὶ ἔργῳ , μέγαθος ὅσον τε πηχυαῖον ἢ δίπηχυν , δεικνὺς δὲ ἑκάστῳ τῶν συμποτέων λέγει " ἐς τοῦτον ὁρέων πῖνέ τε καὶ τέρπευ ·
After rich men's repasts, a man carries around an image in a coffin, painted and carved in exact imitation of a corpse two or four feet long.


2.78.1
2097
ἔσεαι γὰρ ἀποθανὼν τοιοῦτος " .
This he shows to each of the company, saying “While you drink and enjoy, look on this; for to this state you must come when you die.”


2.78.1
2098
ταῦτα μὲν παρὰ τὰ συμπόσια ποιεῦσι .
Such is the custom at their symposia.


2.79.1
2099
πατρίοισι δὲ χρεώμενοι νόμοισι ἄλλον οὐδένα ἐπικτῶνται ·
They keep the customs of their fathers, adding none to them.


2.79.1
2100
τοῖσι ἄλλα τε ἐπάξια ἐστὶ νόμιμα , καὶ δὴ καὶ ἄεισμα ἕν ἐστι , Λίνος , ὅσπερ ἔν τε Φοινίκῃ ἀοίδιμος ἐστὶ καὶ ἐν Κύπρῳ καὶ ἄλλῃ , κατὰ μέντοι ἔθνεα οὔνομα ἔχει , συμφέρεται δὲ ὡυτὸς εἶναι τὸν οἱ Ἕλληνες Λίνον ὀνομάζοντες ἀείδουσι , ὥστε πολλὰ μὲν καὶ ἄλλα ἀποθωμάζειν με τῶν περὶ Αἴγυπτον ἐόντων , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ τὸν Λίνον ὁκόθεν ἔλαβον τὸ οὔνομα ·
Among other notable customs of theirs is this, that they have one song, the Linus-song, which is sung in Phoenicia and Cyprus and elsewhere; each nation has a name of its own for this,


2.79.2
2101
φαίνονται δὲ αἰεί κοτε τοῦτον ἀείδοντες .
but it happens to be the same song that the Greeks sing, and call Linus;


2.79.2
2102
ἔστι δὲ Αἰγυπτιστὶ ὁ Λίνος καλεύμενος Μανερῶς .
so that of many things in Egypt that amaze me, one is: where did the Egyptians get Linus? Plainly they have always sung this song; but in Egyptian Linus is called Maneros.


2.79.3
2103
ἔφασαν δέ μιν Αἰγύπτιοι τοῦ πρώτου βασιλεύσαντος Αἰγύπτου παῖδα μουνογενέα γενέσθαι , ἀποθανόντα δὲ αὐτὸν ἄνωρον θρήνοισι τούτοισι ὑπὸ Αἰγυπτίων τιμηθῆναι , καὶ ἀοιδήν τε ταύτην πρώτην καὶ μούνην σφίσι γενέσθαι .
The Egyptians told me that Maneros was the only son of their first king, who died prematurely, and this dirge was sung by the Egyptians in his honor; and this, they said, was their earliest and their only chant.


2.80.1
2104
συμφέρονται δὲ καὶ τόδε ἄλλο Αἰγύπτιοι Ἑλλήνων μούνοισι Λακεδαιμονίοισι ·
There is a custom, too, which no Greeks except the Lacedaemonians have in common with the Egyptians:


2.80.1
2105
οἱ νεώτεροι αὐτῶν τοῖσι πρεσβυτέροισι συντυγχάνοντες εἴκουσι τῆς ὁδοῦ καὶ ἐκτρέπονται καὶ ἐπιοῦσι ἐξ ἕδρης ὑπανιστέαται .
younger men, encountering their elders, yield the way and stand aside, and rise from their seats for them when they approach.


2.80.2
2106
τόδε μέντοι ἄλλοισι Ἑλλήνων οὐδαμοῖσι συμφέρονται ·
But they are like none of the Greeks in this:


2.80.2
2107
ἀντὶ τοῦ προσαγορεύειν ἀλλήλους ἐν τῇσι ὁδοῖσι προσκυνέουσι κατιέντες μέχρι τοῦ γούνατος τὴν χεῖρα .
passers-by do not address each other, but salute by lowering the hand to the knee.


2.81.1
2108
ἐνδεδύκασι δὲ κιθῶνας λινέους περὶ τὰ σκέλεα θυσανωτούς , τοὺς καλέουσι καλασίρις ·
They wear linen tunics with fringes hanging about the legs, called “calasiris,”


2.81.1
2109
ἐπὶ τούτοισι δὲ εἰρίνεα εἵματα λευκὰ ἐπαναβληδὸν φορέουσι .
and loose white woolen mantles over these.


2.81.1
2110
οὐ μέντοι ἔς γε τὰ ἱρὰ ἐσφέρεται εἰρίνεα οὐδὲ συγκαταθάπτεταί σφι ·
But nothing woolen is brought into temples, or buried with them:


2.81.1
2111
οὐ γὰρ ὅσιον .
that is not pious.


2.81.2
2112
ὁμολογέουσι δὲ ταῦτα τοῖσι Ὀρφικοῖσι καλεομένοισι καὶ Βακχικοῖσι , ἐοῦσι δὲ Αἰγυπτίοισι καὶ Πυθαγορείοισι ·
They agree in this with practices called Orphic and Bacchic, but in fact Egyptian and Pythagorean:


2.81.2
2113
οὐδὲ γὰρ τούτων τῶν ὀργίων μετέχοντα ὅσιον ἐστὶ ἐν εἰρινέοισι εἵμασι θαφθῆναι .
for it is impious, too, for one partaking of these rites to be buried in woolen wrappings.


2.81.2
2114
ἔστι δὲ περὶ αὐτῶν ἱρὸς λόγος λεγόμενος .
There is a sacred legend about this.


2.82.1
2115
καὶ τάδε ἄλλα Αἰγυπτίοισι ἐστὶ ἐξευρημένα , μείς τε καὶ ἡμέρη ἑκάστη θεῶν ὅτευ ἐστί , καὶ τῇ ἕκαστος ἡμέρῃ γενόμενος ὁτέοισι ἐγκυρήσει καὶ ὅκως τελευτήσει καὶ ὁκοῖός τις ἔσται .
Other things originating with the Egyptians are these. Each month and day belong to one of the gods, and according to the day of one's birth are determined how one will fare and how one will end and what one will be like;


2.82.1
2116
καὶ τούτοισι τῶν Ἑλλήνων οἱ ἐν ποιήσι γενόμενοι ἐχρήσαντο .
those Greeks occupied with poetry exploit this.


2.82.2
2117
τέρατά τε πλέω σφι ἀνεύρηται ἢ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ἅπασι ἀνθρώποισι ·
More portents have been discovered by them than by all other peoples;


2.82.2
2118
γενομένου γὰρ τέρατος φυλάσσουσι γραφόμενοι τ- ἀποβαῖνον , καὶ ἤν κοτε ὕστερον παραπλήσιον τούτῳ γένηται , κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ νομίζουσι ἀποβήσεσθαι .
when a portent occurs, they take note of the outcome and write it down; and if something of a like kind happens again, they think it will have a like result.


2.83.1
2119
μαντικὴ δὲ αὐτοῖσι ὧδε διακέεται ·
The art of divination among them is organized as follows.


2.83.1
2120
ἀνθρώπων μὲν οὐδενὶ προσκέεται ἡ τέχνη , τῶν δὲ θεῶν μετεξετέροισι ·
It belongs to no man, but to some of the gods;


2.83.1
2121
καὶ γὰρ Ἡρακλέος μαντήιον αὐτόθι ἐστὶ καὶ Ἀπόλλωνος καὶ Ἀθηναίης καὶ Ἀρτέμιδος καὶ Ἄρεος καὶ Διός , καὶ τό γε μάλιστα ἐν τιμῇ ἄγονται πάντων τῶν μαντηίων , Λητοῦς ἐν Βουτοῖ πόλι ἐστί .
there are in their country oracles of Heracles, Apollo, Athena, Artemis, Ares, and Zeus, and of Leto (the most honored of all) in the town of Buto.


2.83.1
2122
οὐ μέντοι αἵ γε μαντηίαι σφι κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ ἑστᾶσι , ἀλλὰ διάφοροι εἰσί .
Nevertheless, they have several ways of divination, not just one.


2.84.1
2123
ἡ δὲ ἰητρικὴ κατὰ τάδε σφι δέδασται ·
The practice of medicine is so specialized among them


2.84.1
2124
μιῆς νούσου ἕκαστος ἰητρός ἐστι καὶ οὐ πλεόνων .
that each physician is a healer of one disease and no more.


2.84.1
2125
πάντα δ’ ἰητρῶν ἐστι πλέα ·
All the country is full of physicians,


2.84.1
2126
οἳ μὲν γὰρ ὀφθαλμῶν ἰητροὶ κατεστᾶσι , οἳ δὲ κεφαλῆς , οἳ δὲ ὀδόντων , οἳ δὲ τῶν κατὰ νηδύν , οἳ δὲ τῶν ἀφανέων νούσων .
some of the eye, some of the teeth, some of what pertains to the belly, and some of internal diseases.


2.85.1
2127
θρῆνοι δὲ καὶ ταφαί σφεων εἰσὶ αἵδε ·
They mourn and bury the dead like this:


2.85.1
2128
τοῖσι ἂν ἀπογένηται ἐκ τῶν οἰκίων ἄνθρωπος τοῦ τις καὶ λόγος ᾖ , τὸ θῆλυ γένος πᾶν τὸ ἐκ τῶν οἰκίων τούτων κατ’ ὦν ἐπλάσατο τὴν κεφαλὴν πηλῷ ἢ καὶ τὸ πρόσωπον , κ- ἔπειτα ἐν τοῖσι οἰκίοισι λιποῦσαι τὸν νεκρὸν αὐταὶ ἀνὰ τὴν πόλιν στρωφώμεναι τύπτονται ἐπεζωσμέναι καὶ φαίνουσαι τοὺς μαζούς , σὺν δέ σφι αἱ προσήκουσαι πᾶσαι , ἑτέρωθεν δὲ οἱ ἄνδρες , τύπτονται ἐπεζωμένοι καὶ οὗτοι .
whenever a man of note is lost to his house by death, all the women of the house daub their faces or heads with mud; then they leave the corpse in the house and roam about the city lamenting, with their garments girt around them and their breasts showing, and with them all the women of their relatives;


2.85.2
2129
ἐπεὰν δὲ ταῦτα ποιήσωσι , οὕτω ἐς τὴν ταρίχευσιν κομίζουσι .
elsewhere, the men lament, with garments girt likewise. When this is done, they take the dead body to be embalmed.


2.86.1
2130
εἰσὶ δὲ οἳ ἐπ’ αὐτῷ τούτῳ κατέαται καὶ τέχνην ἔχουσι ταύτην .
There are men whose sole business this is and who have this special craft.


2.86.2
2131
οὗτοι , ἐπεάν σφι κομισθῇ νεκρός , δεικνύουσι τοῖσι κομίσασι παραδείγματα νεκρῶν ξύλινα , τῇ γραφῇ μεμιμημένα G? , καὶ τὴν μὲν σπουδαιοτάτην αὐτέων φασὶ εἶναι τοῦ οὐκ ὅσιον ποιεῦμαι τὸ οὔνομα ἐπὶ τοιούτῳ πρήγματι ὀνομάζειν , τὴν δὲ δευτέρην δεικνύουσι ὑποδεεστέρην τε ταύτης καὶ εὐτελεστέρην , τὴν δὲ τρίτην εὐτελεστάτην ·
When a dead body is brought to them, they show those who brought it wooden models of corpses, painted likenesses;


2.86.2
2132
φράσαντες δὲ πυνθάνονται παρ’ αὐτῶν κατὰ ἥντινα βούλονταί σφι σκευασθῆναι τὸν νεκρόν .
the most perfect way of embalming belongs, they say, to One whose name it would be impious for me to mention in treating such a matter; the second way, which they show, is less perfect than the first, and cheaper; and the third is the least costly of all. Having shown these, they ask those who brought the body in which way they desire to have it prepared.


2.86.3
2133
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἐκποδὼν μισθῷ ὁμολογήσαντες ἀπαλλάσσονται , οἳ δὲ ὑπολειπόμενοι ἐν οἰκήμασι ὧδε τὰ σπουδαιότατα ταριχεύουσι .
Having agreed on a price, the bearers go away,


2.86.3
2134
πρῶτα μὲν σκολιῷ σιδήρῳ διὰ τῶν μυξωτήρων ἐξάγουσι τὸν ἐγκέφαλον , τὰ μὲν αὐτοῦ οὕτω ἐξάγοντες , τὰ δὲ ἐγχέοντες φάρμακα ·
and the workmen, left alone in their place, embalm the body. If they do this in the most perfect way, they first draw out part of the brain through the nostrils with an iron hook, and inject certain drugs into the rest.


2.86.4
2135
μετὰ δὲ λίθῳ Αἰθιοπικῷ ὀξέι παρασχίσαντες παρὰ τὴν λαπάρην ἐξ ὦν εἷλον τὴν κοιλίην πᾶσαν , ἐκκαθήραντες δὲ αὐτὴν καὶ διηθήσαντες οἴνῳ φοινικηίῳ αὖτις διηθέουσι θυμιήμασι τετριμμένοισι ·
Then, making a cut near the flank with a sharp knife of Ethiopian stone, they take out all the intestines, and clean the belly, rinsing it with palm wine and bruised spices;


2.86.5
2136
ἔπειτα τὴν νηδὺν σμύρνης ἀκηράτου τετριμμένης καὶ κασίης καὶ τῶν ἄλλων θυμιημάτων , πλὴν λιβανωτοῦ , πλήσαντες συρράπτουσι ὀπίσω .
they sew it up again after filling the belly with pure ground myrrh and casia and any other spices, except frankincense.


2.86.5
2137
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσαντες ταριχεύουσι λίτρῳ κρύψαντες ἡμέρας ἑβδομήκοντα ·
After doing this, they conceal the body for seventy days, embalmed in saltpetre;


2.86.5
2138
πλεῦνας δὲ τουτέων οὐκ ἔξεστι ταριχεύειν .
no longer time is allowed for the embalming;


2.86.6
2139
ἐπεὰν δὲ παρέλθωσι αἱ ἑβδομήκοντα , λούσαντες τὸν νεκρὸν κατειλίσσουσι πᾶν αὐτοῦ τὸ σῶμα σινδόνος βυσσίνης τελαμῶσι κατατετμημένοισι , ὑποχρίοντες τῷ κόμμι , τῷ δὴ ἀντὶ κόλλης τὰ πολλὰ χρέωνται Αἰγύπτιοι .
and when the seventy days have passed, they wash the body and wrap the whole of it in bandages of fine linen cloth, anointed with gum, which the Egyptians mostly use instead of glue;


2.86.7
2140
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ παραδεξάμενοί μιν οἱ προσήκοντες ποιεῦνται ξύλινον τύπον ἀνθρωποειδέα , ποιησάμενοι δὲ ἐσεργνῦσι τὸν νεκρόν , καὶ κατακληίσαντες οὕτω θησαυρίζουσι ἐν οἰκήματι θηκαίῳ , ἱστάντες ὀρθὸν πρὸς τοῖχον .
then they give the dead man back to his friends. These make a hollow wooden figure like a man, in which they enclose the corpse, shut it up, and keep it safe in a coffin-chamber, placed erect against a wall.


2.87.1
2141
οὕτω μὲν τοὺς τὰ πολυτελέστατα σκευάζουσι νεκρούς , τοὺς δὲ τὰ μέσα βουλομένους τὴν δὲ πολυτελείην φεύγοντας σκευάζουσι ὧδε ·
That is how they prepare the dead in the most costly way; those who want the middle way and shun the costly, they prepare as follows.


2.87.2
2142
ἐπεὰν τοὺς κλυστῆρας πλήσωνται τοῦ ἀπὸ κέδρου ἀλείφατος γινομένου , ἐν ὦν ἔπλησαν τοῦ νεκροῦ τὴν κοιλίην , οὔτε ἀναταμόντες αὐτὸν οὔτε ἐξελόντες τὴν νηδύν , κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἕδρην ἐσηθήσαντες καὶ ἐπιλαβόντες τὸ κλύσμα τῆς ὀπίσω ὁδοῦ ταριχεύουσι τὰς προκειμένας ἡμέρας , τῇ δὲ τελευταίῃ ἐξιεῖσι ἐκ τῆς κοιλίης τὴν κεδρίην τὴν ἐσῆκαν πρότερον .
The embalmers charge their syringes with cedar oil and fill the belly of the dead man with it, without making a cut or removing the intestines, but injecting the fluid through the anus and preventing it from running out; then they embalm the body for the appointed days; on the last day they drain the belly of the cedar oil which they put in before.


2.87.3
2143
ἣ δὲ ἔχει τοσαύτην δύναμιν ὥστε ἅμα ἑωυτῇ τὴν νηδὺν καὶ τὰ σπλάγχνα κατατετηκότα ἐξάγει ·
It has such great power as to bring out with it the internal organs and intestines all dissolved;


2.87.3
2144
τὰς δὲ σάρκας τὸ λίτρον κατατήκει , καὶ δὴ λείπεται τοῦ νεκροῦ τὸ δέρμα μοῦνον καὶ τὰ ὀστέα .
meanwhile, the flesh is eaten away by the saltpetre, and in the end nothing is left of the body but hide and bones.


2.87.3
2145
ἐπεὰν δὲ ταῦτα ποιήσωσι , ἀπ’ ὦν ἔδωκαν οὕτω τὸν νεκρόν , οὐδὲν ἔτι πρηγματευθέντες .
Then the embalmers give back the dead body with no more ado.


2.88.1
2146
ἡ δὲ τρίτη ταρίχευσις ἐστὶ ἥδε , ἣ τοὺς χρήμασι ἀσθενεστέρους σκευάζει ·
The third manner of embalming, the preparation of the poorer dead, is this:


2.88.1
2147
συρμαίῃ διηθήσαντες τὴν κοιλίην ταριχεύουσι τὰς ἑβδομήκοντα ἡμέρας καὶ ἔπειτα ἀπ’ ὦν ἔδωκαν ἀποφέρεσθαι .
they cleanse the belly with a purge, embalm the body for the seventy days and then give it back to be taken away.


2.89.1
2148
τὰς δὲ γυναῖκας τῶν ἐπιφανέων ἀνδρῶν , ἐπεὰν τελευτήσωσι , οὐ παραυτίκα διδοῦσι ταριχεύειν , οὐδὲ ὅσαι ἂν ἔωσι εὐειδέες κάρτα καὶ λόγου πλεῦνος γυναῖκες ·
Wives of notable men, and women of great beauty and reputation, are not at once given to the embalmers,


2.89.1
2149
ἀλλ’ ἐπεὰν τριταῖαι ἢ τεταρταῖαι γένωνται , οὕτω παραδιδοῦσι τοῖσι ταριχεύουσι .
but only after they have been dead for three or four days;


2.89.2
2150
τοῦτο δὲ ποιεῦσι οὕτω τοῦδε εἵνεκεν , ἵνα μή σφι οἱ ταριχευταὶ μίσγωνται τῇσι γυναιξί ·
this is done to deter the embalmers from having intercourse with the women.


2.89.2
2151
λαμφθῆναι γὰρ τινὰ φασὶ μισγόμενον νεκρῷ προσφάτῳ γυναικός , κατειπεῖν δὲ τὸν ὁμότεχνον .
For it is said that one was caught having intercourse with the fresh corpse of a woman, and was denounced by his fellow-workman.


2.90.1
2152
ὃς δ’ ἂν ἢ αὐτῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἢ ξείνων ὁμοίως ὑπὸ κροκοδείλου ἁρπασθεὶς ἢ ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ τοῦ ποταμοῦ φαίνηται τεθνεώς , κατ’ ἣν ἂν πόλιν ἐξενειχθῇ , τούτους πᾶσα ἀνάγκη ἐστὶ ταριχεύσαντας αὐτὸν καὶ περιστείλαντας ὡς κάλλιστα θάψαι ἐν ἱρῇσι θήκῃσι ·
Anyone, Egyptian or foreigner, known to have been carried off by a crocodile or drowned by the river itself, must by all means be embalmed and wrapped as attractively as possible and buried in a sacred coffin by the people of the place where he is cast ashore;


2.90.2
2153
οὐδὲ ψαῦσαι ἔξεστι αὐτοῦ ἄλλον οὐδένα οὔτε τῶν προσηκόντων οὔτε τῶν φίλων , ἀλλά μιν αἱ ἱρέες αὐτοὶ τοῦ Νείλου ἅτε πλέον τι ἢ ἀνθρώπου νεκρὸν χειραπτάζοντες θάπτουσι .
none of his relatives or friends may touch him, but his body is considered something more than human, and is handled and buried by the priests of the    Nile    themselves.


2.91.1
2154
ἑλληνικοῖσι δὲ νομαίοισι φεύγουσι χρᾶσθαι , τὸ δὲ σύμπαν εἰπεῖν , μηδ’ ἄλλων μηδαμὰ μηδαμῶν ἀνθρώπων νομαίοισι .
The Egyptians shun using Greek customs, and (generally speaking) the customs of all other peoples as well.


2.91.1
2155
οἱ μέν νυν ἄλλοι Αἰγύπτιοι οὕτω τοῦτο φυλάσσουσι , ἔστι δὲ Χέμμις πόλις μεγάλη νομοῦ τοῦ Θηβαϊκοῦ ἐγγὺς Νέης πόλιος ·
Yet, though the rest are wary of this, there is a great city called    Khemmis   , in the Theban district, near the New City.


2.91.2
2156
ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ πόλι ἐστὶ Περσέος τοῦ Δανάης ἱρὸν τετράγωνον , πέριξ δὲ αὐτοῦ φοίνικες πεφύκασι .
In this city is a square temple of Perseus son of Danae, in a grove of palm trees.


2.91.2
2157
τὰ δὲ πρόπυλα τοῦ ἱροῦ λίθινα ἐστὶ κάρτα μεγάλα ·
Before this temple stand great stone columns;


2.91.2
2158
ἐπὶ δὲ αὐτοῖσι ἀνδριάντες δύο ἑστᾶσι λίθινοι μεγάλοι .
and at the entrance, two great stone statues.


2.91.2
2159
ἐν δὲ τῷ περιβεβλημένῳ τούτῳ νηός τε ἔνι καὶ ἄγαλμα ἐν αὐτῷ ἐνέστηκε τοῦ Περσέος .
In the outer court there is a shrine with an image of Perseus standing in it.


2.91.3
2160
οὗτοι οἱ Χεμμῖται λέγουσι τὸν Περσέα πολλάκις μὲν ἀνὰ τὴν γῆν φαίνεσθαί σφι πολλάκις δὲ ἔσω τοῦ ἱροῦ , σανδάλιόν τε αὐτοῦ πεφορημένον εὑρίσκεσθαι ἐὸν τὸ μέγαθος δίπηχυ , τὸ ἐπεὰν φανῇ , εὐθηνέειν ἅπασαν Αἴγυπτον .
The people of this    Khemmis    say that Perseus is seen often up and down this land, and often within the temple, and that the sandal he wears, which is four feet long, keeps turning up, and that when it does turn up, all    Egypt    prospers.


2.91.4
2161
ταῦτα μὲν λέγουσι , ποιεῦσι δὲ τάδε Ἑλληνικὰ τῷ Περσέι ·
This is what they say;


2.91.4
2162
ἀγῶνα γυμνικὸν τιθεῖσι διὰ πάσης ἀγωνίης ἔχοντα , παρέχοντες ἄεθλα κτήνεα καὶ χλαίνας καὶ δέρματα .
and their doings in honor of Perseus are Greek, inasmuch as they celebrate games that include every form of contest, and offer animals and cloaks and skins as prizes.


2.91.5
2163
εἰρομένου δέ μευ ὅ τι σφι μούνοισι ἔωθε ὁ Περσεὺς ἐπιφαίνεσθαι καὶ ὅ τι κεχωρίδαται Αἰγυπτίων τῶν ἄλλων ἀγῶνα γυμνικὸν τιθέντες , ἔφασαν τὸν Περσέα ἐκ τῆς ἑωυτῶν πόλιος γεγονέναι ·
When I asked why Perseus appeared only to them, and why, unlike all other Egyptians, they celebrate games, they told me that Perseus was by lineage of their city;


2.91.5
2164
τὸν γὰρ Δαναὸν καὶ τὸν Λυγκέα ἐόντας Χεμμίτας ἐκπλῶσαι ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων γενεηλογέοντες κατέβαινον ἐς τὸν Περσέα .
for Danaus and Lynceus, who travelled to    Greece   , were of    Khemmis   ; and they traced descent from these down to Perseus.


2.91.6
2165
ἀπικόμενον δὲ αὐτὸν ἐς Αἴγυπτον κατ’ αἰτίην τὴν καὶ Ἕλληνες λέγουσι , οἴσοντα ἐκ Λιβύης τὴν Γοργοῦς κεφαλήν , ἔφασαν ἐλθεῖν καὶ παρὰ σφέας καὶ ἀναγνῶναι τοὺς συγγενέας πάντας ·
They told how he came to    Khemmis   , too, when he came to    Egypt    for the reason alleged by the Greeks as well — namely, to bring the Gorgon's head from    Libya    — and recognized all his relatives;


2.91.6
2166
ἐκμεμαθηκότα δέ μιν ἀπικέσθαι ἐς Αἴγυπτον τὸ τῆς Χέμμιος οὔνομα , πεπυσμένον παρὰ τῆς μητρός .
and how he had heard the name of    Khemmis    from his mother before he came to    Egypt   .


2.91.6
2167
ἀγῶνα δέ οἱ γυμνικὸν αὐτοῦ κελεύσαντος ἐπιτελέειν .
It was at his bidding, they said, that they celebrated the games.


2.92.1
2168
ταῦτα μὲν πάντα οἱ κατύπερθε τῶν ἑλέων οἰκέοντες Αἰγύπτιοι νομίζουσι ·
All these are the customs of Egyptians who live above the marsh country.


2.92.1
2169
οἱ δὲ δὴ ἐν τοῖσι ἕλεσι κατοικημένοι τοῖσι μὲν αὐτοῖσι νόμοισι χρέωνται τοῖσι καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι Αἰγύπτιοι , καὶ τὰ ἄλλα καὶ γυναικὶ μιῇ ἕκαστος αὐτῶν συνοικέει κατά περ Ἕλληνες , ἀτὰρ πρὸς εὐτελείην τῶν σιτίων τάδε σφι ἄλλα ἐξεύρηται .
Those who inhabit the marshes have the same customs as the rest of Egyptians, even that each man has one wife just like Greeks. They have, besides, devised means to make their food less costly.


2.92.2
2170
ἐπεὰν πλήρης γένηται ὁ ποταμὸς καὶ τὰ πεδία πελαγίσῃ , φύεται ἐν τῷ ὕδατι κρίνεα πολλά , τὰ Αἰγύπτιοι καλέουσι λωτόν ·
When the river is in flood and flows over the plains, many lilies, which the Egyptians call lotus, grow in the water.


2.92.2
2171
ταῦτ’ ἐπεὰν δρέψωσι αὐαίνουσι πρὸς ἥλιον καὶ ἔπειτα τὸ ἐκ μέσου τοῦ λωτοῦ , τῇ μήκωνι ἐὸν ἐμφερές , πτίσαντες ποιεῦνται ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἄρτους ὀπτοὺς πυρί .
They gather these and dry them in the sun; then they crush the poppy-like center of the plant and bake loaves of it.


2.92.3
2172
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἡ ῥίζα τοῦ λωτοῦ τούτου ἐδωδίμη καὶ ἐγγλύσσει ἐπιεικέως , ἐὸν στρογγύλον , μέγαθος κατὰ μῆλον .
The root of this lotus is edible also, and of a sweetish taste; it is round, and the size of an apple.


2.92.4
2173
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλα κρίνεα ῥόδοισι ἐμφερέα , ἐν τῷ ποταμῷ γινόμενα καὶ ταῦτα , ἐξ ὧν ὁ καρπὸς ἐν ἄλλῃ κάλυκι παραφυομένῃ ἐκ τῆς ῥίζης γίνεται , κηρίῳ σφηκῶν ἰδέην ὁμοιότατον ·
Other lilies grow in the river, too, that are like roses; the fruit of these is found in a calyx springing from the root by a separate stalk, and is most like a comb made by wasps;


2.92.4
2174
ἐν τούτῳ τρωκτὰ ὅσον τε πυρὴν ἐλαίης ἐγγίνεται συχνά , τρώγεται δὲ καὶ ἁπαλὰ ταῦτα καὶ αὖα .
this produces many edible seeds as big as olive pits, which are eaten both fresh and dried.


2.92.5
2175
τὴν δὲ βύβλον τὴν ἐπέτειον γινομένην ἐπεὰν ἀνασπάσωσι ἐκ τῶν ἑλέων , τὰ μὲν ἄνω αὐτῆς ἀποτάμνοντες ἐς ἄλλο τι τρέπουσι , τὸ δὲ κάτω λελειμμένον ὅσον τε ἐπὶ πῆχυν τρώγουσι καὶ πωλέουσι ·
They also use the byblus which grows annually: it is gathered from the marshes, the top of it cut off and put to other uses, and the lower part, about twenty inches long, eaten or sold.


2.92.5
2176
οἳ δὲ ἂν καὶ κάρτα βούλωνται χρηστῇ τῇ βύβλῳ χρᾶσθαι , ἐν κλιβάνῳ διαφανέι πνίξαντες οὕτω τρώγουσι .
Those who wish to use the byblus at its very best, roast it before eating in a red-hot oven.


2.92.5
2177
οἳ δὲ τινὲς αὐτῶν ζῶσι ἀπὸ τῶν ἰχθύων μοῦνον , τοὺς ἐπεὰν λάβωσι καὶ ἐξέλωσι τὴν κοιλίην , αὐαίνουσι πρὸς ἥλιον καὶ ἔπειτα αὔους ἐόντας σιτέονται .
Some live on fish alone. They catch the fish, take out the intestines, then dry them in the sun and eat them dried.


2.93.1
2178
οἱ δὲ ἰχθύες οἱ ἀγελαῖοι ἐν μὲν τοῖσι ποταμοῖσι οὐ μάλα γίνονται , τρεφόμενοι δὲ ἐν τῇσι λίμνῃσι τοιάδε ποιεῦσι .
Fish that go in schools are seldom born in rivers; they are raised in the lakes, and this is how they behave:


2.93.1
2179
ἐπεάν σφεας ἐσίῃ οἶστρος κυΐσκεσθαι , ἀγεληδὸν ἐκπλέουσι ἐς θάλασσαν ·
when the desire of spawning comes on them, they swim out to sea in schools.


2.93.1
2180
ἡγέονται δὲ οἱ ἔρσενες ἀπορραίνοντες τοῦ θοροῦ , αἳ δὲ ἑπόμεναι ἀνακάπτουσι καὶ ἐξ αὐτοῦ κυΐσκονται .
The males lead, throwing out their milt, while the females come after and swallow and conceive from it.


2.93.2
2181
ἐπεὰν δὲ πλήρεες γένωνται ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ , ἀναπλώουσι ὀπίσω ἐς ἤθεα τὰ ἑωυτῶν ἕκαστοι , ἡγέονται μέντοι γε οὐκέτι οἱ αὐτοί , ἀλλὰ τῶν θηλέων γίνεται ἡ ἡγεμονία ·
When the females have grown heavy in the sea, then all the fish swim back to their own haunts. But the same no longer lead; now the leadership goes to the females.


2.93.2
2182
ἡγεύμεναι δὲ ἀγεληδὸν ποιεῦσι οἷόν περ ἐποίευν οἱ ἔρσενες ·
They go before in a school as the males had.


2.93.2
2183
τῶν γὰρ ᾠῶν ἀπορραίνουσι κατ’ ὀλίγους τῶν κέγχρων , οἱ δὲ ἔρσενες καταπίνουσι ἑπόμενοι .
Now and then they throw off some of their eggs (which are like millet-seeds), which the males devour as they follow.


2.93.2
2184
εἰσὶ δὲ οἱ κέγχροι οὗτοι ἰχθύες .
These millet-seeds, or eggs, are fish.


2.93.3
2185
ἐκ δὲ τῶν περιγινομένων καὶ μὴ καταπινομένων κέγχρων οἱ τρεφόμενοι ἰχθύες γίνονται .
The fish that are reared come from the eggs that survive and are not devoured.


2.93.3
2186
οἵ δ’ ἂν αὐτῶν ἁλῶσι ἐκπλώοντες ἐς θάλασσαν , φαίνονται τετριμμένοι τὰ ἐπ’ ἀριστερὰ τῶν κεφαλέων , οἳ δ’ ἂν ὀπίσω ἀναπλώοντες , τὰ ἐπὶ δεξιὰ τετρίφαται .
Those fish that are caught while swimming seawards show bruises on the left side of their heads; those that are caught returning, on the right side.


2.93.4
2187
πάσχουσι δὲ ταῦτα διὰ τόδε ·
This happens because they keep close to the left bank as they swim seawards, and keep to the same bank also on their return, grazing it and keeping in contact with it as well as they can,


2.93.4
2188
ἐχόμενοι τῆς γῆς ἐπ’ ἀριστερὰ καταπλώουσι ἐς θάλασσαν , καὶ ἀναπλώοντες ὀπίσω τῆς αὐτῆς ἀντέχονται , ἐγχριμπτόμενοι καὶ ψαύοντες ὡς μάλιστα , ἵνα δὴ μὴ ἁμάρτοιεν τῆς ὁδοῦ διὰ τὸν ῥόον .
I suppose lest the current make them miss their way.


2.93.5
2189
ἐπεὰν δὲ πληθύνεσθαι ἄρχηται ὁ Νεῖλος , τά τε κοῖλα τῆς γῆς καὶ τὰ τέλματα τὰ παρὰ τὸν ποταμὸν πρῶτα ἄρχεται πίμπλασθαι διηθέοντος τοῦ ὕδατος ἐκ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ·
When the    Nile    begins to rise, hollow and marshy places near the river are the first to begin to fill, the water trickling through from the river,


2.93.5
2190
καὶ αὐτίκα τε πλέα γίνεται ταῦτα καὶ παραχρῆμα ἰχθύων σμικρῶν πίμπλαται πάντα .
and as soon as they are flooded, they are suddenly full of little fishes.


2.93.6
2191
κόθεν δὲ οἰκὸς αὐτοὺς γίνεσθαι , ἐγώ μοι δοκέω κατανοέειν τοῦτο ·
Where these probably come from, I believe that I can guess.


2.93.6
2192
τοῦ προτέρου ἔτεος ἐπεὰν ἀπολίπῃ ὁ Νεῖλος , οἱ ἰχθύες ἐντεκόντες ᾠὰ ἐς τὴν ἰλὺν ἅμα τῷ ἐσχάτῳ ὕδατι ἀπαλλάσσονται ·
When the    Nile    falls, the fish have dropped their eggs into the mud before they leave with the last of the water;


2.93.6
2193
ἐπεὰν δὲ περιελθόντος τοῦ χρόνου πάλιν ἐπέλθῃ τὸ ὕδωρ , ἐκ τῶν ᾠῶν τούτων παραυτίκα γίνονται οἱ ἰχθύες οὗτοι .
and when in the course of time the flood comes again in the following year, from these eggs at once come the fish.


2.94.1
2194
καὶ περὶ μὲν τοὺς ἰχθύας οὕτω ἔχει .
So much, then, for the fish.


2.94.1
2195
ἀλείφατι δὲ χρέωνται Αἰγυπτίων οἱ περὶ τὰ ἕλεα οἰκέοντες ἀπὸ τῶν σιλλικυπρίων τοῦ καρποῦ , τὸ καλεῦσι μὲν Αἰγύπτιοι κίκι , ποιεῦσι δὲ ὧδε .
The Egyptians who live around the marshes use an oil drawn from the castor-berry, which they call kiki.


2.94.1
2196
παρὰ τὰ χείλεα τῶν τε ποταμῶν καὶ τῶν λιμνέων σπείρουσι τὰ σιλλικύπρια ταῦτα , τὰ ἐν Ἕλλησι αὐτόματα ἄγρια φύεται ·
They sow this plant, which grows wild in    Hellas   , on the banks of the rivers and lakes;


2.94.2
2197
ταῦτα ἐν τῇ Αἰγύπτῳ σπειρόμενα καρπὸν φέρει πολλὸν μὲν δυσώδεα δέ ·
sown in    Egypt   , it produces abundant fruit, though malodorous;


2.94.2
2198
τοῦτον ἐπεὰν συλλέξωνται , οἳ μὲν κόψαντες ἀπιποῦσι , οἳ δὲ καὶ φρύξαντες ἀπέψουσι , καὶ τὸ ἀπορρέον ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ συγκομίζονται .
when they gather this, some bruise and press it, others boil after roasting it, and collect the liquid that comes from it.


2.94.2
2199
ἔστι δὲ πῖον καὶ οὐδὲν ἧσσον τοῦ ἐλαίου τῷ λύχνῳ προσηνές , ὀδμὴν δὲ βαρέαν παρέχεται .
This is thick and useful as oil for lamps, and gives off a strong smell.


2.95.1
2200
πρὸς δὲ τοὺς κώνωπας ἀφθόνους ἐόντας τάδε σφι ἐστὶ μεμηχανημένα .
Against the mosquitos that abound, the following have been devised by them:


2.95.1
2201
τοὺς μὲν τὰ ἄνω τῶν ἑλέων οἰκέοντας οἱ πύργοι ὠφελέουσι , ἐς τοὺς ἀναβαίνοντες κοιμῶνται ·
those who dwell higher up than the marshy country are well served by the towers where they ascend to sleep,


2.95.1
2202
οἱ γὰρ κώνωπες ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνέμων οὐκ οἷοί τε εἰσὶ ὑψοῦ πέτεσθαι .
for the winds prevent the mosquitos from flying aloft;


2.95.2
2203
τοῖσι δὲ περὶ τὰ ἕλεα οἰκέουσι τάδε ἀντὶ τῶν πύργων ἄλλα μεμηχάνηται ·
those living about the marshes have a different recourse, instead of the towers.


2.95.2
2204
πᾶς ἀνὴρ αὐτῶν ἀμφίβληστρον ἔκτηται , τῷ τῆς μὲν ἡμέρης ἰχθῦς ἀγρεύει , τὴν δὲ νύκτα τάδε αὐτῷ χρᾶται ·
Every one of them has a net, with which he catches fish by day, and at night he sets it around the bed where he rests,


2.95.2
2205
ἐν τῇ ἀναπαύεται κοίτῃ , περὶ ταύτην ἵστησι τὸ ἀμφίβληστρον καὶ ἔπειτα ἐνδὺς ὑπ’ αὐτὸ κατεύδει .
then creeps under it and sleeps.


2.95.3
2206
οἱ δὲ κώνωπες , ἢν μὲν ἐν ἱματίῳ ἐνειλιξάμενος εὕδῃ ἢ σινδόνι , διὰ τούτων δάκνουσι , διὰ δὲ τοῦ δικτύου οὐδὲ πειρῶνται ἀρχήν .
If he sleeps wrapped in a garment or cloth, the mosquitos bite through it; but through the net they absolutely do not even venture.


2.96.1
2207
τὰ δὲ δὴ πλοῖά σφι , τοῖσι φορτηγέουσι , ἐστὶ ἐκ τῆς ἀκάνθης ποιεύμενα , τῆς ἡ μορφὴ μὲν ἐστὶ ὁμοιοτάτη τῷ Κυρηναίῳ λωτῷ , τὸ δὲ δάκρυον κόμμι ἐστί .
The boats in which they carry cargo are made of the acacia, which is most like the lotus of    Cyrene    in form, and its sap is gum.


2.96.1
2208
ἐκ ταύτης ὦν τῆς ἀκάνθης κοψάμενοι ξύλα ὅσον τε διπήχεα πλινθηδὸν συντιθεῖσι ναυπηγεύμενοι τρόπον τοιόνδε ·
Of this tree they cut logs of four feet long and lay them like courses of bricks, and build the boat


2.96.2
2209
περὶ γόμφους πυκνοὺς καὶ μακροὺς περιείρουσι τὰ διπήχεα ξύλα ·
by fastening these four foot logs to long and close-set stakes;


2.96.2
2210
ἐπεὰν δὲ τῷ τρόπῳ τούτῳ ναυπηγήσωνται , ζυγὰ ἐπιπολῆς τείνουσι αὐτῶν ·
and having done so, they set crossbeams athwart and on the logs.


2.96.2
2211
νομεῦσι δὲ οὐδὲν χρέωνται ·
They use no ribs.


2.96.2
2212
ἔσωθεν δὲ τὰς ἁρμονίας ἐν ὦν ἐπάκτωσαν τῇ βύβλῳ .
They caulk the seams within with byblus.


2.96.3
2213
πηδάλιον δὲ ἓν ποιεῦνται , καὶ τοῦτο διὰ τῆς τρόπιος διαβύνεται .
There is one rudder, passing through a hole in the boat's keel.


2.96.3
2214
ἱστῷ δὲ ἀκανθίνῳ χρέωνται , ἱστίοισι δὲ βυβλίνοισι .
The mast is of acacia-wood and the sails of byblus.


2.96.3
2215
ταῦτα τὰ πλοῖα ἀνὰ μὲν τὸν ποταμὸν οὐ δύναται πλέειν , ἢν μὴ λαμπρὸς ἄνεμος ἐπέχῃ , ἐκ γῆς δὲ παρέλκεται , κατὰ ῥόον δὲ κομίζεται ὧδε ·
These boats cannot move upstream unless a brisk breeze continues; they are towed from the bank; but downstream they are managed thus:


2.96.4
2216
ἔστι ἐκ μυρίκης πεποιημένη θύρη , κατερραμμένη ῥιπὶ καλάμων , καὶ λίθος τετρημένος διτάλαντος μάλιστά κῃ σταθμόν ·
they have a raft made of tamarisk wood, fastened together with matting of reeds, and a pierced stone of about two talents' weight;


2.96.4
2217
τούτων τὴν μὲν θύρην δεδεμένην κάλῳ ἔμπροσθε τοῦ πλοίου ἀπιεῖ ἐπιφέρεσθαι , τὸν δὲ λίθον ἄλλῳ κάλῳ ὄπισθε .
the raft is let go to float down ahead of the boat, connected to it by a rope, and the stone is connected by a rope to the after part of the boat.


2.96.5
2218
ἡ μὲν δὴ θύρη τοῦ ῥόου ἐμπίπτοντος χωρέει ταχέως καὶ ἕλκει τὴν βᾶριν ( τοῦτο γὰρ δὴ οὔνομα ἐστὶ τοῖσι πλοίοισι τούτοισι ) , ὁ δὲ λίθος ὄπισθε ἐπελκόμενος καὶ ἐὼν ἐν βυσσῷ κατιθύνει τὸν πλόον .
So, driven by the current, the raft floats swiftly and tows the “baris” (which is the name of these boats), and the stone dragging behind on the river bottom keeps the boat's course straight.


2.96.5
2219
ἔστι δέ σφι τὰ πλοῖα ταῦτα πλήθεϊ πολλά , καὶ ἄγει ἔνια πολλὰς χιλιάδας ταλάντων .
There are many of these boats; some are of many thousand talents' burden.


2.97.1
2220
ἐπεὰν δὲ ἐπέλθῃ ὁ Νεῖλος τὴν χώρην , αἱ πόλιες μοῦναι φαίνονται ὑπερέχουσαι , μάλιστά κῃ ἐμφερέες τῇσι ἐν τῷ Αἰγαίῳ πόντῳ νήσοισι ·
When the Nile overflows the land, only the towns are seen high and dry above the water, very like the islands in the Aegean sea.


2.97.1
2221
τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἄλλα τῆς Αἰγύπτου πέλαγος γίνεται , αἱ δὲ πόλιες μοῦναι ὑπερέχουσι .
These alone stand out, the rest of Egypt being a sheet of water.


2.97.1
2222
πορθμεύονται ὦν , ἐπεὰν τοῦτο γένηται , οὐκέτι κατὰ τὰ ῥέεθρα τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἀλλὰ διὰ μέσου τοῦ πεδίου .
So when this happens, folk are not ferried, as usual, in the course of the stream, but clean over the plain.


2.97.2
2223
ἐς μέν γε Μέμφιν ἐκ Ναυκράτιος ἀναπλώοντι παρ’ αὐτὰς τὰς πυραμίδας γίνεται ὁ πλόος ·
Indeed, the boat going up from Naucratis to Memphis passes close by the pyramids themselves,


2.97.2
2224
ἔστι δὲ οὐδ’ οὗτος , ἀλλὰ παρὰ τὸ ὀξὺ τοῦ Δέλτα καὶ παρὰ Κερκάσωρον πόλιν ·
though the course does not go by here, but by the Delta's point and the town Cercasorus;


2.97.2
2225
ἐς δὲ Ναύκρατιν ἀπὸ θαλάσσης καὶ Κανώβου διὰ πεδίου πλέων ἥξεις κατ’ Ἄνθυλλάν τε πόλιν καὶ τὴν Ἀρχάνδρου καλευμένην .
but your voyage from the sea and Canobus to Naucratis will take you over the plain near the town of Anthylla and that which is called Arkhandrus' town.


2.98.1
2226
τουτέων δὲ ἡ μὲν Ἄνθυλλα ἐοῦσα λογίμη πόλις ἐς ὑποδήματα ἐξαίρετος δίδοται τοῦ αἰεὶ βασιλεύοντος Αἰγύπτου τῇ γυναικί ( τοῦτο δὲ γίνεται ἐξ ὅσου ὑπὸ Πέρσῃσι ἐστὶ Αἴγυπτος ) , ἡ δὲ ἑτέρη πόλις δοκέει μοι τὸ οὔνομα ἔχειν ἀπὸ τοῦ Δαναοῦ γαμβροῦ Ἀρχάνδρου τοῦ Φθίου τοῦ Ἀχαιοῦ ·
Anthylla is a town of some reputation, and is especially assigned to the consort of the reigning king of    Egypt   , to provide her shoes. This has been done since    Egypt    has been under Persian dominion.


2.98.2
2227
καλέεται γὰρ δὴ Ἀρχάνδρου πόλις .
The other town, I think, is named after Arkhandrus son of Phthius the Achaean, and son-in-law of Danaus; for it is called Arkhandrus' town.


2.98.2
2228
εἴη δ’ ἂν καὶ ἄλλος τις Ἄρχανδρος , οὐ μέντοι γε Αἰγύπτιον τὸ οὔνομα .
It may be that there was another Arkhandrus; but the name is not Egyptian.


2.99.1
2229
μέχρι μὲν τούτου ὄψις τε ἐμὴ καὶ γνώμη καὶ ἱστορίη ταῦτα λέγουσα ἐστί , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦδε Αἰγυπτίους ἔρχομαι λόγους ἐρέων κατὰ τὰ ἤκουον ·
So far, all I have said is the record of my own autopsy and judgment and inquiry.


2.99.1
2230
προσέσται δὲ αὐτοῖσί τι καὶ τῆς ἐμῆς ὄψιος .
Henceforth I will record Egyptian chronicles, according to what I have heard, adding something of what I myself have seen.


2.99.2
2231
Μῖνα τὸν πρῶτον βασιλεύσαντα Αἰγύπτου οἱ ἱρέες ἔλεγον τοῦτο μὲν ἀπογεφυρῶσαι τὴν Μέμφιν .
The priests told me that Min was the first king of Egypt, and that first he separated Memphis from the Nile by a dam.


2.99.2
2232
τὸν γὰρ ποταμὸν πάντα ῥέειν παρὰ τὸ ὄρος τὸ ψάμμινον πρὸς Λιβύης , τὸν δὲ Μῖνα ἄνωθεν , ὅσον τε ἑκατὸν σταδίους ἀπὸ Μέμφιος , τὸν πρὸς μεσαμβρίης ἀγκῶνα προσχώσαντα τὸ μὲν ἀρχαῖον ῥέεθρον ἀποξηρῆναι , τὸν δὲ ποταμὸν ὀχετεῦσαι τὸ μέσον τῶν ὀρέων ῥέειν .
All the river had flowed close under the sandy mountains on the Libyan side, but Min made the southern bend of it, which begins about twelve and one-half miles above Memphis, by damming the stream, thereby drying up the ancient channel, and carried the river by a channel so that it flowed midway between the hills.


2.99.3
2233
ἔτι δὲ καὶ νῦν ὑπὸ Περσέων ὁ ἀγκὼν οὗτος τοῦ Νείλου ὡς ἀπεργμένος ῥέῃ ἐν φυλακῇσι μεγάλῃσι ἔχεται , φρασσόμενος ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος ·
And to this day the Persians keep careful watch on this bend of the river, strengthening its dam every year to keep the current in;


2.99.3
2234
εἰ γὰρ ἐθελήσει ῥήξας ὑπερβῆναι ὁ ποταμὸς ταύτῃ , κίνδυνος πάσῃ Μέμφι κατακλυσθῆναι ἐστί .
for were the Nile to burst its dikes and overflow here, all Memphis would be in danger of flooding.


2.99.4
2235
ὡς δὲ τῷ Μῖνι τούτῳ τῷ πρώτῳ γενομένῳ βασιλέι χέρσον γεγονέναι τὸ ἀπεργμένον , τοῦτο μὲν ἐν αὐτῷ πόλιν κτίσαι ταύτην ἥτις νῦν Μέμφις καλέεται ·
Then, when this first king Min had made dry land of what he thus cut off, he first founded in it that city which is now called Memphis (for even Memphis lies in the narrow part of Egypt),


2.99.4
2236
ἔστι γὰρ καὶ ἡ Μέμφις ἐν τῷ στεινῷ τῆς Αἰγύπτου ·
and outside of it he dug a lake from the river to its north and west (for the Nile itself bounds it on the east);


2.99.4
2237
ἔξωθεν δὲ αὐτῆς περιορύξαι λίμνην ἐκ τοῦ ποταμοῦ πρὸς βορέην τε καὶ πρὸς ἑσπέρην ( τὸ γὰρ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ αὐτὸς ὁ Νεῖλος ἀπέργει ) , τοῦτο δὲ τοῦ Ἡφαίστου τὸ ἱρὸν ἱδρύσασθαι ἐν αὐτῇ , ἐὸν μέγα τε καὶ ἀξιαπηγητότατον .
and secondly, he built in it the great and most noteworthy temple of Hephaestus.


2.100.1
2238
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον κατέλεγον οἱ ἱρέες ἐκ βύβλου ἄλλων βασιλέων τριηκοσίων καὶ τριήκοντα οὐνόματα .
After him came three hundred and thirty kings, whose names the priests recited from a papyrus roll.


2.100.1
2239
ἐν τοσαύτῃσι δὲ γενεῇσι ἀνθρώπων ὀκτωκαίδεκα μὲν Αἰθίοπες ἦσαν , μία δὲ γυνὴ ἐπιχωρίη , οἱ δὲ ἄλλοι ἄνδρες Αἰγύπτιοι .
In all these many generations there were eighteen Ethiopian kings, and one queen, native to the country; the rest were all Egyptian men.


2.100.2
2240
τῇ δὲ γυναικὶ οὔνομα ἦν , ἥτις ἐβασίλευσε , τό περ τῇ Βαβυλωνίῃ , Νίτωκρις ·
The name of the queen was the same as that of the Babylonian princess, Nitocris.


2.100.2
2241
τὴν ἔλεγον τιμωρέουσαν ἀδελφεῷ , τὸν Αἰγύπτιοι βασιλεύοντα σφέων ἀπέκτειναν , ἀποκτείναντες δὲ οὕτω ἐκείνῃ ἀπέδοσαν τὴν βασιληίην , τούτῳ τιμωρέουσαν πολλοὺς Αἰγυπτίων διαφθεῖραι δόλῳ .
She, to avenge her brother (he was king of Egypt and was slain by his subjects, who then gave Nitocris the sovereignty) put many of the Egyptians to death by treachery.


2.100.3
2242
ποιησαμένην γάρ μιν οἴκημα περίμηκες ὑπόγαιον καινοῦν τῷ λόγῳ , νόῳ δὲ ἄλλα μηχανᾶσθαι ·
She built a spacious underground chamber; then, with the pretence of inaugurating it, but with quite another intent in her mind.


2.100.3
2243
καλέσασαν δέ μιν Αἰγυπτίων τοὺς μάλιστα μεταιτίους τοῦ φόνου ᾔδεε πολλοὺς ἱστιᾶν , δαινυμένοισι δὲ ἐπεῖναι τὸν ποταμὸν δι’ αὐλῶνος κρυπτοῦ μεγάλου .
She gave a great feast, inviting to it those Egyptians whom she knew to have had the most complicity in her brother's murder; and while they feasted, she let the river in upon them by a vast secret channel.


2.100.4
2244
ταύτης μὲν πέρι τοσαῦτα ἔλεγον , πλὴν ὅτι αὐτήν μιν , ὡς τοῦτο ἐξέργαστο , ῥίψαι ἐς οἴκημα σποδοῦ πλέον , ὅκως ἀτιμώρητος γένηται .
This was all that the priests told of her, except that when she had done this she cast herself into a chamber full of hot ashes, to escape vengeance.


2.101.1
2245
τῶν δὲ ἄλλων βασιλέων οὐ γὰρ ἔλεγον οὐδεμίαν ἔργων ἀπόδεξιν καὶ οὐδὲν εἶναι λαμπρότητος , πλὴν ἑνὸς τοῦ ἐσχάτου αὐτῶν Μοίριος ·
But of the other kings they related no achievement or act of great note, except of Moeris, the last of them.


2.101.2
2246
τοῦτον δὲ ἀποδέξασθαι μνημόσυνα τοῦ Ἡφαίστου τὰ πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον τετραμμένα προπύλαια , λίμνην τε ὀρύξαι , τῆς ἡ περίοδος ὅσων ἐστὶ σταδίων ὕστερον δηλώσω , πυραμίδας τε ἐν αὐτῇ οἰκοδομῆσαι , τῶν τοῦ μεγάθεος πέρι ὁμοῦ αὐτῇ τῇ λίμνῃ ἐπιμνήσομαι ·
This Moeris was remembered as having built the northern forecourt of the temple of Hephaestus, and dug a lake, of as great a circumference as I shall later indicate; and built pyramids there also, the size of which I will mention when I speak of the lake.


2.101.2
2247
τοῦτον μὲν τοσαῦτα ἀποδέξασθαι , τῶν δὲ ἄλλων οὐδένα οὐδέν .
All this was Moeris' work, they said; of none of the rest had they anything to record.


2.102.1
2248
παραμειψάμενος ὦν τούτους τοῦ ἐπὶ τούτοισι γενομένου βασιλέος , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Σέσωστρις , τούτου μνήμην ποιήσομαι ·
Leaving the latter aside, then, I shall speak of the king who came after them, whose name was Sesostris .


2.102.2
2249
τὸν ἔλεγον οἱ ἱρέες πρῶτον μὲν πλοίοισι μακροῖσι ὁρμηθέντα ἐκ τοῦ Ἀραβίου κόλπου τοὺς παρὰ τὴν Ἐρυθρὴν θάλασσαν κατοικημένους καταστρέφεσθαι , ἐς ὃ πλέοντά μιν πρόσω ἀπικέσθαι ἐς θάλασσαν οὐκέτι πλωτὴν ὑπὸ βραχέων .
This king, the priests said, set out with a fleet of long ships from the    Arabian Gulf    and subjugated all those living by the    Red Sea   , until he came to a sea which was too shallow for his vessels.


2.102.3
2250
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὡς ὀπίσω ἀπίκετο ἐς Αἴγυπτον , κατὰ τῶν ἱρέων τὴν φάτιν , πολλὴν στρατιὴν τῶν λαβὼν ἤλαυνε διὰ τῆς ἠπείρου , πᾶν ἔθνος τὸ ἐμποδὼν καταστρεφόμενος .
After returning from there back to    Egypt   , he gathered a great army (according to the account of the priests) and marched over the mainland, subjugating every nation to which he came.


2.102.4
2251
ὁτέοισι μέν νυν αὐτῶν ἀλκίμοισι ἐνετύγχανε καὶ δεινῶς γλιχομένοισι περὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίης , τούτοισι μὲν στήλας ἐνίστη ἐς τὰς χώρας διὰ γραμμάτων λεγούσας τό τε ἑωυτοῦ οὔνομα καὶ τῆς πάτρης , καὶ ὡς δυνάμι τῇ ἑωυτοῦ κατεστρέψατο σφέας ·
When those that he met were valiant men and strove hard for freedom, he set up pillars in their land, the inscription on which showed his own name and his country's, and how he had overcome them with his own power;


2.102.5
2252
ὅτεων δὲ ἀμαχητὶ καὶ εὐπετέως παρέλαβε τὰς πόλιας , τούτοισι δὲ ἐνέγραφε ἐν τῇσι στήλῃσι κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ καὶ τοῖσι ἀνδρηίοισι τῶν ἐθνέων γενομένοισι , καὶ δὴ καὶ αἰδοῖα γυναικὸς προσενέγραφε , δῆλα βουλόμενος ποιέειν ὡς εἴησαν ἀνάλκιδες .
but when the cities had made no resistance and been easily taken, then he put an inscription on the pillars just as he had done where the nations were brave; but he also drew on them the private parts of a woman, wishing to show clearly that the people were cowardly.


2.103.1
2253
ταῦτα δὲ ποιέων διεξήιε τὴν ἤπειρον , ἐς ὃ ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην διαβὰς τούς τε Σκύθας κατεστρέψατο καὶ τοὺς Θρήικας .
He marched over the country doing this until he had crossed over from Asia to Europe and defeated the Scythians and Thracians.


2.103.1
2254
ἐς τούτους δέ μοι δοκέει καὶ προσώτατα ἀπικέσθαι ὁ Αἰγύπτιος στρατός ·
Thus far and no farther, I think, the Egyptian army went;


2.103.1
2255
ἐν μὲν γὰρ τῇ τούτων χώρῃ φαίνονται σταθεῖσαι αἱ στῆλαι , τὸ δὲ προσωτέρω τούτων οὐκέτι .
for the pillars can be seen standing in their country, but in none beyond it.


2.103.2
2256
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ἐπιστρέψας ὀπίσω ἤιε , καὶ ἐπείτε ἐγίνετο ἐπὶ Φάσι ποταμῷ , οὐκ ἔχω τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν ἀτρεκέως εἰπεῖν εἴτε αὐτὸς ὁ βασιλεὺς Σέσωστρις ἀποδασάμενος τῆς ἑωυτοῦ στρατιῆς μόριον ὅσον δὴ αὐτοῦ κατέλιπε τῆς χώρης οἰκήτορας , εἴτε τῶν τινες στρατιωτέων τῇ πλάνῃ αὐτοῦ ἀχθεσθέντες περὶ Φᾶσιν ποταμὸν κατέμειναν .
From there, he turned around and went back home; and when he came to the   Phasis  river , that King, Sesostris, may have detached some part of his army and left it there to live in the country (for I cannot speak with exact knowledge), or it may be that some of his soldiers grew weary of his wanderings, and stayed by the  Phasis.


2.104.1
2257
φαίνονται μὲν γὰρ ἐόντες οἱ Κόλχοι Αἰγύπτιοι , νοήσας δὲ πρότερον αὐτὸς ἢ ἀκούσας ἄλλων λέγω .
For it is plain to see that the Colchians are Egyptians; and what I say, I myself noted before I heard it from others.


2.104.1
2258
ὡς δέ μοι ἐν φροντίδι ἐγένετο , εἰρόμην ἀμφοτέρους , καὶ μᾶλλον οἱ Κόλχοι ἐμεμνέατο τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἢ οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι τῶν Κόλχων ·
When it occurred to me, I inquired of both peoples; and the Colchians remembered the Egyptians better than the Egyptians remembered the Colchians;


2.104.2
2259
νομίζειν δ’ ἔφασαν οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι τῆς Σεσώστριος στρατιῆς εἶναι τοὺς Κόλχους .
the Egyptians said that they considered the Colchians part of Sesostris' army.


2.104.2
2260
αὐτὸς δὲ εἴκασα τῇδε , καὶ ὅτι μελάγχροες εἰσὶ καὶ οὐλότριχες .
I myself guessed it, partly because they are dark-skinned and woolly-haired;


2.104.2
2261
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ἐς οὐδὲν ἀνήκει ·
though that indeed counts for nothing,


2.104.2
2262
εἰσὶ γὰρ καὶ ἕτεροι τοιοῦτοι ·
since other peoples are, too;


2.104.2
2263
ἀλλὰ τοῖσιδε καὶ μᾶλλον , ὅτι μοῦνοι πάντων ἀνθρώπων Κόλχοι καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι καὶ Αἰθίοπες περιτάμνονται ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς τὰ αἰδοῖα .
but my better proof was that the Colchians and Egyptians and Ethiopians are the only nations that have from the first practised circumcision.


2.104.3
2264
Φοίνικες δὲ καὶ Σύροι οἱ ἐν τῇ Παλαιστίνῃ καὶ αὐτοὶ ὁμολογέουσι παρ’ Αἰγυπτίων μεμαθηκέναι , Σύριοι δὲ οἱ περὶ Θερμώδοντα καὶ Παρθένιον ποταμὸν καὶ Μάκρωνες οἱ τούτοισι ἀστυγείτονες ἐόντες ἀπὸ Κόλχων φασὶ νεωστὶ μεμαθηκέναι .
The Phoenicians and the Syrians of Palestine acknowledge that they learned the custom from the Egyptians, and the Syrians of the valleys of the Thermodon and the Parthenius, as well as their neighbors the Macrones, say that they learned it lately from the Colchians.


2.104.3
2265
οὗτοι γὰρ εἰσὶ οἱ περιταμνόμενοι ἀνθρώπων μοῦνοι , καὶ οὗτοι Αἰγυπτίοισι φαίνονται ποιεῦντες κατὰ τ- αὐτά .
These are the only nations that circumcise, and it is seen that they do just as the Egyptians.


2.104.4
2266
αὐτῶν δὲ Αἰγυπτίων καὶ Αἰθιόπων οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν ὁκότεροι παρὰ τῶν ἑτέρων ἐξέμαθον ·
But as to the Egyptians and Ethiopians themselves, I cannot say which nation learned it from the other;


2.104.4
2267
ἀρχαῖον γὰρ δή τι φαίνεται ἐόν .
for it is evidently a very ancient custom.


2.104.4
2268
ὡς δὲ ἐπιμισγόμενοι Αἰγύπτῳ ἐξέμαθον , μέγα μοι καὶ τόδε τεκμήριον γίνεται ·
That the others learned it through traffic with Egypt, I consider clearly proved by this:


2.104.4
2269
Φοινίκων ὁκόσοι τῇ Ἑλλάδι ἐπιμίσγονται , οὐκέτι Αἰγυπτίους μιμέονται κατὰ τὰ αἰδοῖα .
that Phoenicians who traffic with Hellas cease to imitate the Egyptians in this matter


2.104.4
2270
ἀλλὰ τῶν ἐπιγινομένων οὐ περιτάμνουσι τὰ αἰδοῖα .
and do not circumcise their children.


2.105.1
2271
φέρε νῦν καὶ ἄλλο εἴπω περὶ τῶν Κόλχων , ὡς Αἰγυπτίοισι προσφερέες εἰσί ·
Listen to something else about the Colchians, in which they are like the Egyptians:


2.105.1
2272
λίνον μοῦνοι οὗτοί τε καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι ἐργάζονται καὶ κατὰ τ- αὐτά , καὶ ἡ ζόη πᾶσα καὶ ἡ γλῶσσα ἐμφερής ἐστι ἀλλήλοισι .
they and the Egyptians alone work linen and have the same way of working it, a way peculiar to themselves; and they are alike in all their way of life, and in their speech.


2.105.1
2273
λίνον δὲ τὸ μὲν Κολχικὸν ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων Σαρδωνικὸν κέκληται , τὸ μέντοι ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου ἀπικνεύμενον καλέεται Αἰγύπτιον .
Linen has two names: the Colchian kind is called by the Greeks Sardonian; that which comes from Egypt is called Egyptian.


2.106.1
2274
αἱ δὲ στῆλαι τὰς ἵστα κατὰ τὰς χώρας ὁ Αἰγύπτου βασιλεὺς Σέσωστρις , αἱ μὲν πλεῦνες οὐκέτι φαίνονται περιεοῦσαι , ἐν δὲ τῇ Παλαιστίνῃ Συρίῃ αὐτὸς ὥρων ἐούσας καὶ τὰ γράμματα τὰ εἰρημένα ἐνεόντα καὶ γυναικὸς αἰδοῖα .
As to the pillars that Sesostris, king of    Egypt   , set up in the countries, most of them are no longer to be seen. But I myself saw them in the    Palestine    district of    Syria   , with the aforesaid writing and the women's private parts on them.


2.106.2
2275
εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ περὶ Ἰωνίην δύο τύποι ἐν πέτρῃσι ἐγκεκολαμμένοι τούτου τοῦ ἀνδρός , τῇ τε ἐκ τῆς Ἐφεσίης ἐς Φώκαιαν ἔρχονται καὶ τῇ ἐκ Σαρδίων ἐς Σμύρνην .
Also, there are in    Ionia    two figures of this man carved in rock, one on the road from    Ephesus    to    Phocaea   , and the other on that from    Sardis    to    Smyrna   .


2.106.3
2276
ἑκατέρωθι δὲ ἀνὴρ ἐγγέγλυπται μέγαθος πέμπτης σπιθαμῆς , τῇ μὲν δεξιῇ χειρὶ ἔχων αἰχμὴν τῇ δὲ ἀριστερῇ τόξα , καὶ τὴν ἄλλην σκευὴν ὡσαύτως ·
In both places, the figure is over twenty feet high, with a spear in his right hand and a bow in his left, and the rest of his equipment proportional;


2.106.3
2277
καὶ γὰρ Αἰγυπτίην καὶ Αἰθιοπίδα ἔχει ·
for it is both Egyptian and Ethiopian;


2.106.4
2278
ἐκ δὲ τοῦ ὤμου ἐς τὸν ἕτερον ὦμον διὰ τῶν στηθέων γράμματα ἱρὰ Αἰγύπτια διήκει ἐγκεκολαμμένα , λέγοντα τάδε ·
and right across the breast from one shoulder to the other a text is cut in the Egyptian sacred characters, saying:


2.106.4
2279
" ἐγὼ τήνδε τὴν χώρην ὤμοισι τοῖσι ἐμοῖσι ἐκτησάμην " .
“I myself won this land with the strength of my shoulders.”


2.106.4
2280
ὅστις δὲ καὶ ὁκόθεν ἐστί , ἐνθαῦτα μὲν οὐ δηλοῖ , ἑτέρωθι δὲ δεδήλωκε ·
There is nothing here to show who he is and whence he comes, but it is shown elsewhere.


2.106.5
2281
τὰ δὴ καὶ μετεξέτεροι τῶν θεησαμένων Μέμνονος εἰκόνα εἰκάζουσί μιν εἶναι , πολλὸν τῆς ἀληθείης ἀπολελειμμένοι .
Some of those who have seen these figures guess they are Memnon, but they are far indeed from the truth.


2.107.1
2282
τοῦτον δὴ τὸν Αἰγύπτιον Σέσωστριν ἀναχωρέοντα καὶ ἀνάγοντα πολλοὺς ἀνθρώπους τῶν ἐθνέων τῶν τὰς χώρας κατεστρέψατο , ἔλεγον οἱ ἱρέες , ἐπείτε ἐγίνετο ἀνακομιζόμενος ἐν Δάφνῃσι τῇσι Πηλουσίῃσι , τὸν ἀδελφεὸν ἑωυτοῦ , τῷ ἐπέτρεψε ὁ Σέσωστρις τὴν Αἴγυπτον , τοῦτον ἐπὶ ξείνια αὐτὸν καλέσαντα καὶ πρὸς αὐτῷ τοὺς παῖδας περινῆσαι ἔξωθεν τὴν οἰκίην ὕλῃ , περινήσαντα δὲ ὑποπρῆσαι .
Now when this Egyptian Sesostris (so the priests said) reached    Daphnae    of    Pelusium    on his way home, leading many captives from the peoples whose lands he had subjugated, his brother, whom he had left in charge in    Egypt   , invited him and his sons to a banquet and then piled wood around the house and set it on fire.


2.107.2
2283
τὸν δὲ ὡς μαθεῖν τοῦτο , αὐτίκα συμβουλεύεσθαι τῇ γυναικί ·
When Sesostris was aware of this, he at once consulted his wife.


2.107.2
2284
καὶ γὰρ δὴ καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα αὐτὸν ἅμα ἄγεσθαι ·
For (it was said) he had his wife with him;


2.107.2
2285
τὴν δέ οἱ συμβουλεῦσαι τῶν παίδων ἐόντων ἓξ τοὺς δύο ἐπὶ τὴν πυρὴν ἐκτείναντα γεφυρῶσαι τὸ καιόμενον , αὐτοὺς δὲ ἐπ’ ἐκείνων ἐπιβαίνοντας ἐκσώζεσθαι .
and she advised him to lay two of his six sons on the fire and make a bridge over the burning so that they could walk over the bodies of the two and escape.


2.107.2
2286
ταῦτα ποιῆσαι τὸν Σέσωστριν , καὶ δύο μὲν τῶν παίδων κατακαῆναι τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ , τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς ἀποσωθῆναι ἅμα τῷ πατρί .
This Sesostris did; two of his sons were thus burnt but the rest escaped alive with their father.


2.108.1
2287
νοστήσας δὲ ὁ Σέσωστρις ἐς τὴν Αἴγυπτον καὶ τισάμενος τὸν ἀδελφεόν , τῷ μὲν ὁμίλῳ τὸν ἐπηγάγετο τῶν τὰς χώρας κατεστρέψατο , τούτῳ μὲν τάδε ἐχρήσατο ·
After returning to    Egypt   , and avenging himself on his brother, Sesostris found work for the multitude which he brought with him from the countries which he had subdued.


2.108.2
2288
τούς τέ οἱ λίθους τοὺς ἐπὶ τούτου τοῦ βασιλέος κομισθέντας ἐς τοῦ Ἡφαίστου τὸ ἱρόν , ἐόντας μεγάθεϊ περιμήκεας , οὗτοι ἦσαν οἱ ἑλκύσαντες , καὶ τὰς διώρυχας τὰς νῦν ἐούσας ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ πάσας οὗτοι ἀναγκαζόμενοι ὤρυσσον , ἐποίευν τε οὐκ ἑκόντες Αἴγυπτον , τὸ πρὶν ἐοῦσαν ἱππασίμην καὶ ἁμαξευομένην πᾶσαν , ἐνδεᾶ τούτων .
It was these who dragged the great and long blocks of stone which were brought in this king's reign to the temple of Hephaestus; and it was they who were compelled to dig all the canals which are now in    Egypt   , and involuntarily made what had been a land of horses and carts empty of these.


2.108.3
2289
ἀπὸ γὰρ τούτου τοῦ χρόνου Αἴγυπτος ἐοῦσα πεδιὰς πᾶσα ἄνιππος καὶ ἀναμάξευτος γέγονε ·
For from this time Egypt, although a level land, could use no horses or carts,


2.108.3
2290
αἴτιαι δὲ τούτων αἱ διώρυχες γεγόνασι ἐοῦσαι πολλαὶ καὶ παντοίους τρόπους ἔχουσαί .
because there were so many canals going every which way. The reason why the king thus intersected the country was this:


2.108.4
2291
κατέταμνε δὲ τοῦδε εἵνεκα τὴν χώρην ὁ βασιλεύς ·
those Egyptians whose towns were not on the Nile, but inland from it,


2.108.4
2292
ὅσοι τῶν Αἰγυπτίων μὴ ἐπὶ τῷ ποταμῷ ἔκτηντο τὰς πόλις ἀλλ’ ἀναμέσους , οὗτοι , ὅκως τε ἀπίοι ὁ ποταμός , σπανίζοντες ὑδάτων πλατυτέροισι ἐχρέωντο τοῖσι πόμασι , ἐκ φρεάτων χρεώμενοι .
lacked water whenever the flood left their land, and drank only brackish water from wells.


2.109.1
2293
τούτων μὲν δὴ εἵνεκα κατετμήθη ἡ Αἴγυπτος .
For this reason Egypt was intersected.


2.109.1
2294
κατανεῖμαι δὲ τὴν χώρην Αἰγυπτίοισι ἅπασι τοῦτον ἔλεγον τὸν βασιλέα , κλῆρον ἴσον ἑκάστῳ τετράγωνον διδόντα , καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου τὰς προσόδους ποιήσασθαι , ἐπιτάξαντα ἀποφορὴν ἐπιτελέειν κατ’ ἐνιαυτόν .
This king also (they said) divided the country among all the Egyptians by giving each an equal parcel of land, and made this his source of revenue, assessing the payment of a yearly tax.


2.109.2
2295
εἰ δὲ τινὸς τοῦ κλήρου ὁ ποταμός τι παρέλοιτο , ἐλθὼν ἂν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐσήμαινε τὸ γεγενημένον ·
And any man who was robbed by the river of part of his land could come to Sesostris and declare what had happened;


2.109.2
2296
ὁ δὲ ἔπεμπε τοὺς ἐπισκεψομένους καὶ ἀναμετρήσοντας ὅσῳ ἐλάσσων ὁ χῶρος γέγονε , ὅκως τοῦ λοιποῦ κατὰ λόγον τῆς τεταγμένης ἀποφορῆς τελέοι .
then the king would send men to look into it and calculate the part by which the land was diminished, so that thereafter it should pay in proportion to the tax originally imposed.


2.109.3
2297
δοκέει δέ μοι ἐνθεῦτεν γεωμετρίη εὑρεθεῖσα ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἐπανελθεῖν ·
From this, in my opinion, the Greeks learned the art of measuring land;


2.109.3
2298
πόλον μὲν γὰρ καὶ γνώμονα καὶ τὰ δυώδεκα μέρεα τῆς ἡμέρης παρὰ Βαβυλωνίων ἔμαθον οἱ Ἕλληνες .
the sunclock and the sundial, and the twelve divisions of the day, came to Hellas from Babylonia and not from Egypt.


2.110.1
2299
βασιλεὺς μὲν δὴ οὗτος μοῦνος Αἰγύπτιος Αἰθιοπίης ἦρξε , μνημόσυνα δὲ ἐλίπετο πρὸ τοῦ Ἡφαιστείου ἀνδριάντας λιθίνους , δύο μὲν τριήκοντα πηχέων , ἑωυτόν τε καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα , τοὺς δὲ παῖδας ἐόντας τέσσερας εἴκοσι πηχέων ἕκαστον ·
Sesostris was the only Egyptian king who also ruled    Ethiopia   . To commemorate his name, he set before the temple of Hephaestus two stone statues, of himself and of his wife, each fifty feet high, and statues of his four sons, each thirty-three feet.


2.110.2
2300
τῶν δὴ ὁ ἱρεὺς τοῦ Ἡφαίστου χρόνῳ μετέπειτα πολλῷ Δαρεῖον τὸν Πέρσην οὐ περιεῖδε ἱστάντα ἔμπροσθε ἀνδριάντα , φὰς οὔ οἱ πεποιῆσθαι ἔργα οἷά περ Σεσώστρι τῷ Αἰγυπτίῳ ·
Long afterwards, Darius the Persian would have set up his statue before these;


2.110.2
2301
Σέσωστριν μὲν γὰρ ἄλλα τε καταστρέψασθαι ἔθνεα οὐκ ἐλάσσω ἐκείνου καὶ δὴ καὶ Σκύθας , Δαρεῖον δὲ οὐ δυνασθῆναι Σκύθας ἑλεῖν ·
but the priest of Hephaestus forbade him, saying that he had achieved nothing equal to the deeds of Sesostris the Egyptian; for Sesostris (he said) had subjugated the Scythians, besides as many nations as Darius had conquered, and Darius had not been able to overcome the Scythians;


2.110.3
2302
οὔκων δίκαιον εἶναι ἱστάναι ἔμπροσθε τῶν ἐκείνου ἀναθημάτων μὴ οὐκ ὑπερβαλλόμενον τοῖσι ἔργοισι .
therefore, it was not just that Darius should set his statue before the statues of Sesostris, whose achievements he had not equalled.


2.110.3
2303
Δαρεῖον μέν νυν λέγουσι πρὸς ταῦτα συγγνώμην ποιήσασθαι .
Darius, it is said, let the priest have his way.


2.111.1
2304
Σεσώστριος δὲ τελευτήσαντος ἐκδέξασθαι ἔλεγον τὴν βασιληίην τὸν παῖδα αὐτοῦ Φερῶν , τὸν ἀποδέξασθαι μὲν οὐδεμίαν στρατηίην , συνενειχθῆναι δέ οἱ τυφλὸν γενέσθαι διὰ τοιόνδε πρῆγμα .
When Sesostris died, he was succeeded in the kingship (the priests said) by his son Pheros.


2.111.1
2305
τοῦ ποταμοῦ κατελθόντος μέγιστα δὴ τότε ἐπ’ ὀκτωκαίδεκα πήχεας , ὡς ὑπερέβαλε τὰς ἀρούρας , πνεύματος ἐμπεσόντος κυματίης ὁ ποταμὸς ἐγένετο ·
This king waged no wars, and chanced to become blind, for the following reason: the Nile came down in such a flood as there had never been, rising to a height of thirty feet, and the water that flowed over the fields was roughened by a strong wind;


2.111.2
2306
τὸν δὲ βασιλέα λέγουσι τοῦτον ἀτασθαλίῃ χρησάμενον , λαβόντα αἰχμὴν βαλεῖν ἐς μέσας τὰς δίνας τοῦ ποταμοῦ , μετὰ δὲ αὐτίκα καμόντα αὐτὸν τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς τυφλωθῆναι .
then, it is said, the king was so audacious as to seize a spear and hurl it into the midst of the river eddies.


2.111.2
2307
δέκα μὲν δὴ ἔτεα εἶναί μιν τυφλόν , ἑνδεκάτῳ δὲ ἔτεϊ ἀπικέσθαι οἱ μαντήιον ἐκ Βουτοῦς πόλιος ὡς ἐξήκει τέ οἱ ὁ χρόνος τῆς ζημίης καὶ ἀναβλέψει γυναικὸς οὔρῳ νιψάμενος τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς , ἥτις παρὰ τὸν ἑωυτῆς ἄνδρα μοῦνον πεφοίτηκε , ἄλλων ἀνδρῶν ἐοῦσα ἄπειρος .
Right after this, he came down with a disease of the eyes, and became blind. When he had been blind for ten years, an oracle from the city of Buto declared to him that the term of his punishment was drawing to an end, and that he would regain his sight by washing his eyes with the urine of a woman who had never had intercourse with any man but her own husband.


2.111.3
2308
καὶ τὸν πρώτης τῆς ἑωυτοῦ γυναικὸς πειρᾶσθαι , μετὰ δέ , ὡς οὐκ ἀνέβλεπε , ἐπεξῆς πασέων πειρᾶσθαι ·
Pheros tried his own wife first; and, as he remained blind, all women, one after another.


2.111.3
2309
ἀναβλέψαντα δὲ συναγαγεῖν τὰς γυναῖκας τῶν ἐπειρήθη , πλὴν ἢ τῆς τῷ οὔρῳ νιψάμενος ἀνέβλεψε , ἐς μίαν πόλιν , ἣ νῦν καλέεται Ἐρυθρὴ βῶλος ·
When he at last recovered his sight, he took all the women whom he had tried, except the one who had made him see again, and gathered them into one town, the one which is now called “Red Clay”;


2.111.3
2310
ἐς ταύτην συναλίσαντα ὑποπρῆσαι πάσας σὺν αὐτῇ τῇ πόλι ·
having concentrated them together there, he burnt them and the town;


2.111.4
2311
τῆς δὲ νιψάμενος τῷ οὔρῳ ἀνέβλεψε , ταύτην δὲ ἔσχε αὐτὸς γυναῖκα .
but the woman by whose means he had recovered his sight, he married.


2.111.4
2312
ἀναθήματα δὲ ἀποφυγὼν τὴν πάθην τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν ἄλλα τε ἀνὰ τὰ ἱρὰ πάντα τὰ λόγιμα ἀνέθηκε καὶ τοῦ γε λόγον μάλιστα ἄξιον ἐστὶ ἔχειν , ἐς τοῦ Ἡλίου τὸ ἱρὸν ἀξιοθέητα ἀνέθηκε ἔργα , ὀβελοὺς δύο λιθίνους , ἐξ ἑνὸς ἐόντα ἑκάτερον λίθου , μῆκος μὲν ἑκάτερον πηχέων ἑκατόν , εὖρος δὲ ὀκτὼ πηχέων .
Most worthy of mention among the many offerings which he dedicated in all the noteworthy temples for his deliverance from blindness are the two marvellous stone obelisks which he set up in the temple of the Sun. Each of these is made of a single block, and is over one hundred and sixty-six feet high and thirteen feet thick.


2.112.1
2313
τούτου δὲ ἐκδέξασθαι τὴν βασιληίην ἔλεγον ἄνδρα Μεμφίτην , τῷ κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλήνων γλῶσσαν οὔνομα Πρωτέα εἶναι ·
Pheros was succeeded (they said) by a man of Memphis, whose name in the Greek tongue was Proteus.


2.112.1
2314
τοῦ νῦν τέμενος ἐστὶ ἐν Μέμφι κάρτα καλόν τε καὶ εὖ ἐσκευασμένον , τοῦ Ἡφαιστείου πρὸς νότον ἄνεμον κείμενον .
This Proteus has a very attractive and well-appointed temple precinct at Memphis, south of the temple of Hephaestus.


2.112.2
2315
περιοικέουσι δὲ τὸ τέμενος τοῦτο Φοίνικες Τύριοι , καλέεται δὲ ὁ χῶρος οὗτος ὁ συνάπας Τυρίων στρατόπεδον .
Around the precinct live Phoenicians of Tyre, and the whole place is called the Camp of the Tyrians.


2.112.2
2316
ἔστι δὲ ἐν τῷ τεμένεϊ τοῦ Πρωτέος ἱρὸν τὸ καλέεται ξείνης Ἀφροδίτης ·
There is in the precinct of Proteus a temple called the temple of the Stranger Aphrodite;


2.112.2
2317
συμβάλλομαι δὲ τοῦτο τὸ ἱρὸν εἶναι Ἑλένης τῆς Τυνδάρεω , καὶ τὸν λόγον ἀκηκοὼς ὡς διαιτήθη Ἑλένη παρὰ Πρωτέι , καὶ δὴ καὶ ὅτι ξείνης Ἀφροδίτης ἐπώνυμον ἐστί ·
I guess this is a temple of Helen, daughter of Tyndarus, partly because I have heard the story of Helen's abiding with Proteus, and partly because it bears the name of the Foreign Aphrodite:


2.112.2
2318
ὅσα γὰρ ἄλλα Ἀφροδίτης ἱρά ἐστι , οὐδαμῶς ξείνης ἐπικαλέεται .
for no other of Aphrodite's temples is called by that name.


2.113.1
2319
ἔλεγον δέ μοι οἱ ἱρέες ἱστορέοντι τὰ περὶ Ἑλένην γενέσθαι ὧδε .
When I inquired of the priests, they told me that this was the story of Helen.


2.113.1
2320
Ἀλέξανδρον ἁρπάσαντα Ἑλένην ἐκ Σπάρτης ἀποπλέειν ἐς τὴν ἑωυτοῦ ·
After carrying off Helen from Sparta, Alexandrus sailed away for his own country;


2.113.1
2321
καί μιν , ὡς ἐγένετο ἐν τῷ Αἰγαίῳ , ἐξῶσται ἄνεμοι ἐκβάλλουσι ἐς τὸ Αἰγύπτιον πέλαγος , ἐνθεῦτεν δέ , οὐ γὰρ ἀνιεῖ τὰ πνεύματα , ἀπικνέεται ἐς Αἴγυπτον καὶ Αἰγύπτου ἐς τὸ νῦν Κανωβικὸν καλεύμενον στόμα τοῦ Νείλου καὶ ἐς Ταριχείας .
violent winds caught him in the Aegean and drove him into the Egyptian sea; and from there (as the wind did not let up) he came to Egypt, to the mouth of the Nile called the Canopic mouth, and to the Salters'.


2.113.2
2322
ἦν δὲ ἐπὶ τῆς ἠιόνος τὸ καὶ νῦν ἐστι Ἡρακλέος ἱρόν , ἐς τὸ ἢν καταφυγὼν οἰκέτης ὅτευ ὦν ἀνθρώπων ἐπιβάληται στίγματα ἱρά , ἑωυτὸν διδοὺς τῷ θεῷ , οὐκ ἔξεστι τούτου ἅψασθαι .
Now there was (and still is) on the coast a temple of Heracles; if a servant of any man takes refuge there and is branded with certain sacred marks, delivering himself to the god, he may not be touched. This law continues today the same as it has always been from the first.


2.113.3
2323
ὁ νόμος οὗτος διατελέει ἐὼν ὅμοιος μέχρι ἐμεῦ τῷ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς ·
Hearing of the temple law, some of Alexandrus' servants ran away from him, threw themselves on the mercy of the god,


2.113.3
2324
τοῦ ὦν δὴ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἀπιστέαται θεράποντες πυθόμενοι τὸν περὶ τὸ ἱρὸν ἔχοντα νόμον , ἱκέται δὲ ἱζόμενοι τοῦ θεοῦ κατηγόρεον τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου , βουλόμενοι βλάπτειν αὐτόν , πάντα λόγον ἐξηγεύμενοι ὡς εἶχε περὶ τὴν Ἑλένην τε καὶ τὴν ἐς Μενέλεων ἀδικίην ·
and brought an accusation against Alexandrus meaning to injure him, telling the whole story of Helen and the wrong done Menelaus.


2.113.3
2325
κατηγόρεον δὲ ταῦτα πρός τε τοὺς ἱρέας καὶ τὸν στόματος τούτου φύλακον , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Θῶνις .
They laid this accusation before the priests and the warden of the Nile mouth, whose name was Thonis.


2.114.1
2326
ἀκούσας δὲ τούτων ὁ Θῶνις πέμπει τὴν ταχίστην ἐς Μέμφιν παρὰ Πρωτέα ἀγγελίην λέγουσαν τάδε .
When Thonis heard it, he sent this message the quickest way to Proteus at    Memphis   :


2.114.2
2327
" ἥκει ξεῖνος γένος μὲν Τευκρός , ἔργον δὲ ἀνόσιον ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι ἐξεργασμένος ·
“A stranger has come, a Trojan, who has committed an impiety in Hellas.


2.114.2
2328
ξείνου γὰρ τοῦ ἑωυτοῦ ἐξαπατήσας τὴν γυναῖκα αὐτήν τε ταύτην ἄγων ἥκει καὶ πολλὰ κάρτα χρήματα , ὑπὸ ἀνέμων ἐς γῆν ταύτην ἀπενειχθείς .
After defrauding his guest-friend, he has come bringing the man's wife and a very great deal of wealth, driven to your country by the wind.


2.114.2
2329
κότερα δῆτα τοῦτον ἐῶμεν ἀσινέα ἐκπλέειν ἢ ἀπελώμεθα τὰ ἔχων ἦλθε " ;
Are we to let him sail away untouched, or are we to take away what he has come with?”


2.114.3
2330
ἀντιπέμπει πρὸς ταῦτα ὁ Πρωτεὺς λέγοντα τάδε .
Proteus sent back this message:


2.114.3
2331
" ἄνδρα τοῦτον , ὅστις κοτὲ ἐστὶ ἀνόσια ἐργασμένος ξεῖνον τὸν ἑωυτοῦ , συλλαβόντες ἀπάγετε παρ’ ἐμέ , ἵνα εἰδέω ὅ τι κοτὲ καὶ λέξει " .
“Whoever this is who has acted impiously against his guest-friend, seize him and bring him to me, that I may know what he will say.”


2.115.1
2332
ἀκούσας δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Θῶνις συλλαμβάνει τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ τὰς νέας αὐτοῦ κατίσχει , μετὰ δὲ αὐτόν τε τοῦτον ἀνήγαγε ἐς Μέμφιν καὶ τὴν Ἑλένην τε καὶ τὰ χρήματα , πρὸς δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἱκέτας .
Hearing this, Thonis seized Alexandrus and detained his ships there, and then brought him with Helen and all the wealth, and the suppliants too, to    Memphis   .


2.115.2
2333
ἀνακομισθέντων δὲ πάντων , εἰρώτα τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ὁ Πρωτεὺς τίς εἴη καὶ ὁκόθεν πλέοι .
When all had arrived, Proteus asked Alexandrus who he was and whence he sailed;


2.115.2
2334
ὁ δέ οἱ καὶ τὸ γένος κατέλεξε καὶ τῆς πάτρης εἶπε τὸ οὔνομα , καὶ δὴ καὶ τὸν πλόον ἀπηγήσατο ὁκόθεν πλέοι .
Alexandrus told him his lineage and the name of his country, and about his voyage, whence he sailed.


2.115.3
2335
μετὰ δὲ ὁ Πρωτεὺς εἰρώτα αὐτὸν ὁκόθεν τὴν Ἑλένην λάβοι ·
Then Proteus asked him where he had got Helen;


2.115.3
2336
πλανωμένου δὲ τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐν τῷ λόγῳ καὶ οὐ λέγοντος τὴν ἀληθείην , ἤλεγχον οἱ γενόμενοι ἱκέται , ἐξηγεύμενοι πάντα λόγον τοῦ ἀδικήματος .
when Alexandrus was evasive in his story and did not tell the truth, the men who had taken refuge with the temple confuted him, and related the whole story of the wrong.


2.115.4
2337
τέλος δὲ δή σφι λόγον τόνδε ἐκφαίνει ὁ Πρωτεύς , λέγων ὅτι " ἐγὼ εἰ μὴ περὶ πολλοῦ ἡγεύμην μηδένα ξείνων κτείνειν , ὅσοι ὑπ’ ἀνέμων ἤδη ἀπολαμφθέντες ἦλθον ἐς χώρην τὴν ἐμήν , ἐγὼ ἄν σε ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἕλληνος ἐτισάμην , ὅς , ὦ κάκιστε ἀνδρῶν , ξεινίων τυχὼν ἔργον ἀνοσιώτατον ἐργάσαο ·
Finally, Proteus declared the following judgment to them, saying,


2.115.4
2338
παρὰ τοῦ σεωυτοῦ ξείνου τὴν γυναῖκα ἦλθες .
“If I did not make it a point never to kill a stranger who has been caught by the wind and driven to my coasts, I would have punished you on behalf of the Greek, you most vile man.


2.115.4
2339
καὶ μάλα ταῦτά τοι οὐκ ἤρκεσε , ἀλλ’ ἀναπτερώσας αὐτὴν οἴχεαι ἔχων ἐκκλέψας .
You committed the gravest impiety after you had had your guest-friend's hospitality: you had your guest-friend's wife.


2.115.5
2340
καὶ οὐδὲ ταῦτά τοι μοῦνα ἤρκεσε , ἀλλὰ καὶ οἰκία τοῦ ξείνου κεραΐσας ἥκεις .
And as if this were not enough, you got her to fly with you and went off with her. And not just with her, either, but you plundered your guest-friend's wealth and brought it, too.


2.115.6
2341
νῦν ὦν ἐπειδὴ περὶ πολλοῦ ἥγημαι μὴ ξεινοκτονέειν , γυναῖκα μὲν ταύτην καὶ τὰ χρήματα οὔ τοι προήσω ἀπάγεσθαι , ἀλλ’ αὐτὰ ἐγὼ τῷ Ἕλληνι ξείνῳ φυλάξω , ἐς ὃ ἂν αὐτὸς ἐλθὼν ἐκεῖνος ἀπαγαγέσθαι ἐθέλῃ ·
Now, then, since I make it a point not to kill strangers, I shall not let you take away this woman and the wealth, but I shall watch them for the Greek stranger, until he come and take them away;


2.115.6
2342
αὐτὸν δέ σε καὶ τοὺς σοὺς συμπλόους τριῶν ἡμερέων προαγορεύω ἐκ τῆς ἐμῆς γῆς ἐς ἄλλην τινὰ μετορμίζεσθαι , εἰ δὲ μή , ἅτε πολεμίους περιέψεσθαι " .
but as for you and your sailors, I warn you to leave my country for another within three days, and if you do not, I will declare war on you.”


2.116.1
2343
Ἑλένης μὲν ταύτην ἄπιξιν παρὰ Πρωτέα ἔλεγον οἱ ἱρέες γενέσθαι ·
This, the priests said, was how Helen came to Proteus.


2.116.1
2344
δοκέει δέ μοι καὶ Ὅμηρος τὸν λόγον τοῦτον πυθέσθαι ·
And, in my opinion, Homer knew this story, too;


2.116.1
2345
ἀλλ’ οὐ γὰρ ὁμοίως ἐς τὴν ἐποποιίην εὐπρεπὴς ἦν τῷ ἑτέρῳ τῷ περ ἐχρήσατο , ἑκὼν μετῆκε αὐτόν , δηλώσας ὡς καὶ τοῦτον ἐπίσταιτο τὸν λόγον ·
but seeing that it was not so well suited to epic poetry as the tale of which he made use, he rejected it, showing that he knew it.


2.116.2
2346
δῆλον δὲ κατὰ γὰρ ἐποίησε ἐν Ἰλιάδι ( καὶ οὐδαμῇ ἄλλῃ ἀνεπόδισε ἑωυτόν ) πλάνην τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου , ὡς ἀπηνείχθη ἄγων Ἑλένην τῇ τε δὴ ἄλλῃ πλαζόμενος καὶ ὡς ἐς Σιδῶνα τῆς Φοινίκης ἀπίκετο .
This is apparent from the passage in the Iliad (and nowhere else does he return to the story) where he relates the wanderings of Alexander, and shows how he and Helen were carried off course, and wandered to, among other places,    Sidon    in    Phoenicia   .


2.116.3
2347
ἐπιμέμνηται δὲ αὐτοῦ ἐν Διομήδεος ἀριστείῃ ·
This is in the story of the Prowess of Diomedes, where the verses run as follows:


2.116.3
2348
λέγει δὲ τὰ ἔπεα ὧδε .
"There were the robes, all embroidered,


2.116.3
2349
ἔνθ’ ἔσαν οἱ πέπλοι παμποίκιλοι , ἔργα γυναικῶν Σιδονίων , τὰς αὐτὸς Ἀλέξανδρος θεοειδής ἤγαγε Σιδονίηθεν , ἐπιπλὼς εὐρέα πόντον , τὴν ὁδὸν ἣν Ἑλένην περ ἀνήγαγεν εὐπατέρειαν .
The work of women of Sidon, whom godlike Alexandrus himself   Brought from Sidon, crossing the broad sea,   The same voyage on which he brought back Helen of noble descent."


2.116.4
2350
ἐπιμέμνηται δὲ καὶ ἐν Ὀδυσσείῃ ἐν τοῖσιδε τοῖσι ἔπεσι .
He mentions it in the Odyssey also:


2.116.4
2351
τοῖα Διὸς θυγάτηρ ἔχε φάρμακα μητιόεντα , ἐσθλά , τά οἱ Πολύδαμνα πόρεν Θῶνος παράκοιτις Αἰγυπτίη , τῇ πλεῖστα φέρει ζείδωρος ἄρουρα φάρμακα , πολλὰ μὲν ἐσθλὰ μεμιγμένα , πολλὰ δὲ λυγρά .
"The daughter of Zeus had such ingenious drugs, Good ones, which she had from Thon's wife, Polydamna, an Egyptian, Whose country's fertile plains bear the most drugs, Many mixed for good, many for harm."


2.116.5
2352
καὶ τάδε ἕτερα πρὸς Τηλέμαχον Μενέλεως λέγει .
and again Menelaus says to Telemachus:


2.116.5
2353
Αἰγύπτῳ μ’ ἔτι δεῦρο θεοὶ μεμαῶτα νέεσθαι ἔσχον , ἐπεὶ οὔ σφιν ἔρεξα τεληέσσας ἑκατόμβας .
"I was eager to return here, but the gods still held me in Egypt, Since I had not sacrificed entire hecatombs to them."


2.116.6
2354
ἐν τούτοισι τοῖσι ἔπεσι δηλοῖ ὅτι ἠπίστατο τὴν ἐς Αἴγυπτον Ἀλεξάνδρου πλάνην ·
In these verses the poet shows that he knew of Alexander's wanderings to Egypt;


2.116.6
2355
ὁμουρέει γὰρ ἡ Συρίη Αἰγύπτῶ , οἱ δὲ Φοίνικες , τῶν ἐστὶ ἡ Σιδών , ἐν τῇ Συρίῃ οἰκέουσι .
for Syria borders on Egypt, and the Phoenicians, to whom Sidon belongs, dwell in Syria.


2.117.1
2356
κατὰ ταῦτα δὲ τὰ ἔπεα καὶ τόδε τὸ χωρίον οὐκ ἥκιστα ἀλλὰ μάλιστα δηλοῖ ὅτι οὐκ Ὁμήρου τὰ Κύπρια ἔπεα ἐστὶ ἀλλ’ ἄλλου τινός .
These verses and this passage prove most clearly that the Cyprian poems are not the work of Homer but of someone else.


2.117.1
2357
ἐν μὲν γὰρ τοῖσι Κυπρίοισι εἴρηται ὡς τριταῖος ἐκ Σπάρτης Ἀλέξανδρος ἀπίκετο ἐς τὸ Ἴλιον ἄγων Ἑλένην , εὐαέι τε πνεύματι χρησάμενος καὶ θαλάσσῃ λείῃ ·
For the Cyprian poems relate that Alexandrus reached Ilion with Helen in three days from Sparta, having a fair wind and a smooth sea;


2.117.1
2358
ἐν δὲ Ἰλιάδι λέγει ὡς ἐπλάζετο ἄγων αὐτήν .
but according to the Iliad, he wandered from his course in bringing her.


2.118.1
2359
ὅμηρος μέν νυν καὶ τὰ Κύπρια ἔπεα χαιρέτω .
Enough, then, of Homer and the Cyprian poems.


2.118.1
2360
εἰρομένου δέ μευ τοὺς ἱρέας εἰ μάταιον λόγον λέγουσι οἱ Ἕλληνες τὰ περὶ Ἴλιον γενέσθαι ἢ οὔ , ἔφασαν πρὸς ταῦτα τάδε , ἱστορίῃσι φάμενοι εἰδέναι παρ’ αὐτοῦ Μενέλεω .
But, when I asked the priests whether the Greek account of what happened at Troy were idle or not, they gave me the following answer, saying that they had inquired and knew from Menelaus himself.


2.118.2
2361
ἐλθεῖν μὲν γὰρ μετὰ τὴν Ἑλένης ἁρπαγὴν ἐς τὴν Τευκρίδα γῆν Ἑλλήνων στρατιὴν πολλὴν βοηθεῦσαν Μενέλεῳ , ἐκβᾶσαν δὲ ἐς γῆν καὶ ἱδρυθεῖσαν τὴν στρατιὴν πέμπειν ἐς τὸ Ἴλιον ἀγγέλους , σὺν δέ σφι ἰέναι καὶ αὐτὸν Μενέλεων ·
After the rape of Helen, a great force of Greeks came to the Trojan land on Menelaus' behalf. After disembarking and disposing their forces, they sent messengers to    Ilion   , one of whom was Menelaus himself.


2.118.3
2362
τοὺς δ’ ἐπείτε ἐσελθεῖν ἐς τὸ τεῖχος , ἀπαιτέειν Ἑλένην τε καὶ τὰ χρήματα τά οἱ οἴχετο κλέψας Ἀλέξανδρος , τῶν τε ἀδικημάτων δίκας αἰτέειν ·
When these were let inside the city walls, they demanded the restitution of Helen and of the property which Alexandrus had stolen from Menelaus and carried off, and they demanded reparation for the wrongs;


2.118.3
2363
τοὺς δὲ Τευκροὺς τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον λέγειν τότε καὶ μετέπειτα , καὶ ὀμνύντας καὶ ἀνωμοτί , μὴ μὲν ἔχειν Ἑλένην μηδὲ τὰ ἐπικαλεύμενα χρήματα , ἀλλ’ εἶναι αὐτὰ πάντα ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ , καὶ οὐκ ἂν δικαίως αὐτοὶ δίκας ὑπέχειν τῶν Πρωτεὺς ὁ Αἰγύπτιος βασιλεὺς ἔχει .
but the Trojans gave the same testimony then and later, sworn and unsworn: that they did not have Helen or the property claimed, but all of that was in Egypt, and they could not justly make reparation for what Proteus the Egyptian had.


2.118.4
2364
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες καταγελᾶσθαι δοκέοντες ὑπ’ αὐτῶν οὕτω δὴ ἐπολιόρκεον , ἐς ὃ ἐξεῖλον ·
But the Greeks, thinking that the Trojans were mocking them, laid siege to the city, until they took it;


2.118.4
2365
ἑλοῦσι δὲ τὸ τεῖχος ὡς οὐκ ἐφαίνετο ἡ Ἑλένη , ἀλλὰ τὸν αὐτὸν λόγου τῷ προτέρῳ ἐπυνθάνοντο , οὕτω δὴ πιστεύσαντες τῷ λόγῳ τῷ πρώτῳ οἱ Ἕλληνες αὐτὸν Μενέλεων ἀποστέλλουσι παρὰ Πρωτέα .
but there was no Helen there when they breached the wall, but they heard the same account as before; so, crediting the original testimony, they sent Menelaus himself to Proteus.


2.119.1
2366
ἀπικόμενος δὲ ὁ Μενέλεως ἐς τὴν Αἴγυπτον καὶ ἀναπλώσας ἐς τὴν Μέμφιν , εἴπας τὴν ἀληθείην τῶν πρηγμάτων , καὶ ξεινίων ἤντησε μεγάλων καὶ Ἑλένην ἀπαθέα κακῶν ἀπέλαβε , πρὸς δὲ καὶ τὰ ἑωυτοῦ χρήματα πάντα .
Menelaus then went to    Egypt    and up the river to    Memphis   ; there, relating the truth of the matter, he met with great hospitality and got back Helen, who had not been harmed, and also all his wealth, besides.


2.119.2
2367
τυχὼν μέντοι τούτων ἐγένετο Μενέλεως ἀνὴρ ἄδικος ἐς Αἰγυπτίους .
Yet, although getting this, Menelaus was guilty of injustice toward the Egyptians.


2.119.2
2368
ἀποπλέειν γὰρ ὁρμημένον αὐτὸν ἶσχον ἄπλοιαι ·
For adverse weather detained him when he tried to sail away;


2.119.2
2369
ἐπειδὴ δὲ τοῦτο ἐπὶ πολλὸν τοιοῦτον ἦν , ἐπιτεχνᾶται πρῆγμα οὐκ ὅσιον ·
after this continued for some time, he carried out something impious,


2.119.3
2370
λαβὼν γὰρ δύο παιδία ἀνδρῶν ἐπιχωρίων ἔντομα σφέα ἐποίησε .
taking two native children and sacrificing them.


2.119.3
2371
μετὰ δὲ ὡς ἐπάιστος ἐγένετο τοῦτο ἐργασμένος , μισηθείς τε καὶ διωκόμενος οἴχετο φεύγων τῇσι νηυσὶ ἐπὶ Λιβύης ·
When it became known that he had done this, he fled with his ships straight to Libya, hated and hunted;


2.119.3
2372
τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὅκου ἔτι ἐτράπετο οὐκ εἶχον εἰπεῖν Αἰγύπτιοι .
and where he went from there, the Egyptians could not say.


2.119.3
2373
τούτων δὲ τὰ μὲν ἱστορίῃσι ἔφασαν ἐπίστασθαι , τὰ δὲ παρ’ ἑωυτοῖσι γενόμενα ἀτρεκέως ἐπιστάμενοι λέγειν .
The priests told me that they had learned some of this by inquiry, but that they were sure of what had happened in their own country.


2.120.1
2374
ταῦτα μὲν Αἰγυπτίων οἱ ἱρέες ἔλεγον ·
The Egyptians' priests said this,


2.120.1
2375
ἐγὼ δὲ τῷ λόγῳ τῷ περὶ Ἑλένης λεχθέντι καὶ αὐτὸς προστίθεμαι , τάδε ἐπιλεγόμενος , εἰ ἦν Ἑλένη ἐν Ἰλίῳ , ἀποδοθῆναι ἂν αὐτὴν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι ἤτοι ἑκόντος γε ἢ ἀέκοντος Ἀλεξάνδρου .
and I myself believe their story about Helen, for I reason thus: had Helen been in Ilion, then with or without the will of Alexandrus she would have been given back to the Greeks.


2.120.2
2376
οὐ γὰρ δὴ οὕτω γε φρενοβλαβὴς ἦν ὁ Πρίαμος οὐδὲ οἱ ἄλλοι οἱ προσήκοντες αὐτῷ , ὥστε τοῖσι σφετέροισι σώμασι καὶ τοῖσι τέκνοισι καὶ τῇ πόλι κινδυνεύειν ἐβούλοντο , ὅκως Ἀλέξανδρος Ἑλένῃ συνοικέῃ .
For surely Priam was not so mad, or those nearest to him, as to consent to risk their own persons and their children and their city so that Alexandrus might cohabit with Helen.


2.120.3
2377
εἰ δέ τοι καὶ ἐν τοῖσι πρώτοισι χρόνοισι ταῦτα ἐγίνωσκον , ἐπεὶ πολλοὶ μὲν τῶν ἄλλων Τρώων , ὁκότε συμμίσγοιεν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι , ἀπώλλυντο , αὐτοῦ δὲ Πριάμου οὐκ ἔστι ὅτε οὐ δύο ἢ τρεῖς ἢ καὶ ἔτι πλέους τῶν παίδων μάχης γινομένης ἀπέθνησκον , εἰ χρή τι τοῖσι ἐποποιοῖσι χρεώμενον λέγειν , τούτων δὲ τοιούτων συμβαινόντων ἐγὼ μὲν ἔλπομαι , εἰ καὶ αὐτὸς Πρίαμος συνοίκεε Ἑλένῃ , ἀποδοῦναι ἂν αὐτὴν τοῖσι Ἀχαιοῖσι , μέλλοντά γε δὴ τῶν παρεόντων κακῶν ἀπαλλαγήσεσθαι .
Even if it were conceded that they were so inclined in the first days, yet when not only many of the Trojans were slain in fighting against the Greeks, but Priam himself lost to death two or three or even more of his sons in every battle (if the poets are to be believed), in this turn of events, had Helen been Priam's own wife, I cannot but think that he would have restored her to the Greeks, if by so doing he could escape from the evils besetting him.


2.120.4
2378
οὐ μὲν οὐδὲ ἡ βασιληίη ἐς Ἀλέξανδρον περιήιε , ὥστε γέροντος Πριάμου ἐόντος ἐπ’ ἐκείνῳ τὰ πρήγματα εἶναι , ἀλλὰ Ἕκτωρ καὶ πρεσβύτερος καὶ ἀνὴρ ἐκείνου μᾶλλον ἐὼν ἔμελλε αὐτὴν Πριάμου ἀποθανόντος παραλάμψεσθαι , τὸν οὐ προσῆκε ἀδικέοντι τῷ ἀδελφεῷ ἐπιτρέπειν , καὶ ταῦτα μεγάλων κακῶν δι’ αὐτὸν συμβαινόντων ἰδίῃ τε αὐτῷ καὶ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι πᾶσι Τρωσί .
Alexandrus was not even heir to the throne, in which case matters might have been in his hands since Priam was old, but Hector, who was an older and a better man than Alexandrus, was going to receive the royal power at Priam's death, and ought not have acquiesced in his brother's wrongdoing, especially when that brother was the cause of great calamity to Hector himself and all the rest of the Trojans.


2.120.5
2379
ἀλλ’ οὐ γὰρ εἶχον Ἑλένην ἀποδοῦναι , οὐδὲ λέγουσι αὐτοῖσι τὴν ἀληθείην ἐπίστευον οἱ Ἕλληνες , ὡς μὲν ἐγὼ γνώμην ἀποφαίνομαι , τοῦ δαιμονίου παρασκευάζοντος , ὅκως πανωλεθρίῃ ἀπολόμενοι καταφανὲς τοῦτο τοῖσι ἀνθρώποισι ποιήσωσι , ὡς τῶν μεγάλων ἀδικημάτων μεγάλαι εἰσὶ καὶ αἱ τιμωρίαι παρὰ τῶν θεῶν .
But since they did not have Helen there to give back, and since the Greeks would not believe them although they spoke the truth — I am convinced and declare — the divine powers provided that the Trojans, perishing in utter destruction, should make this clear to all mankind: that retribution from the gods for terrible wrongdoing is also terrible.


2.120.5
2380
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν τῇ ἐμοὶ δοκέει εἴρηται .
This is what I think, and I state it.


2.121.1
2381
Πρωτέος δὲ ἐκδέξασθαι τὴν βασιληίην Ῥαμψίνιτον ἔλεγον , ὃς μνημόσυνα ἐλίπετο τὰ προπύλαια τὰ πρὸς ἑσπέρην τετραμμένα τοῦ Ἡφαιστείου , ἀντίους δὲ τῶν προπυλαίων ἔστησε ἀνδριάντας δύο , ἐόντας τὸ μέγαθος πέντε καὶ εἴκοσι πηχέων , τῶν Αἰγύπτιοι τὸν μὲν πρὸς βορέω ἑστεῶτα καλέουσι θέρος , τὸν δὲ πρὸς νότον χειμῶνα ·
The next to reign after Proteus (they said) was Rhampsinitus.


2.121.1
2382
καὶ τὸν μὲν καλέουσι θέρος , τοῦτον μὲν προσκυνέουσί τε καὶ εὖ ποιέουσι , τὸν δὲ χειμῶνα καλεόμενον τὰ ἔμπαλιν τούτων ἔρδουσι
The memorial of his name left by him was the western forecourt of the temple of Hephaestus; he set two statues here forty-one feet high; the northernmost of these the Egyptians call Summer, and the southernmost Winter; the one that they call Summer they worship and treat well, but do the opposite to the statue called Winter.


2.121A.1
2383
πλοῦτον δὲ τούτῳ τῷ βασιλέι γενέσθαι ἀργύρου μέγαν , τὸν οὐδένα τῶν ὕστερον ἐπιτραφέντων βασιλέων δύνασθαι ὑπερβαλέσθαι οὐδ’ ἐγγὺς ἐλθεῖν .
This king (they told me) had great wealth in silver, so great that none of the succeeding kings could surpass or come near it.


2.121A.1
2384
βουλόμενον δὲ αὐτὸν ἐν ἀσφαλείῃ τὰ χρήματα θησαυρίζειν οἰκοδομέεσθαι οἴκημα λίθινον , τοῦ τῶν τοίχων ἕνα ἐς τὸ ἔξω μέρος τῆς οἰκίης ἔχειν .
To store his treasure safely, he had a stone chamber built, one of its walls abutting on the outer side of his palace.


2.121A.1
2385
τὸν δὲ ἐργαζόμενον ἐπιβουλεύοντα τάδε μηχανᾶσθαι ·
But the builder of it, plotting, contrived the following.


2.121A.1
2386
τῶν λίθων παρασκευάσασθαι ἕνα ἐξαιρετὸν εἶναι ἐκ τοῦ τοίχου ῥηιδίως καὶ ὑπὸ δύο ἀνδρῶν καὶ ὑπὸ ἑνός .
He provided that one stone be so placed as to be easily removed by two men or even by one.


2.121A.2
2387
ὡς δὲ ἐπετελέσθη τὸ οἴκημα , τὸν μὲν βασιλέα θησαυρίσαι τὰ χρήματα ἐν αὐτῷ ·
So when the chamber was finished, the king stored his treasure in it,


2.121A.2
2388
χρόνου δὲ περιιόντος τὸν οἰκοδόμον περὶ τελευτὴν τοῦ βίου ἐόντα ἀνακαλέσασθαι τοὺς παῖδας ( εἶναι γὰρ αὐτῷ δύο ) , τούτοισι δὲ ἀπηγήσασθαι ὡς ἐκείνων προορῶν , ὅκως βίον ἄφθονον ἔχωσι , τεχνάσαιτο οἰκοδομέων τὸν θησαυρὸν τοῦ βασιλέος ·
and as time went on, the builder, drawing near the end of his life, summoned his sons (he had two) and told them how he had provided for them, that they have an ample livelihood, by the art with which he had built the king's treasure-house;


2.121A.2
2389
σαφέως δὲ αὐτοῖσι πάντα ἐξηγησάμενον τὰ περὶ τὴν ἐξαίρεσιν τοῦ λίθου δοῦναι τὰ μέτρα αὐτοῦ , λέγοντα ὡς ταῦτα διαφυλάσσοντες ταμίαι τῶν βασιλέος χρημάτων ἔσονται .
explaining clearly to them how to remove the stone, he gave the coordinates of it, and told them that if they kept these in mind, they would be the custodians of the king's riches.


2.121A.3
2390
καὶ τὸν μὲν τελευτῆσαι τὸν βίον , τοὺς δὲ παῖδας οὐκ ἐς μακρὴν ἔργου ἔχεσθαι , ἐπελθόντας δὲ ἐπὶ τὰ βασιλήια νυκτὸς καὶ τὸν λίθον ἐπὶ τῷ οἰκοδομήματι ἀνευρόντας ῥηιδίως μεταχειρίσασθαι καὶ τῶν χρημάτων πολλὰ ἐξενείκασθαι .
So when he was dead, his sons got to work at once: coming to the palace by night, they readily found and managed the stone in the building, and took away much of the treasure.


2.121B.1
2391
ὡς δὲ τυχεῖν τὸν βασιλέα ἀνοίξαντα τὸ οἴκημα , θωμάσαι ἰδόντα τῶν χρημάτων καταδεᾶ τὰ ἀγγήια , οὐκ ἔχειν δὲ ὅντινα ἐπαιτιᾶται , τῶν τε σημάντρων ἐόντων σόων καὶ τοῦ οἰκήματος κεκληιμένου .
When the king opened the building, he was amazed to see the containers lacking their treasure;


2.121B.1
2392
ὡς δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ δὶς καὶ τρὶς ἀνοίξαντι αἰεὶ ἐλάσσω φαίνεσθαι τὰ χρήματα ( τοὺς γὰρ κλέπτας οὐκ ἀνιέναι κεραΐζοντας ) , ποιῆσαί μιν τάδε ·
yet he did not know whom to accuse, seeing that the seals were unbroken and the building shut fast.


2.121B.1
2393
πάγας προστάξαι ἐργάσασθαι καὶ ταύτας περὶ τὰ ἀγγήια ἐν τοῖσι τὰ χρήματα ἐνῆν στῆσαι .
But when less treasure appeared the second and third times he opened the building (for the thieves did not stop plundering), he had traps made and placed around the containers in which his riches were stored.


2.121B.2
2394
τῶν δὲ φωρῶν ὥσπερ ἐν τῷ πρὸ τοῦ χρόνῳ ἐλθόντων καὶ ἐσδύντος τοῦ ἑτέρου αὐτῶν , ἐπεὶ πρὸς τὸ ἄγγος προσῆλθε , ἰθέως τῇ πάγῃ ἐνέχεσθαι .
The thieves came just as before, and one of them crept in;


2.121B.2
2395
ὡς δὲ γνῶναι αὐτὸν ἐν οἵῳ κακῷ ἦν , ἰθέως καλέειν τὸν ἀδελφεὸν καὶ δηλοῦν αὐτῷ τὰ παρεόντα , καὶ κελεύειν τὴν ταχίστην ἐσδύντα ἀποταμεῖν αὐτοῦ τὴν κεφαλήν , ὅκως μὴ αὐτὸς ὀφθεὶς καὶ γνωρισθεὶς ὃς εἴη προσαπολέσῃ κ- ἐκεῖνον .
when he came near the container, right away he was caught in the trap. When he saw the trouble he was in, he called to his brother right away and explained to him the problem, and told him to come in quickly and cut off his head, lest he be seen and recognized and destroy him, too.


2.121B.2
2396
τῷ δὲ δόξαι εὖ λέγειν , καὶ ποιῆσαί μιν πεισθέντα ταῦτα , καὶ καταρμόσαντα τὸν λίθον ἀπιέναι ἐπ’ οἴκου , φέροντα τὴν κεφαλὴν τοῦ ἀδελφεοῦ .
He seemed to have spoken rightly to the other, who did as he was persuaded and then, replacing the stone, went home, carrying his brother's head.


2.121C.1
2397
ὡς δὲ ἡμέρη ἐγένετο , ἐσελθόντα τὸν βασιλέα ἐς τὸ οἴκημα ἐκπεπλῆχθαι ὁρῶντα τὸ σῶμα τοῦ φωρὸς ἐν τῇ πάγῃ ἄνευ τῆς κεφαλῆς ἐόν , τὸ δὲ οἴκημα ἀσινὲς καὶ οὔτε ἔσοδον οὔτε ἔκδυσιν οὐδεμίαν ἔχον .
When day came, the king went to the building, and was amazed to see in the trap the thief's body without a head, yet the building intact, with no way in or out.


2.121C.1
2398
ἀπορεύμενον δέ μιν τάδε ποιῆσαι ·
At a loss, he did as follows:


2.121C.1
2399
τοῦ φωρὸς τὸν νέκυν κατὰ τοῦ τείχεος κατακρεμάσαι , φυλάκους δὲ αὐτοῦ καταστήσαντα ἐντείλασθαί σφι , τὸν ἂν ἴδωνται ἀποκλαύσαντα ἢ κατοικτισάμενον , συλλαβόντας ἄγειν πρὸς ἑωυτόν .
he suspended the thief's body from the wall and set guards over it, instructing them to seize and bring to him any whom they saw weeping or making lamentation.


2.121C.2
2400
ἀνακρεμαμένου δὲ τοῦ νέκυος τὴν μητέρα δεινῶς φέρειν , λόγους δὲ πρὸς τὸν περιεόντα παῖδα ποιευμένην προστάσσειν αὐτῷ ὅτεῳ τρόπῳ δύναται μηχανᾶσθαι ὅκως τὸ σῶμα τοῦ ἀδελφεοῦ καταλύσας κομιεῖ ·
But the thief's mother, when the body had been hung up, was terribly stricken:


2.121C.2
2401
εἰ δὲ τούτων ἀμελήσει , διαπειλέειν αὐτὴν ὡς ἐλθοῦσα πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα μηνύσει αὐτὸν ἔχοντα τὰ χρήματα .
she had words with her surviving son, and told him that he was somehow to think of some way to cut loose and bring her his brother's body, and if he did not obey, she threatened to go to the king and denounce him as having the treasure.


2.121D.1
2402
ὡς δὲ χαλεπῶς ἐλαμβάνετο ἡ μήτηρ τοῦ περιεόντος παιδὸς καὶ πολλὰ πρὸς αὐτὴν λέγων οὐκ ἔπειθε , ἐπιτεχνήσασθαι τοιάδε μιν ·
So when his mother bitterly reproached the surviving son and for all that he said he could not dissuade her,


2.121D.1
2403
ὄνους κατασκευασάμενον καὶ ἀσκοὺς πλήσαντα οἴνου ἐπιθεῖναι ἐπὶ τῶν ὄνων καὶ ἔπειτα ἐλαύνειν αὐτούς ·
he devised a plan: he harnessed asses and put skins full of wine on the asses, then set out driving them;


2.121D.1
2404
ὡς δὲ κατὰ τοὺς φυλάσσοντας ἦν τὸν κρεμάμενον νέκυν , ἐπισπάσαντα τῶν ἀσκῶν δύο ἢ τρεῖς ποδεῶνας αὐτὸν λύειν ἀπαμμένους ·
and when he was near those who were guarding the hanging body, he pulled at the feet of two or three of the skins and loosed their fastenings;


2.121D.2
2405
ὡς δὲ ἔρρεε ὁ οἶνος , τὴν κεφαλήν μιν κόπτεσθαι μεγάλα βοῶντα ὡς οὐκ ἔχοντα πρὸς ὁκοῖον τῶν ὄνων πρῶτον τράπηται .
and as the wine ran out, he beat his head and cried aloud like one who did not know to which ass he should turn first,


2.121D.2
2406
τοὺς δὲ φυλάκους ὡς ἰδεῖν πολλὸν ῥέοντα τὸν οἶνον , συντρέχειν ἐς τὴν ὁδὸν ἀγγήια ἔχοντας , καὶ τὸν ἐκκεχυμένον οἶνον συγκομίζειν ἐν κέρδεϊ ποιευμένους ·
while the guards, when they saw the wine flowing freely, ran out into the road with cups and caught what was pouring out, thinking themselves in luck.


2.121D.3
2407
τὸν δὲ διαλοιδορέεσθαι πᾶσι ὀργὴν προσποιεύμενον , παραμυθευμένων δὲ αὐτὸν τῶν φυλάκων χρόνῳ πρηΰνεσθαι προσποιέεσθαι καὶ ὑπίεσθαι τῆς ὀργῆς , τέλος δὲ ἐξελάσαι αὐτὸν τοὺς ὄνους ἐκ τῆς ὁδοῦ καὶ κατασκευάζειν .
feigning anger, the man cursed all; but as the guards addressed him peaceably, he pretended to be soothed and to relent in his anger, and finally drove his asses out of the road and put his harness in order.


2.121D.4
2408
ὡς δὲ λόγους τε πλέους ἐγγίνεσθαι καί τινα καὶ σκῶψαι μιν καὶ ἐς γέλωτα προαγαγέσθαι , ἐπιδοῦναι αὐτοῖσι τῶν ἀσκῶν ἕνα ·
And after more words passed and one joked with him and got him to laugh, he gave them one of the skins:


2.121D.4
2409
τοὺς δὲ αὐτοῦ ὥσπερ εἶχον κατακλιθέντας πίνειν διανοέεσθαι , καὶ ἐκεῖνον παραλαμβάνειν καὶ κελεύειν μετ’ ἑωυτῶν μείναντα συμπίνειν ·
and they lay down there just as they were, disposed to drink, and included him and told him to stay and drink with them;


2.121D.4
2410
τὸν δὲ πεισθῆναί τε δὴ καὶ καταμεῖναι .
and he consented and stayed.


2.121D.5
2411
ὡς δέ μιν παρὰ τὴν πόσιν φιλοφρόνως ἠσπάζοντο , ἐπιδοῦναι αὐτοῖσι καὶ ἄλλον τῶν ἀσκῶν ·
When they cheerily saluted him in their drinking, he gave them yet another of the skins;


2.121D.5
2412
δαψιλέι δὲ τῷ ποτῷ χρησαμένους τοὺς φυλάκους ὑπερμεθυσθῆναι καὶ κρατηθέντας ὑπὸ τοῦ ὕπνου αὐτοῦ ἔνθα περ ἔπινον κατακοιμηθῆναι .
and the guards grew very drunk with the abundance of liquor, and lay down right there where they were drinking, overpowered by sleep;


2.121D.6
2413
τὸν δέ , ὡς πρόσω ἦν τῆς νυκτός , τό τε σῶμα τοῦ ἀδελφεοῦ καταλῦσαι καὶ τῶν φυλάκων ἐπὶ λύμῃ πάντων ξυρῆσαι τὰς δεξιὰς παρηίδας , ἐπιθέντα δὲ τὸν νέκυν ἐπὶ τοὺς ὄνους ἀπελαύνειν ἐπ’ οἴκου , ἐπιτελέσαντα τῇ μητρὶ τὰ προσταχθέντα .
but he, when it was late at night, cut down the body of his brother and shaved the right cheek of each of the guards for the indignity, and loading the body on his asses, drove home, fulfilling his mother's commands.


2.121E.1
2414
τὸν δὲ βασιλέα , ὡς αὐτῷ ἀπηγγέλθη τοῦ φωρὸς ὁ νέκυς ἐκκεκλεμμένος , δεινὰ ποιέειν ·
When the king learned that the body of the thief had been taken, he was beside himself and, obsessed with finding who it was who had managed this, did as follows


2.121E.1
2415
πάντως δὲ βουλόμενον εὑρεθῆναι ὅστις κοτὲ εἴη ὁ ταῦτα μηχανώμενος , ποιῆσαί μιν τάδε , ἐμοὶ μὲν οὐ πιστά ·
— they say, but I do not believe it.


2.121E.2
2416
τὴν θυγατέρα τὴν ἑωυτοῦ κατίσαι ἐπ’ οἰκήματος , ἐντειλάμενον πάντας τε ὁμοίως προσδέκεσθαι , καὶ πρὶν συγγενέσθαι , ἀναγκάζειν λέγειν αὐτῇ ὅ τι δὴ ἐν τῷ βίῳ ἔργασται αὐτῷ σοφώτατον καὶ ἀνοσιώτατον ·
He put his own daughter in a brothel, instructing her to accept all alike and, before having intercourse, to make each tell her the shrewdest and most impious thing he had done in his life;


2.121E.2
2417
ὃς δ’ ἂν ἀπηγήσηται τὰ περὶ τὸν φῶρα γεγενημένα , τοῦτον συλλαμβάνειν καὶ μὴ ἀπιέναι ἔξω .
whoever told her the story of the thief, she was to seize and not let get out.


2.121E.3
2418
ὡς δὲ τὴν παῖδα ποιέειν τὰ ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς προσταχθέντα , τὸν φῶρα πυθόμενον τῶν εἵνεκα ταῦτα ἐπρήσσετο , βουληθέντα πολυτροπίῃ τοῦ βασιλέος περιγενέσθαι ποιέειν τάδε ·
The girl did as her father told her, and the thief, learning why she was doing this, did as follows, wanting to get the better of the king by craft.


2.121E.4
2419
νεκροῦ προσφάτου ἀποταμόντα ἐν τῷ ὤμῳ τὴν χεῖρα ἰέναι αὐτὸν ἔχοντα αὐτὴν ὑπὸ τῷ ἱματίῳ .
He cut the arm off a fresh corpse at the shoulder, and went to the king's daughter, carrying it under his cloak,


2.121E.4
2420
ἐσελθόντα δὲ ὡς τοῦ βασιλέος τὴν θυγατέρα καὶ εἰρωτώμενον τά περ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι , ἀπηγήσασθαι ὡς ἀνοσιώτατον μὲν εἴη ἐργασμένος ὅτι τοῦ ἀδελφεοῦ ἐν τῷ θησαυρῷ τοῦ βασιλέος ὑπὸ πάγης ἁλόντος ἀποτάμοι τὴν κεφαλήν , σοφώτατον δὲ ὅτι τοὺς φυλάκους καταμεθύσας καταλύσειε τοῦ ἀδελφεοῦ κρεμάμενον τὸν νέκυν .
and when asked the same question as the rest, he said that his most impious act had been when he had cut the head off his brother who was caught in a trap in the king's treasury; and his shrewdest, that after making the guards drunk he had cut down his brother's hanging body.


2.121E.5
2421
τὴν δὲ ὡς ἤκουσε ἅπτεσθαι αὐτοῦ .
When she heard this, the princess grabbed for him;


2.121E.5
2422
τὸν δὲ φῶρα ἐν τῷ σκότεϊ προτεῖναι αὐτῇ τοῦ νεκροῦ τὴν χεῖρα ·
but in the darkness the thief let her have the arm of the corpse;


2.121E.5
2423
τὴν δὲ ἐπιλαβομένην ἔχειν , νομίζουσαν αὐτοῦ ἐκείνου τῆς χειρὸς ἀντέχεσθαι ·
and clutching it, she held on, believing that she had the arm of the other;


2.121E.5
2424
τὸν δὲ φῶρα προέμενον αὐτῇ οἴχεσθαι διὰ θυρέων φεύγοντα .
but the thief, after giving it to her, was gone in a flash out the door.


2.121F.1
2425
ὡς δὲ καὶ ταῦτα ἐς τὸν βασιλέα ἀνηνείχθη , ἐκπεπλῆχθαι μὲν ἐπὶ τῇ πολυφροσύνῃ τε καὶ τόλμῃ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου , τέλος δὲ διανέμοντα ἐς πάσας τὰς πόλις ἐπαγγέλλεσθαι ἀδείην τε διδόντα καὶ μεγάλα ὑποδεκόμενον ἐλθόντι ἐς ὄψιν τὴν ἑωυτοῦ .
When this also came to the king's ears, he was astonished at the man's ingenuity and daring, and in the end, he sent a proclamation to every town, promising the thief immunity and a great reward if he would come into the king's presence.


2.121F.2
2426
τὸν δὲ φῶρα πιστεύσαντα ἐλθεῖν πρὸς αὐτόν , Ῥαμψίνιτον δὲ μεγάλως θωμάσαι , καί οἱ τὴν θυγατέρα ταύτην συνοικίσαι ὡς πλεῖστα ἐπισταμένῳ ἀνθρώπων .
The thief trusted the king and came before him;


2.121F.2
2427
Αἰγυπτίους μὲν γὰρ τῶν ἄλλων προκεκρίσθαι , ἐκεῖνον δὲ Αἰγυπτίων .
Rhampsinitus was very admiring and gave him his daughter to marry on the grounds that he was the cleverest of men; for as the Egyptians (he said) surpassed all others in craft, so he surpassed the Egyptians.


2.122.1
2428
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἔλεγον τοῦτον τὸν βασιλέα ζωὸν καταβῆναι κάτω ἐς τὸν οἱ Ἕλληνες Ἅιδην νομίζουσι εἶναι , καὶ κεῖθι συγκυβεύειν τῇ Δήμητρι , καὶ τὰ μὲν νικᾶν αὐτὴν τὰ δὲ ἑσσοῦσθαι ὑπ’ αὐτῆς , καί μιν πάλιν ἀπικέσθαι δῶρον ἔχοντα παρ’ αὐτῆς χειρόμακτρον χρύσεον .
They said that later this king went down alive to what the Greeks call Hades and there played dice with Demeter, and after winning some and losing some, came back with a gift from her of a golden hand towel.


2.122.2
2429
ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς Ῥαμψινίτου καταβάσιος , ὡς πάλιν ἀπίκετο , ὁρτὴν δὴ ἀνάγειν Αἰγυπτίους ἔφασαν ·
From the descent of Rhampsinitus, when he came back, they said that the Egyptians celebrate a festival,


2.122.2
2430
τὴν καὶ ἐγὼ οἶδα ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἐπιτελέοντας αὐτούς , οὐ μέντοι εἴ γε διὰ ταῦτα ὁρτάζουσι ἔχω λέγειν .
which I know that they celebrate to this day, but whether this is why they celebrate, I cannot say.


2.122.3
2431
φᾶρος δὲ αὐτημερὸν ἐξυφήναντες οἱ ἱρέες κατ’ ὦν ἔδησαν ἑνὸς ἑωυτῶν μίτρῃ τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς , ἀγαγόντες δέ μιν ἔχοντα τὸ φᾶρος ἐς ὁδὸν φέρουσαν ἐς ἱρὸν Δήμητρος αὐτοὶ ἀπαλλάσσονται ὀπίσω ·
On the day of the festival, the priests weave a cloth and bind it as a headband on the eyes of one of their number,


2.122.3
2432
τὸν δὲ ἱρέα τοῦτον καταδεδεμένον τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς λέγουσι ὑπὸ δύο λύκων ἄγεσθαι ἐς τὸ ἱρὸν τῆς Δήμητρος ἀπέχον τῆς πόλιος εἴκοσι σταδίους , καὶ αὖτις ὀπίσω ἐκ τοῦ ἱροῦ ἀπάγειν μιν τοὺς λύκους ἐς τ- αὐτὸ χωρίον .
whom they then lead, wearing the cloth, into a road that goes to the temple of Demeter; they themselves go back, but this priest with his eyes bandaged is guided (they say) by two wolves to Demeter's temple, a distance of three miles from the city, and led back again from the temple by the wolves to the same place.


2.123.1
2433
τοῖσι μέν νυν ὑπ’ Αἰγυπτίων λεγομένοισι χράσθω ὅτεῳ τὰ τοιαῦτα πιθανά ἐστι ·
These Egyptian stories are for the benefit of whoever believes such tales:


2.123.1
2434
ἐμοὶ δὲ παρὰ πάντα τὸν λόγον ὑπόκειται ὅτι τὰ λεγόμενα ὑπ’ ἑκάστων ἀκοῇ γράφω .
my rule in this history is that I record what is said by all as I have heard it.


2.123.1
2435
ἀρχηγετέειν δὲ τῶν κάτω Αἰγύπτιοι λέγουσι Δήμητρα καὶ Διόνυσον .
The Egyptians say that Demeter and Dionysus are the rulers of the lower world.


2.123.2
2436
πρῶτοι δὲ καὶ τόνδε τὸν λόγον Αἰγύπτιοι εἰσὶ οἱ εἰπόντες , ὡς ἀνθρώπου ψυχὴ ἀθάνατος ἐστί , τοῦ σώματος δὲ καταφθίνοντος ἐς ἄλλο ζῷον αἰεὶ γινόμενον ἐσδύεται , ἐπεὰν δὲ πάντα περιέλθῃ τὰ χερσαῖα καὶ τὰ θαλάσσια καὶ τὰ πετεινά , αὖτις ἐς ἀνθρώπου σῶμα γινόμενον ἐσδύνει ·
The Egyptians were the first who maintained the following doctrine, too, that the human soul is immortal, and at the death of the body enters into some other living thing then coming to birth;


2.123.2
2437
τὴν περιήλυσιν δὲ αὐτῇ γίνεσθαι ἐν τρισχιλίοισι ἔτεσι .
and after passing through all creatures of land, sea, and air, it enters once more into a human body at birth, a cycle which it completes in three thousand years.


2.123.3
2438
τούτῳ τῷ λόγῳ εἰσὶ οἳ Ἑλλήνων ἐχρήσαντο , οἳ μὲν πρότερον οἳ δὲ ὕστερον , ὡς ἰδίῳ ἑωυτῶν ἐόντι ·
There are Greeks who have used this doctrine, some earlier and some later, as if it were their own;


2.123.3
2439
τῶν ἐγὼ εἰδὼς τὰ οὐνόματα οὐ γράφω .
I know their names, but do not record them.


2.124.1
2440
μέχρι μέν νυν Ῥαμψινίτου βασιλέος εἶναι ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ πᾶσαν εὐνομίην ἔλεγον καὶ εὐθηνέειν Αἴγυπτον μεγάλως , μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον βασιλεύσαντα σφέων Χέοπα ἐς πᾶσαν κακότητα ἐλάσαι .
They said that    Egypt    until the time of King Rhampsinitus was altogether well-governed and prospered greatly,


2.124.1
2441
κατακληίσαντα γάρ μιν πάντα τὰ ἱρὰ πρῶτα μὲν σφέας θυσιέων τουτέων ἀπέρξαι , μετὰ δὲ ἐργάζεσθαι ἑωυτῷ κελεύειν πάντας Αἰγυπτίους .
but that Kheops, who was the next king, brought the people to utter misery. For first he closed all the temples, so that no one could sacrifice there; and next, he compelled all the Egyptians to work for him.


2.124.2
2442
τοῖσι μὲν δὴ ἀποδεδέχθαι ἐκ τῶν λιθοτομιέων τῶν ἐν τῷ Ἀραβίῳ ὄρεϊ , ἐκ τουτέων ἕλκειν λίθους μέχρι τοῦ Νείλου ·
To some, he assigned the task of dragging stones from the quarries in the Arabian mountains to the    Nile   ;


2.124.2
2443
διαπεραιωθέντας δὲ τὸν ποταμὸν πλοίοισι τοὺς λίθους ἑτέροισι ἐπέταξε ἐκδέκεσθαι καὶ πρὸς τὸ Λιβυκὸν καλεύμενον ὄρος , πρὸς τοῦτο ἕλκειν .
and after the stones were ferried across the river in boats, he organized others to receive and drag them to the mountains called Libyan.


2.124.3
2444
ἐργάζοντο δὲ κατὰ δέκα μυριάδας ἀνθρώπων αἰεὶ τὴν τρίμηνον ἑκάστην .
They worked in gangs of a hundred thousand men, each gang for three months.


2.124.3
2445
χρόνον δὲ ἐγγενέσθαι τριβομένῳ τῷ λεῷ δέκα ἔτεα μὲν τῆς ὁδοῦ κατ’ ἣν εἷλκον τοὺς λίθους , τὴν ἔδειμαν ἔργον ἐὸν οὐ πολλῷ τεῳ ἔλασσον τῆς πυραμίδος .
For ten years the people wore themselves out building the road over which the stones were dragged, work which was in my opinion not much lighter at all than the building of the pyramid


2.124.3
2446
ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέειν ·
(for the road is nearly a mile long and twenty yards wide, and elevated at its highest to a height of sixteen yards, and it is all of stone polished and carved with figures).


2.124.4
2447
τῆς μὲν γὰρ μῆκος εἰσὶ πέντε στάδιοι , εὖρος δὲ δέκα ὀργυιαί , ὕψος δέ , τῇ ὑψηλοτάτη ἐστὶ αὐτὴ ἑωυτῆς , ὀκτὼ ὀργυιαί , λίθου δὲ ξεστοῦ καὶ ζῴων ἐγγεγλυμμένων ·
The aforesaid ten years went to the building of this road and of the underground chambers in the hill where the pyramids stand;


2.124.4
2448
ταύτης τε δὴ τὰ δέκα ἔτεα γενέσθαι καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ τοῦ λόφου ἐπ’ οὗ ἑστᾶσι αἱ πυραμίδες , τῶν ὑπὸ γῆν οἰκημάτων , τὰς ἐποιέετο θήκας ἑωυτῷ ἐν νήσῳ , διώρυχα τοῦ Νείλου ἐσαγαγών .
these, the king meant to be burial-places for himself, and surrounded them with water, bringing in a channel from the    Nile   .


2.124.5
2449
τῇ δὲ πυραμίδι αὐτῇ χρόνον γενέσθαι εἴκοσι ἔτεα ποιευμένῃ ·
The pyramid itself was twenty years in the making.


2.124.5
2450
τῆς ἐστὶ πανταχῇ μέτωπον ἕκαστον ὀκτὼ .
Its base is square, each side eight hundred feet long, and its height is the same;


2.124.5
2451
πλέθρα ἐούσης τετραγώνου καὶ ὕψος ἴσον , λίθου δὲ ξεστοῦ τε καὶ ἁρμοσμένου τὰ μάλιστα ·
the whole is of stone polished and most exactly fitted;


2.124.5
2452
οὐδεὶς τῶν λίθων τριήκοντα ποδῶν ἐλάσσων .
there is no block of less than thirty feet in length.


2.125.1
2453
ἐποιήθη δὲ ὧδε αὕτη ἡ πυραμίς ·
This pyramid was made like stairs, which some call steps and others, tiers.


2.125.1
2454
ἀναβαθμῶν τρόπον , τὰς μετεξέτεροι κρόσσας οἳ δὲ βωμίδας ὀνομάζουσι , τοιαύτην τὸ πρῶτον ἐπείτε ἐποίησαν αὐτήν , ἤειρον τοὺς ἐπιλοίπους λίθους μηχανῇσι ξύλων βραχέων πεποιημένῃσι , χαμᾶθεν μὲν ἐπὶ τὸν πρῶτον στοῖχον τῶν ἀναβαθμῶν ἀείροντες ·
After making this first step, they raised the remaining stones with devices made of short wooden planks, lifting them from the ground up to the first tier of steps.


2.125.3
2455
ὅκως δὲ ἀνίοι ὁ λίθος ἐπ’ αὐτόν , ἐς ἑτέρην μηχανὴν ἐτίθετο ἑστεῶσαν ἐπὶ τοῦ πρώτου στοίχου , ἀπὸ τούτου δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν δεύτερον εἵλκετο στοῖχον ἐπ’ ἄλλης μηχανῆς ·
when the stone had been raised, it was set on another lever that stood on the first tier, and the lever again used to lift it from this tier to the next.


2.125.4
2456
ὅσοι γὰρ δὴ στοῖχοι ἦσαν τῶν ἀναβαθμῶν , τοσαῦται καὶ μηχαναὶ ἦσαν , εἴτε καὶ τὴν αὐτὴν μηχανὴν ἐοῦσαν μίαν τε καὶ εὐβάστακτον μετεφόρεον ἐπὶ στοῖχον ἕκαστον , ὅκως τὸν λίθον ἐξέλοιεν ·
It may be that there was a new lever on each tier of steps, or perhaps there was only one lever, quite portable, which they carried up to each tier in turn;


2.125.4
2457
λελέχθω γὰρ ἡμῖν ἐπ’ ἀμφότερα , κατά περ λέγεται .
I leave this uncertain, as both possibilities were mentioned.


2.125.5
2458
ἐξεποιήθη δ’ ὦν τὰ ἀνώτατα αὐτῆς πρῶτα , μετὰ δὲ τὰ ἐχόμενα τούτων ἐξεποίευν , τελευταῖα δὲ αὐτῆς τὰ ἐπίγαια καὶ τὰ κατωτάτω ἐξεποίησαν .
But this is certain, that the upper part of the pyramid was finished off first, then the next below it, and last of all the base and the lowest part.


2.125.6
2459
σεσήμανται δὲ διὰ γραμμάτων Αἰγυπτίων ἐν τῇ πυραμίδι ὅσα ἔς τε συρμαίην καὶ κρόμμυα καὶ σκόροδα ἀναισιμώθη τοῖσι ἐργαζομένοισι ·
There are writings on the pyramid in Egyptian characters indicating how much was spent on radishes and onions and garlic for the workmen;


2.125.6
2460
καὶ ὡς ἐμὲ εὖ μεμνῆσθαι τὰ ὁ ἑρμηνεύς μοι ἐπιλεγόμενος τὰ γράμματα ἔφη , ἑξακόσια καὶ χίλια τάλαντα ἀργυρίου τετελέσθαι .
and I am sure that, when he read me the writing, the interpreter said that sixteen hundred talents of silver had been paid.


2.125.7
2461
εἰ δ’ ἔστι οὕτω ἔχοντα ταῦτα , κόσα οἰκὸς ἄλλα δεδαπανῆσθαι ἐστὶ ἔς τε σίδηρον τῷ ἐργάζοντο καὶ σιτία καὶ ἐσθῆτα τοῖσι ἐργαζομένοισι , ὁκότε χρόνον μὲν οἰκοδόμεον τὰ ἔργα τὸν εἰρημένον , ἄλλον δέ , ὡς ἐγὼ δοκέω , ἐν τῷ τοὺς λίθους ἔταμνον καὶ ἦγον καὶ τὸ ὑπὸ γῆν ὄρυγμα ἐργάζοντο , οὐκ ὀλίγον χρόνον .
Now if that is so, how much must have been spent on the iron with which they worked, and the workmen's food and clothing, considering that the time aforesaid was spent in building, while hewing and carrying the stone and digging out the underground parts was, as I suppose, a business of long duration.


2.126.1
2462
ἐς τοῦτο δὲ ἐλθεῖν Χέοπα κακότητος ὥστε χρημάτων δεόμενον τὴν θυγατέρα τὴν ἑωυτοῦ κατίσαντα ἐπ’ οἰκήματος προστάξαι πρήσσεσθαι ἀργύριον ὁκόσον δή τι ·
And so evil a man was Kheops that, needing money, he put his own daughter in a brothel and made her charge a fee (how much, they did not say).


2.126.1
2463
οὐ γὰρ δὴ τοῦτό γε ἔλεγον .
She did as her father told her, but was disposed to leave a memorial of her own,


2.126.1
2464
τὴν δὲ τά τε ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς ταχθέντα πρήσσεσθαι , ἰδίῃ δὲ καὶ αὐτὴν διανοηθῆναι μνημήιον καταλιπέσθαι , καὶ τοῦ ἐσιόντος πρὸς αὐτὴν ἑκάστου δέεσθαι ὅκως ἂν αὐτῇ ἕνα λίθον ἐν τοῖσι ἔργοισι δωρέοιτο .
and asked of each coming to her that he give one stone;


2.126.2
2465
ἐκ τούτων δὲ τῶν λίθων ἔφασαν τὴν πυραμίδα οἰκοδομηθῆναι τὴν ἐν μέσῳ τῶν τριῶν ἑστηκυῖαν , ἔμπροσθε τῆς μεγάλης πυραμίδος , τῆς ἐστὶ τὸ κῶλον ἕκαστον ὅλου καὶ ἡμίσεος πλέθρου .
and of these stones they said the pyramid was built that stands midmost of the three, over against the great pyramid; each side of it measures one hundred and fifty feet.


2.127.1
2466
βασιλεῦσαι δὲ τὸν Χέοπα τοῦτον Αἰγύπτιοι ἔλεγον πεντήκοντα ἔτεα , τελευτήσαντος δὲ τούτου ἐκδέξασθαι τὴν βασιληίην τὸν ἀδελφεὸν αὐτοῦ Χεφρῆνα ·
The Egyptians said that this Kheops reigned for fifty years;


2.127.1
2467
καὶ τοῦτον δὲ τῷ αὐτῷ τρόπῳ διαχρᾶσθαι τῷ ἑτέρῳ τά τε ἄλλα καὶ πυραμίδα ποιῆσαι , ἐς μὲν τὰ ἐκείνου μέτρα οὐκ ἀνήκουσαν ·
at his death he was succeeded by his brother Khephren, who was in all respects like Kheops. Khephren also built a pyramid, smaller than his brother's.


2.127.2
2468
ταῦτα γὰρ ὦν καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐμετρήσαμεν ·
I have measured it myself.


2.127.2
2469
( οὔτε γὰρ ὕπεστι οἰκήματα ὑπὸ γῆν , οὔτε ἐκ τοῦ Νείλου διῶρυξ ἥκει ἐς αὐτὴν ὥσπερ ἐς τὴν ἑτέρην ῥέουσα ·
It has no underground chambers, nor is it entered like the other by a canal from the    Nile   ,


2.127.2
2470
δι’ οἰκοδομημένου δὲ αὐλῶνος ἔσω νῆσον περιρρέει , ἐν τῇ αὐτὸν λέγουσι κεῖσθαι Χέοπα ) ·
but the river comes in through a built passage and encircles an island, in which, they say, Kheops himself lies.


2.127.3
2471
ὑποδείμας δὲ τὸν πρῶτον δόμον λίθου Αἰθιοπικοῦ ποικίλου , τεσσεράκοντα πόδας ὑποβὰς τῆς ἑτέρης τ- αὐτὸ μέγαθος , ἐχομένην τῆς μεγάλης οἰκοδόμησε .
This pyramid was built on the same scale as the other, except that it falls forty feet short of it in height;


2.127.3
2472
ἑστᾶσι δὲ ἐπὶ λόφου τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἀμφότεραι , μάλιστα ἐς ἑκατὸν πόδας ὑψηλοῦ .
It stands near the great pyramid; the lowest layer of it is of variegated Ethiopian stone.


2.127.3
2473
βασιλεῦσαι δὲ ἔλεγον Χεφρῆνα ἓξ καὶ πεντήκοντα ἔτεα .
Both of them stand on the same ridge, which is about a hundred feet high. Khephren, they said, reigned for fifty-six years.


2.128.1
2474
ταῦτα ἕξ τε καὶ ἑκατὸν λογίζονται ἔτεα , ἐν τοῖσι Αἰγυπτίοισί τε πᾶσαν εἶναι κακότητα καὶ τὰ ἱρὰ χρόνου τοσούτου κατακληισθέντα οὐκ ἀνοιχθῆναι .
Thus, they reckon that for a hundred and six years    Egypt    was in great misery and the temples so long shut were never opened.


2.128.1
2475
τούτους ὑπὸ μίσεος οὐ κάρτα θέλουσι Αἰγύπτιοι ὀνομάζειν , ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰς πυραμίδας καλέουσι ποιμένος Φιλίτιος , ὃς τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ἔνεμε κτήνεα κατὰ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία .
The people hate the memory of these two kings so much that they do not much wish to name them, and call the pyramids after the shepherd Philitis, who then pastured his flocks in this place .


2.129.1
2476
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον βασιλεῦσαι Αἰγύπτου Μυκερῖνον ἔλεγον Χέοπος παῖδα ·
The next king of    Egypt   , they said, was Kheops' son Mycerinus.


2.129.1
2477
τῷ τὰ μὲν τοῦ πατρὸς ἔργα ἀπαδεῖν , τὸν δὲ τά τε ἱρὰ ἀνοῖξαι καὶ τὸν λεὼν τετρυμένον ἐς τὸ ἔσχατον κακοῦ ἀνεῖναι πρὸς ἔργα τε καὶ θυσίας , δίκας δέ σφι πάντων βασιλέων δικαιότατα κρίνειν .
Disliking his father's doings, he opened the temples and let the people, ground down to the depth of misery, go to their business and their sacrifices; and he was the most just judge among all the kings.


2.129.2
2478
κατὰ τοῦτο μέν νυν τὸ ἔργον ἁπάντων ὅσοι ἤδη βασιλέες ἐγένοντο Αἰγυπτίων αἰνέουσι μάλιστα τοῦτον .
This is why he is praised above all the rulers of    Egypt   ;


2.129.2
2479
τά τε ἄλλα γάρ μιν κρίνειν εὖ , καὶ δὴ καὶ τῷ ἐπιμεμφομένῳ ἐκ τῆς δίκης παρ’ ἑωυτοῦ διδόντα ἄλλα ἀποπιμπλάναι αὐτοῦ τὸν θυμόν .
for not only were his judgments just, but Mycerinus would give any who were not satisfied with the judgment a present out of his own estate to compensate him for his loss.


2.129.3
2480
ἐόντι δὲ ἠπίῳ τῷ Μυκερίνῳ κατὰ τοὺς πολιήτας καὶ ταῦτα ἐπιτηδεύοντι πρῶτον κακῶν ἄρξαι τὴν θυγατέρα ἀποθανοῦσαν αὐτοῦ , τὴν μοῦνόν οἱ εἶναι ἐν τοῖσι οἰκίοισι τέκνον .
Though mild toward his people and conducting himself as he did, yet he suffered calamities, the first of which was the death of his daughter, the only child of his household.


2.129.3
2481
τὸν δὲ ὑπεραλγήσαντά τε τῷ περιεπεπτώκεε πρήγματι , καὶ βουλόμενον περισσότερόν τι τῶν ἄλλων θάψαι τὴν θυγατέρα , ποιήσασθαι βοῦν ξυλίνην κοίλην , καὶ ἔπειτα καταχρυσώσαντά μιν ταύτην ἔσω ἐν αὐτῇ θάψαι ταύτην δὴ τὴν ἀποθανοῦσαν θυγατέρα .
Deeply grieved over this misfortune, he wanted to give her a burial somewhat more sumptuous than ordinary; he therefore made a hollow cow's image of gilded wood and placed the body of his dead daughter therein.


2.130.1
2482
αὕτη ὦν ἡ βοῦς γῇ οὐκ ἐκρύφθη , ἀλλ’ ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἦν φανερή , ἐν Σάι μὲν πόλι ἐοῦσα , κειμένη δὲ ἐν τοῖσι βασιληίοισι ἐν οἰκήματι ἠσκημένῳ ·
This cow was not buried in the earth but was to be seen even in my time, in the town of Saïs, where it stood in a furnished room of the palace;


2.130.1
2483
θυμιήματα δὲ παρ’ αὐτῇ παντοῖα καταγίζουσι ἀνὰ πᾶσαν ἡμέρην , νύκτα δὲ ἑκάστην πάννυχος λύχνος παρακαίεται .
incense of all kinds is offered daily before it, and a lamp burns by it all through every night.


2.130.2
2484
ἀγχοῦ δὲ τῆς βοὸς ταύτης ἐν ἄλλῳ οἰκήματι εἰκόνες τῶν παλλακέων τῶν Μυκερίνου ἑστᾶσι , ὡς ἔλεγον οἱ ἐν Σάι πόλι ἱρέες ·
Near this cow in another chamber statues of Mycerinus' concubines stand, so the priests of Saïs said;


2.130.2
2485
ἑστᾶσι μὲν γὰρ ξύλιναι κολοσσοί , ἐοῦσαι ἀριθμὸν ὡς εἴκοσι μάλιστά κῃ , γυμναὶ ἐργασμέναι ·
and in fact there are about twenty colossal wooden figures there, made like naked women;


2.130.2
2486
αἵτινες μέντοι εἰσί , οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν πλὴν ἢ τὰ λεγόμενα .
but except what I was told, I cannot tell who these are.


2.131.1
2487
οἳ δὲ τινὲς λέγουσι περὶ τῆς βοὸς ταύτης καὶ τῶν κολοσσῶν τόνδε τὸν λόγον , ὡς Μυκερῖνος ἠράσθη τῆς ἑωυτοῦ θυγατρὸς καὶ ἔπειτα ἐμίγη οἱ ἀεκούσῃ ·
But some tell the following story about the cow and the statues: that Mycerinus conceived a passion for his own daughter and then had intercourse with her against her will;


2.131.2
2488
μετὰ δὲ λέγουσι ὡς ἡ παῖς ἀπήγξατο ὑπὸ ἄχεος , ὁ δέ μιν ἔθαψε ἐν τῇ βοῒ ταύτῃ , ἡ δὲ μήτηρ αὐτῆς τῶν ἀμφιπόλων τῶν προδουσέων τὴν θυγατέρα τῷ πατρὶ ἀπέταμε τὰς χεῖρας , καὶ νῦν τὰς εἰκόνας αὐτέων εἶναι πεπονθυίας τά περ αἱ ζωαὶ ἔπαθον .
and they say that afterwards the girl strangled herself for grief, and that he buried her in this cow, but that her mother cut off the hands of the attendants who had betrayed the daughter to her father, and that now their statues are in the same condition as the living women were.


2.131.3
2489
ταῦτα δὲ λέγουσι φλυηρέοντες , ὡς ἐγὼ δοκέω , τά τε ἄλλα καὶ δὴ καὶ τὰ περὶ τὰς χεῖρας τῶν κολοσσῶν ·
But this I believe to be a silly story, especially about the hands of the figures.


2.131.3
2490
ταύτας γὰρ ὦν καὶ ἡμεῖς ὡρῶμεν ὅτι ὑπὸ χρόνου τὰς χεῖρας ἀποβεβλήκασι , αἳ ἐν ποσὶ αὐτέων ἐφαίνοντο ἐοῦσαι ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμέ .
For in fact we ourselves saw that the hands have fallen off through age, and were lying at their feet even in my day.


2.132.1
2491
ἡ δὲ βοῦς τὰ μὲν ἄλλα κατακέκρυπται φοινικέῳ εἵματι , τὸν αὐχένα δὲ καὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν φαίνει κεχρυσωμένα παχέι κάρτα χρυσῷ ·
As for the cow, it is covered with a purple robe, only the head and neck exposed, encrusted with a very thick layer of gold.


2.132.1
2492
μεταξὺ δὲ τῶν κερέων ὁ τοῦ ἡλίου κύκλος μεμιμημένος ἔπεστι χρύσεος .
Between the horns is the golden figure of the sun's orb.


2.132.2
2493
ἔστι δὲ ἡ βοῦς οὐκ ὀρθὴ ἀλλ’ ἐν γούνασι κειμένη , μέγαθος δὲ ὅση περ μεγάλη βοῦς ζωή .
It does not stand, but kneels; it is as big as a live cow of great size.


2.132.2
2494
ἐκφέρεται δὲ ἐκ τοῦ οἰκήματος ἀνὰ πάντα ἔτεα , ἐπεὰν τύπτωνται Αἰγύπτιοι τὸν οὐκ ὀνομαζόμενον θεὸν ὑπ’ ἐμεῦ ἐπὶ τοιούτῳ πρήγματι ·
This image is carried out of the chamber once every year, whenever the Egyptians mourn the god whose name I omit in speaking of these matters:


2.132.3
2495
τότε ὦν καὶ τὴν βοῦν ἐκφέρουσι ἐς τὸ φῶς ·
then the cow is brought out into the light;


2.132.3
2496
φασὶ γὰρ αὐτὴν δεηθῆναι τοῦ πατρὸς Μυκερίνου ἀποθνήσκουσαν ἐν τῷ ἐνιαυτῷ ἅπαξ μιν τὸν ἥλιον κατιδεῖν .
for they say that before she died she asked her father, Mycerinus, that she see the sun once a year.


2.133.1
2497
μετὰ δὲ τῆς θυγατρὸς τὸ πάθος δεύτερα τούτῳ τῷ βασιλέι τάδε γενέσθαι ·
After what happened to his daughter, the following happened next to this king:


2.133.1
2498
ἐλθεῖν οἱ μαντήιον ἐκ Βουτοῦς πόλιος ὡς μέλλοι ἓξ ἔτεα μοῦνον βιοὺς τῷ ἑβδόμῳ τελευτήσειν .
an oracle came to him from the city of Buto, announcing that he had just six years to live and was to die in the seventh.


2.133.2
2499
τὸν δὲ δεινὸν ποιησάμενον πέμψαι ἐς τὸ μαντήιον τῷ θεῷ ὀνείδισμα , ἀντιμεμφόμενον ὅτι ὁ μὲν αὐτοῦ πατὴρ καὶ πάτρως , ἀποκληίσαντες τὰ ἱρὰ καὶ θεῶν οὐ μεμνημένοι ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους φθείροντες , ἐβίωσαν χρόνον ἐπὶ πολλόν , αὐτὸς δ’ εὐσεβὴς ἐὼν μέλλοι ταχέως οὕτω τελευτήσειν .
The king took this badly, and sent back to the oracle a message of reproach, blaming the god that his father and his uncle, though they had shut up the temples, and disregarded the gods, and destroyed men, had lived for a long time, but that he who was pious was going to die so soon.


2.133.3
2500
ἐκ δὲ τοῦ χρηστηρίου αὐτῷ δεύτερα ἐλθεῖν λέγοντα τούτων εἵνεκα καὶ συνταχύνειν αὐτὸν τὸν βίον ·
But a second oracle came announcing that for this very reason his life was hastening to a close:


2.133.3
2501
οὐ γὰρ ποιῆσαί μιν τὸ χρεὸν ἦν ποιέειν ·
he had done what was contrary to fate;


2.133.3
2502
δεῖν γὰρ Αἴγυπτον κακοῦσθαι ἐπ’ ἔτεα πεντήκοντά τε καὶ ἑκατόν , καὶ τοὺς μὲν δύο τοὺς πρὸ ἐκείνου γενομένους βασιλέας μαθεῖν τοῦτο , κεῖνον δὲ οὔ .
Egypt should have been afflicted for a hundred and fifty years, and the two kings before him knew this, but not he.


2.133.4
2503
ταῦτα ἀκούσαντα τὸν Μυκερῖνον , ὡς κατακεκριμένων ἤδη οἱ τούτων , λύχνα ποιησάμενον πολλά , ὅκως γίνοιτο νύξ , ἀνάψαντα αὐτὰ πίνειν τε καὶ εὐπαθέειν , οὔτε ἡμέρης οὔτε νυκτὸς ἀνιέντα , ἔς τε τὰ ἕλεα καὶ τὰ ἄλσεα πλανώμενον καὶ ἵνα πυνθάνοιτο εἶναι ἐνηβητήρια ἐπιτηδεότατα .
Hearing this, Mycerinus knew that his doom was fixed. Therefore, he had many lamps made, and would light these at nightfall and drink and enjoy himself, not letting up day or night, roaming to the marsh country and the groves and wherever he heard of the likeliest places of pleasure.


2.133.5
2504
ταῦτα δὲ ἐμηχανᾶτο θέλων τὸ μαντήιον ψευδόμενον ἀποδέξαι , ἵνα οἱ δυώδεκα ἔτεα ἀντὶ ἓξ ἐτέων γένηται , αἱ νύκτες ἡμέραι ποιεύμεναι .
This was his recourse, so that by turning night into day he might make his six years into twelve and so prove the oracle false.


2.134.1
2505
πυραμίδα δὲ οὗτος ἀπελίπετο πολλὸν ἐλάσσω τοῦ πατρός , εἴκοσι ποδῶν καταδέουσαν κῶλον ἕκαστον τριῶν πλέθρων , ἐούσης τετραγώνου , λίθου δὲ ἐς τὸ ἥμισυ Αἰθιοπικοῦ ·
This king, too, left a pyramid, but far smaller than his father's, each side twenty feet short of three hundred feet long, square at the base, and as much as half its height of Ethiopian stone.


2.134.1
2506
τὴν δὴ μετεξέτεροι φασὶ Ἑλλήνων Ῥοδώπιος ἑταίρης γυναικὸς εἶναι , οὐκ ὀρθῶς λέγοντες .
Some Greeks say that it was built by Rhodopis, the courtesan, but they are wrong;


2.134.2
2507
οὐδὲ ὦν οὐδὲ εἰδότες μοι φαίνονται λέγειν οὗτοι ἥτις ἦν ἡ Ῥοδῶπις ·
indeed, it is clear to me that they say this without even knowing who Rhodopis was


2.134.2
2508
οὐ γὰρ ἄν οἱ πυραμίδα ἀνέθεσαν ποιήσασθαι τοιαύτην , ἐς τὴν ταλάντων χιλιάδες ἀναρίθμητοι ὡς λόγῳ εἰπεῖν ἀναισίμωνται ·
(otherwise, they would never have credited her with the building of a pyramid on which what I may call an uncountable sum of money was spent),


2.134.2
2509
πρὸς δὲ ὅτι κατὰ Ἄμασιν βασιλεύοντα ἦν ἀκμάζουσα Ῥοδῶπις , ἀλλ’ οὐ κατὰ τοῦτον .
or that Rhodopis flourished in the reign of Amasis, not of Mycerinus;


2.134.3
2510
ἔτεσι γὰρ κάρτα πολλοῖσι ὕστερον τούτων τῶν βασιλέων τῶν τὰς πυραμίδας ταύτας ἦν λιπομένων Ῥοδῶπις , γενεὴν μὲν ἀπὸ Θρηίκης , δούλη δὲ ἦν Ἰάδμονος τοῦ Ἡφαιστοπόλιος ἀνδρὸς Σαμίου , σύνδουλος δὲ Αἰσώπου τοῦ λογοποιοῦ .
for very many years later than these kings who left the pyramids came Rhodopis, who was Thracian by birth, and a slave of Iadmon son of Hephaestopolis the Samian, and a fellow-slave of Aesop the story-writer.


2.134.3
2511
καὶ γὰρ οὗτος Ἰάδμονος ἐγένετο , ὡς διέδεξε τῇδε οὐκ ἥκιστα ·
For Aesop was owned by Iadmon, too, as the following made crystal clear:


2.134.4
2512
ἐπείτε γὰρ πολλάκις κηρυσσόντων Δελφῶν ἐκ θεοπροπίου ὃς βούλοιτο ποινὴν τῆς Αἰσώπου ψυχῆς ἀνελέσθαι , ἄλλος μὲν οὐδεὶς ἐφάνη , Ἰάδμονος δὲ παιδὸς παῖς ἄλλος Ἰάδμων ἀνείλετο .
when the Delphians, obeying an oracle, issued many proclamations summoning anyone who wanted it to accept compensation for the killing of Aesop, no one accepted it except the son of Iadmon's son, another Iadmon;


2.134.4
2513
οὕτω καὶ Αἴσωπος Ἰάδμονος ἐγένετο .
hence Aesop, too, was Iadmon's.


2.135.1
2514
Ῥοδῶπις δὲ ἐς Αἴγυπτον ἀπίκετο Ἐάνθεω τοῦ Σαμίου κομίσαντος , ἀπικομένη δὲ κατ’ ἐργασίην ἐλύθη χρημάτων μεγάλων ὑπὸ ἀνδρὸς Μυτιληναίου Χαράξου τοῦ Σκαμανδρωνύμου παιδός , ἀδελφεοῦ δὲ Σαπφοῦς τῆς μουσοποιοῦ .
Rhodopis came to    Egypt    to work, brought by Xanthes of    Samos   , but upon her arrival was freed for a lot of money by Kharaxus of    Mytilene   , son of Scamandronymus and brother of Sappho the poetess.


2.135.2
2515
οὕτω δὴ ἡ Ῥοδῶπις ἐλευθερώθη , καὶ κατέμεινέ τε ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ καὶ κάρτα ἐπαφρόδιτος γενομένη μεγάλα ἐκτήσατο χρήματα ὡς ἂν εἶναι Ῥοδώπι , ἀτὰρ οὐκ ὥς γε ἐς πυραμίδα τοιαύτην ἐξικέσθαι .
Thus Rhodopis lived as a free woman in    Egypt   , where, as she was very alluring, she acquired a lot of money — sufficient for such a Rhodopis, so to speak, but not for such a pyramid.


2.135.3
2516
τῆς γὰρ τὴν δεκάτην τῶν χρημάτων ἰδέσθαι ἐστὶ ἔτι καὶ ἐς τόδε παντὶ τῷ βουλομένῳ , οὐδὲν δεῖ μεγάλα οἱ χρήματα ἀναθεῖναι .
Seeing that to this day anyone who likes can calculate what one tenth of her worth was, she cannot be credited with great wealth.


2.135.3
2517
ἐπεθύμησε γὰρ Ῥοδῶπις μνημήιον ἑωυτῆς ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι καταλιπέσθαι , ποίημα ποιησαμένη τοῦτο τὸ μὴ τυγχάνοι ἄλλῳ ἐξευρημένον καὶ ἀνακείμενον ἐν ἱρῷ , τοῦτο ἀναθεῖναι ἐς Δελφοὺς μνημόσυνον ἑωυτῆς .
For Rhodopis desired to leave a memorial of herself in Greece, by having something made which no one else had thought of or dedicated in a temple and presenting this at Delphi to preserve her memory;


2.135.4
2518
τῆς ὦν δεκάτης τῶν χρημάτων ποιησαμένη ὀβελοὺς βουπόρους πολλοὺς σιδηρέους , ὅσον ἐνεχώρεε ἡ δεκάτη οἱ , ἀπέπεμπε ἐς Δελφούς ·
so she spent one tenth of her substance on the manufacture of a great number of iron beef spits, as many as the tenth would pay for, and sent them to Delphi;


2.135.4
2519
οἳ καὶ νῦν ἔτι συννενέαται ὄπισθε μὲν τοῦ βωμοῦ τὸν Χῖοι ἀνέθεσαν , ἀντίον δὲ αὐτοῦ τοῦ νηοῦ .
these lie in a heap to this day, behind the altar set up by the Chians and in front of the shrine itself.


2.135.5
2520
φιλέουσι δέ κως ἐν τῇ Ναυκράτι ἐπαφρόδιτοι γίνεσθαι αἱ ἑταῖραι .
The courtesans of Naucratis seem to be peculiarly alluring,


2.135.5
2521
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ αὕτη , τῆς πέρι λέγεται ὅδε ὁ λόγος , οὕτω δή τι κλεινὴ ἐγένετο ὡς καὶ οἱ πάντες Ἕλληνες Ῥοδώπιος τὸ οὔνομα ἐξέμαθον ·
for the woman of whom this story is told became so famous that every Greek knew the name of Rhodopis,


2.135.5
2522
τοῦτο δὲ ὕστερον ταύτης , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Ἀρχιδίκη , ἀοίδιμος ἀνὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἐγένετο , ἧσσον δὲ τῆς ἑτέρης περιλεσχήνευτος .
and later on a certain Archidice was the theme of song throughout Greece, although less celebrated than the other.


2.135.6
2523
Χάραξος δὲ ὡς λυσάμενος Ῥοδῶπιν ἀπενόστησε ἐς Μυτιλήνην , ἐν μέλεϊ Σαπφὼ πολλὰ κατεκερτόμησέ μιν .
Kharaxus, after giving Rhodopis her freedom, returned to Mytilene. He is bitterly attacked by Sappho in one of her poems.


2.135.6
2524
Ῥοδώπιος μέν νυν πέρι πέπαυμαι .
This is enough about Rhodopis.


2.136.1
2525
μετὰ δὲ Μυκερῖνον γενέσθαι Αἰγύπτου βασιλέα ἔλεγον οἱ ἱρέες Ἄσυχιν , τὸν τὰ πρὸς ἥλιον ἀνίσχοντα ποιῆσαι τῷ Ἡφαίστῳ προπύλαια , ἐόντα πολλῷ τε κάλλιστα καὶ πολλῷ μέγιστα ·
After Mycerinus, the priests said, Asukhis became king of Egypt. He built the eastern outer court of Hephaestus' temple; this is by far the finest and grandest of all the courts,


2.136.1
2526
ἔχει μὲν γὰρ καὶ τὰ πάντα προπύλαια τύπους τε ἐγγεγλυμμένους καὶ ἄλλην ὄψιν οἰκοδομημάτων μυρίην , ἐκεῖνα δὲ καὶ μακρῷ μάλιστα .
for while all have carved figures and innumerable felicities of architecture, this court has far more than any.


2.136.2
2527
ἐπὶ τούτου βασιλεύοντος ἔλεγον , ἀμιξίης ἐούσης πολλῆς χρημάτων , γενέσθαι νόμον Αἰγυπτίοισι , ἀποδεικνύντα ἐνέχυρον τοῦ πατρὸς τὸν νέκυν οὕτω λαμβάνειν τὸ χρέος ·
As not much money was in circulation during this king's reign, they told me, a law was made for the Egyptians allowing a man to borrow on the security of his father's corpse;


2.136.2
2528
προστεθῆναι δὲ ἔτι τούτῳ τῷ νόμῳ τόνδε , τὸν διδόντα τὸ χρέος καὶ ἁπάσης κρατέειν τῆς τοῦ λαμβάνοντος θήκης , τῷ δὲ ὑποτιθέντι τοῦτο τὸ ἐνέχυρον τήνδε ἐπεῖναι ζημίην μὴ βουλομένῳ ἀποδοῦναι τὸ χρέος , μήτε αὐτῷ ἐκείνῳ τελευτήσαντι εἶναι ταφῆς κυρῆσαι μήτ’ ἐν ἐκείνῳ τῷ πατρωίῳ τάφῳ μήτ’ ἐν ἄλλῳ μηδενί , μήτε ἄλλον μηδένα τῶν ἑωυτοῦ ἀπογενόμενον θάψαι .
and the law also provided that the lender become master of the entire burial-vault of the borrower, and that the penalty for one giving this security, should he fail to repay the loan, was that he was not to be buried at his death either in that tomb of his fathers or in any other, nor was he to bury any relative of his there.


2.136.3
2529
ὑπερβαλέσθαι δὲ βουλόμενον τοῦτον τὸν βασιλέα τοὺς πρότερον ἑωυτοῦ βασιλέας γενομένους Αἰγύπτου μνημόσυνον πυραμίδα λιπέσθαι ἐκ πλίνθων ποιήσαντα , ἐν τῇ γράμματα ἐν λίθῳ ἐγκεκολαμμένα τάδε λέγοντα ἐστί .
Furthermore, in his desire to excel all who ruled    Egypt    before him, this king left a pyramid of brick to commemorate his name, on which is this writing, cut on a stone:


2.136.4
2530
" μή με κατονοσθῇς πρὸς τὰς λιθίνας πυραμίδας ·
"Do not think me less than pyramids of stone;


2.136.4
2531
προέχω γὰρ αὐτέων τοσοῦτον ὅσον ὁ Ζεὺς τῶν ἄλλων θεῶν .
for I excel them as much as Zeus does other gods.


2.136.4
2532
κοντῷ γὰρ ὑποτύπτοντες ἐς λίμνην , ὅ τι πρόσσχοιτο τοῦ πηλοῦ τῷ κοντῷ , τοῦτο συλλέγοντες πλίνθους εἴρυσαν καί με τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ ἐξεποίησαν " .
for they stuck a pole down into a marsh and collected what mud clung to the pole, made bricks of it, and thus built me."


2.136.4
2533
τοῦτον μὲν τοσαῦτα ἀποδέξασθαι .
These were the acts of Asukhis.


2.137.1
2534
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον βασιλεῦσαι ἄνδρα τυφλὸν ἐξ Ἀνύσιος πόλιος , τῷ οὔνομα Ἄνυσιν εἶναι .
After him reigned a blind man called Anysis, of the town of that name.


2.137.1
2535
ἐπὶ τούτου βασιλεύοντος ἐλάσαι ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον χειρὶ πολλῇ Αἰθίοπάς τε καὶ Σαβακῶν τὸν Αἰθιόπων βασιλέα .
In his reign Egypt was invaded by Sabacos king of Ethiopia and a great army of Ethiopians.


2.137.2
2536
τὸν μὲν δὴ τυφλὸν τοῦτον οἴχεσθαι φεύγοντα ἐς τὰ ἕλεα , τὸν δὲ Αἰθίοπα βασιλεύειν Αἰγύπτου ἐπ’ ἔτεα πεντήκοντα , ἐν τοῖσι αὐτὸν τάδε ἀποδέξασθαι ·
The blind man fled to the marshes, and the Ethiopian ruled    Egypt    for fifty years, during which he distinguished himself for the following:


2.137.3
2537
ὅκως τῶν τις Αἰγυπτίων ἁμάρτοι τι , κτείνειν μὲν αὐτῶν οὐδένα ἐθέλειν , τὸν δὲ κατὰ μέγαθος τοῦ ἀδικήματος ἑκάστῳ δικάζειν ἐπιτάσσοντα χώματα χοῦν πρὸς τῇ ἑωυτῶν πόλι , ὅθεν ἕκαστος ἦν τῶν ἀδικεόντων .
he would never put to death any Egyptian wrongdoer but sentenced all, according to the severity of their offenses, to raise embankments in their native towns.


2.137.3
2538
καὶ οὕτω ἔτι αἱ πόλιες ἐγένοντο ὑψηλότεραι ·
Thus the towns came to stand yet higher than before;


2.137.4
2539
τὸ μὲν γὰρ πρῶτον ἐχώσθησαν ὑπὸ τῶν τὰς διώρυχας ὀρυξάντων ἐπὶ Σεσώστριος βασιλέος , δεύτερα δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ Αἰθίοπος καὶ κάρτα ὑψηλαὶ ἐγένοντο .
for after first being built on embankments made by the excavators of the canals in the reign of Sesostris, they were yet further raised in the reign of the Ethiopian.


2.137.5
2540
ὑψηλέων δὲ καὶ ἑτερέων γενομενέων ἐν τῇ Αἰγύπτῳ πολίων , ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέει , μάλιστα ἡ ἐν Βουβάστιπόλις ἐξεχώσθη , ἐν τῇ καὶ ἱρόν ἐστι Βουβάστιος ἀξιαπηγητότατον ·
Of the towns in Egypt that were raised, in my opinion, Bubastis is especially prominent, where there is also a temple of Bubastis, a building most worthy of note.


2.137.5
2541
μέζω μὲν γὰρ ἄλλα καὶ πολυδαπανώτερα ἐστὶ ἱρά , ἡδονὴ δὲ ἰδέσθαι οὐδὲν τούτου μᾶλλον .
Other temples are greater and more costly, but none more pleasing to the eye than this.


2.137.5
2542
ἡ δὲ Βούβαστις κατὰ Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν ἐστὶ Ἄρτεμις .
Bubastis is, in the Greek language, Artemis.


2.138.1
2543
τὸ δ’ ἱρὸν αὐτῆς ὧδε ἔχει .
Her temple is of this description:


2.138.1
2544
πλὴν τῆς ἐσόδου τὸ ἄλλο νῆσος ἐστί ·
except for the entrance, it stands on an island;


2.138.1
2545
ἐκ γὰρ τοῦ Νείλου διώρυχες ἐσέχουσι οὐ συμμίσγουσαι ἀλλήλῃσι , ἀλλ’ ἄχρι τῆς ἐσόδου τοῦ ἱροῦ ἑκατέρη ἐσέχει , ἣ μὲν τῇ περιρρέουσα ἣ δὲ τῇ , εὖρος ἐοῦσα ἑκατέρη ἑκατὸν ποδῶν , δένδρεσι κατάσκιος .
for two channels approach it from the Nile without mixing with one another, running as far as the entryway of the temple, the one and the other flowing around it, each a hundred feet wide and shaded by trees.


2.138.2
2546
τὰ δὲ προπύλαια ὕψος μὲν δέκα ὀργυιέων ἐστί , τύποισι δὲ ἑξαπήχεσι ἐσκευάδαται ἀξίοισι λόγου .
The outer court is sixty feet high, adorned with notable figures ten feet high.


2.138.2
2547
ἐὸν δ’ ἐν μέσῃ τῇ πόλι τὸ ἱρὸν κατορᾶται πάντοθεν περιιόντι ·
The whole circumference of the city commands a view down into the temple in its midst;


2.138.2
2548
ἅτε γὰρ τῆς πόλιος μὲν ἐκκεχωσμένης ὑψοῦ , τοῦ δ’ ἱροῦ οὐ κεκινημένου ὡς ἀρχῆθεν ἐποιήθη , ἔσοπτον ἐστί .
for the city's level has been raised, but that of the temple has been left as it was from the first, so that it can be seen into from above.


2.138.3
2549
περιθέει δὲ αὐτὸ αἱμασιὴ ἐγγεγλυμμένη τύποισι , ἔστι δὲ ἔσωθεν ἄλσος δενδρέων μεγίστων πεφυτευμένον περὶ νηὸν μέγαν , ἐν τῷ δὴ τ- ἄγαλμα ἔνι ·
A stone wall, cut with figures, runs around it;


2.138.3
2550
εὖρος δὲ καὶ μῆκος τοῦ ἱροῦ πάντῃ σταδίου ἐστί .
within is a grove of very tall trees growing around a great shrine where the image of the goddess is; the temple is a square, each side measuring an eighth of a mile.


2.138.4
2551
κατὰ μὲν δὴ τὴν ἔσοδον ἐστρωμένη ἐστὶ ὁδὸς λίθου ἐπὶ σταδίους τρεῖς μάλιστά κῃ , διὰ τῆς ἀγορῆς φέρουσα ἐς τὸ πρὸς ἠῶ , εὖρος δὲ ὡς τεσσέρων πλέθρων ·
A road, paved with stone, about three eighths of a mile long leads to the entrance, running eastward through the marketplace, towards the temple of Hermes;


2.138.4
2552
τῇ δὲ καὶ τῇ τῆς ὁδοῦ δένδρεα οὐρανομήκεα πέφυκε ·
this road is about four hundred feet wide.


2.138.4
2553
φέρει δὲ ἐς Ἑρμέω ἱρόν .
It is bordered by trees reaching to heaven.


2.138.4
2554
τὸ μὲν δὴ ἱρὸν τοῦτο οὕτω ἔχει .
Such is this temple.


2.139.1
2555
τέλος δὲ τῆς ἀπαλλαγῆς τοῦ Αἰθίοπος ὧδε ἔλεγον γενέσθαι ·
Now the departure of the Ethiopian (they said) came about in this way.


2.139.1
2556
ὄψιν ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ τοιήνδε ἰδόντα αὐτὸν οἴχεσθαι φεύγοντα ·
After seeing in a dream one who stood over him and urged him to gather together all the Priests in Egypt and cut them in half,


2.139.1
2557
ἐδόκέε οἱ ἄνδρα ἐπιστάντα συμβουλεύειν τοὺς ἱρέας τοὺς ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ συλλέξαντα πάντας μέσους διαταμεῖν .
he fled from the country.


2.139.2
2558
ἰδόντα δὲ τὴν ὄψιν ταύτην λέγειν αὐτὸν ὡς πρόφασίν οἱ δοκέοι ταύτην τοὺς θεοὺς προδεικνύναι , ἵνα ἀσεβήσας περὶ τὰ ἱρὰ κακόν τι πρὸς θεῶν ἢ πρὸς ἀνθρώπων λάβοι ·
Seeing this vision, he said, he supposed it to be a manifestation sent to him by the gods, so that he might commit sacrilege and so be punished by gods or men;


2.139.2
2559
οὔκων ποιήσειν ταῦτα , ἀλλὰ γάρ οἱ ἐξεληλυθέναι τὸν χρόνον , ὁκόσον κεχρῆσθαι ἄρξαντα Αἰγύπτου ἐκχωρήσειν .
he would not (he said) do so, but otherwise, for the time foretold for his rule over Egypt was now fulfilled, after which he was to depart:


2.139.3
2560
ἐν γὰρ τῇ Αἰθιοπίῃ ἐόντι αὐτῷ τὰ μαντήια , τοῖσι χρέωνται Αἰθίοπες , ἀνεῖλε ὡς δέοι αὐτὸν Αἰγύπτου βασιλεῦσαι ἔτεα πεντήκοντα .
for when he was still in Ethiopia, the oracles that are consulted by the people of that country told him that he was fated to reign fifty years over Egypt.


2.139.3
2561
ὡς ὦν ὁ χρόνος οὗτος ἐξήιε καὶ αὐτὸν ἡ ὄψις τοῦ ἐνυπνίου ἐπετάρασσε , ἑκὼν ἀπαλλάσσετο ἐκ τῆς Αἰγύπτου ὁ Σαβακῶς .
Seeing that this time was now completed and that he was troubled by what he saw in his dream, Sabacos departed from Egypt of his own volition.


2.140.1
2562
ὡς δ’ ἄρα οἴχεσθαι τὸν Αἰθίοπα ἐξ Αἰγύπτου , αὖτις τὸν τυφλὸν ἄρχειν ἐκ τῶν ἑλέων ἀπικόμενον , ἔνθα πεντήκοντα ἔτεα νῆσον χώσας σποδῷ τε καὶ γῇ οἴκεε .
When the Ethiopian left Egypt, the blind man (it is said) was king once more, returning from the marshes where he had lived for fifty years on an island that he built of ashes and earth;


2.140.1
2563
ὅκως γάρ οἱ φοιτᾶν σῖτον ἄγοντας Αἰγυπτίων , ὡς ἑκάστοισι προστετάχθαι , σιγῇ τοῦ Αἰθίοπος , ἐς τὴν δωρεὴν κελεύειν σφέας καὶ σποδὸν κομίζειν .
for the Egyptians who were to bring him food without the Ethiopian's knowledge were instructed by the king to bring ashes whenever they came, to add to their gift.


2.140.2
2564
ταύτην τὴν νῆσον οὐδεὶς πρότερον ἐδυνάσθη Ἀμυρταίου ἐξευρεῖν , ἀλλὰ ἔτεα ἐπὶ πλέω ἢ ἑπτακόσια οὐκ οἷοί τε ἦσαν αὐτὴν ἀνευρεῖν οἱ πρότεροι γενόμενοι βασιλέες Ἀμυρταίου .
This island was never discovered before the time of Amyrtaeus; all the kings before him sought it in vain for more than seven hundred years.


2.140.2
2565
οὔνομα δὲ ταύτῃ τῇ νήσῳ Ἐλβώ , μέγαθος δ’ ἐστὶ πάντῃ δέκα σταδίων .
The name of it is Elbo, and it is over a mile long and of an equal breadth.


2.141.1
2566
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον βασιλεῦσαι τὸν ἱρέα τοῦ Ἡφαίστου , τῷ οὔνομα εἶναι Σεθῶν ·
The next king was the priest of Hephaestus whose name was Sethos.


2.141.1
2567
τὸν ἐν ἀλογίῃσι ἔχειν παραχρησάμενον τῶν μαχίμων Αἰγυπτίων ὡς οὐδὲν δεησόμενον αὐτῶν , ἄλλα τε δὴ ἄτιμα ποιεῦντα ἐς αὐτούς , καί σφεας ἀπελέσθαι τὰς ἀρούρας ·
He despised and had no regard for the warrior Egyptians, thinking he would never need them;


2.141.1
2568
τοῖσι ἐπὶ τῶν προτέρων βασιλέων δεδόσθαι ἐξαιρέτους ἑκάστῳ δυώδεκα ἀρούρας .
besides otherwise dishonoring them, he took away the chosen lands which had been given to them, twelve fields to each man, in the reign of former kings.


2.141.2
2569
μετὰ δὲ ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον ἐλαύνειν στρατὸν μέγαν Σαναχάριβον βασιλέα Ἀραβίων τε καὶ Ἀσσυρίων ·
So when presently king Sanacharib came against Egypt, with a great force of Arabians and Assyrians,


2.141.2
2570
οὔκων δὴ ἐθέλειν τοὺς μαχίμους τῶν Αἰγυπτίων βοηθέειν .
the warrior Egyptians would not march against him.


2.141.3
2571
τὸν δ’ ἱρέα ἐς ἀπορίην ἀπειλημένον ἐσελθόντα ἐς τὸ μέγαρον πρὸς τ- ἄγαλμα ἀποδύρεσθαι οἷα κινδυνεύει παθεῖν .
The priest, in this quandary, went into the temple shrine and there before the god's image bitterly lamented over what he expected to suffer.


2.141.3
2572
ὀλοφυρόμενον δ’ ἄρα μιν ἐπελθεῖν ὕπνον , καί οἱ δόξαι ἐν τῇ ὄψι ἐπιστάντα τὸν θεὸν θαρσύνειν ὡς οὐδὲν πείσεται ἄχαρι ἀντιάζων τὸν Ἀραβίων στρατόν ·
Sleep came on him while he was lamenting, and it seemed to him the god stood over him and told him to take heart, that he would come to no harm encountering the power of Arabia:


2.141.3
2573
αὐτὸς γάρ οἱ πέμψειν τιμωρούς .
“I shall send you champions,” said the god.


2.141.4
2574
τούτοισι δή μιν πίσυνον τοῖσι ἐνυπνίοισι , παραλαβόντα Αἰγυπτίων τοὺς βουλομένους οἱ ἕπεσθαι , στρατοπεδεύσασθαι ἐν Πηλουσίῳ ·
So he trusted the vision, and together with those Egyptians who would follow him camped at Pelusium.


2.141.4
2575
ταύτῃ γὰρ εἰσὶ αἱ ἐσβολαί ·
Here the road comes into Egypt;


2.141.4
2576
ἕπεσθαι δέ οἱ τῶν μαχίμων μὲν οὐδένα ἀνδρῶν , καπήλους δὲ καὶ χειρώνακτας καὶ ἀγοραίους ἀνθρώπους .
and none of the warriors would go with him, but only merchants and craftsmen and traders.


2.141.5
2577
ἐνθαῦτα ἀπικομένοισι τοῖσι ἐναντίοισι αὐτοῖσι ἐπιχυθέντας νυκτὸς μῦς ἀρουραίους κατὰ μὲν φαγεῖν τοὺς φαρετρεῶνας αὐτῶν κατὰ δὲ τὰ τόξα , πρὸς δὲ τῶν ἀσπίδων τὰ ὄχανα , ὥστε τῇ ὑστεραίῃ φευγόντων σφέων γυμνῶν πεσεῖν πολλούς .
Their enemies came there, too, and during the night were overrun by a horde of field mice that gnawed quivers and bows and the handles of shields, with the result that many were killed fleeing unarmed the next day.


2.141.6
2578
καὶ νῦν οὗτος ὁ βασιλεὺς ἕστηκε ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ τοῦ Ἡφαίστου λίθινος , ἔχων ἐπὶ τῆς χειρὸς μῦν , λέγων διὰ γραμμάτων τάδε ·
And to this day a stone statue of the Egyptian king stands in Hephaestus' temple, with a mouse in his hand, and an inscription to this effect:


2.141.6
2579
" ἐς ἐμέ τις ὁρέων εὐσεβὴς ἔστω " .
“Look at me, and believe.”


2.142.1
2580
ἐς μὲν τοσόνδε τοῦ λόγου Αἰγύπτιοί τε καὶ οἱ ἱρέες ἔλεγον , ἀποδεικνύντες ἀπὸ τοῦ πρώτου βασιλέος ἐς τοῦ Ἡφαίστου τὸν ἱρέα τοῦτον τὸν τελευταῖον βασιλεύσαντα μίαν τε καὶ τεσσεράκοντα καὶ τριηκοσίας γενεὰς ἀνθρώπων γενομένας , καὶ ἐν ταύτῃσι ἀρχιερέας καὶ βασιλέας ἑκατέρους τοσούτους γενομένους .
Thus far went the record given by the Egyptians and their priests; and they showed me that the time from the first king to that priest of Hephaestus, who was the last, covered three hundred and forty-one generations, and that in this time this also had been the number of their kings, and of their high priests.


2.142.2
2581
καίτοι τριηκόσιαι μὲν ἀνδρῶν γενεαὶ δυνέαται μύρια ἔτεα ·
Now three hundred generations are ten thousand years,


2.142.2
2582
γενεαὶ γὰρ τρεῖς ἀνδρῶν ἑκατὸν ἔτεα ἐστί ·
three generations being equal to a hundred.


2.142.2
2583
μιῆς δὲ καὶ τεσσεράκοντα ἔτι τῶν ἐπιλοίπων γενεέων , αἳ ἐπῆσαν τῇσι τριηκοσίῃσι , ἐστὶ τεσσεράκοντα καὶ τριηκόσια καὶ χίλια ἔτεα .
And over and above the three hundred, the remaining forty-one cover thirteen hundred and forty years.


2.142.3
2584
οὕτω ἐν μυρίοισί τε ἔτεσι καὶ χιλίοισι καὶ τριηκοσίοισί τε καὶ τεσσεράκοντα ἔλεγον θεὸν ἀνθρωποειδέα οὐδένα γενέσθαι ·
Thus the whole period is eleven thousand three hundred and forty years;


2.142.3
2585
οὐ μέντοι οὐδὲ πρότερον οὐδὲ ὕστερον ἐν τοῖσι ὑπολοίποισι Αἰγύπτου βασιλεῦσι γενομένοισι ἔλεγον οὐδὲν τοιοῦτο .
in all of which time (they said) they had had no king who was a god in human form, nor had there been any such either before or after those years among the rest of the kings of Egypt.


2.142.4
2586
ἐν τοίνυν τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ τετράκις ἔλεγον ἐξ ἠθέων τὸν ἥλιον ἀνατεῖλαι ·
Four times in this period (so they told me) the sun rose contrary to experience;


2.142.4
2587
ἔνθα τε νῦν καταδύεται , ἐνθεῦτεν δὶς ἐπαντεῖλαι , καὶ ἔνθεν νῦν ἀνατέλλει , ἐνθαῦτα δὶς καταδῦναι .
twice he came up where he now goes down, and twice went down where he now comes up;


2.142.4
2588
καὶ οὐδὲν τῶν κατ’ Αἴγυπτον ὑπὸ ταῦτα ἑτεροιωθῆναι , οὔτε τὰ ἐκ τῆς γῆς οὔτε τὰ ἐκ τοῦ ποταμοῦ σφι γινόμενα , οὔτε τὰ ἀμφὶ νούσους οὔτε τὰ κατὰ τοὺς θανάτους .
yet Egypt at these times underwent no change, either in the produce of the river and the land, or in the matter of sickness and death.


2.143.1
2589
πρότερον δὲ Ἑκαταίῳ τῷ λογοποιῷ ἐν Θήβῃσι γενεηλογήσαντί τε ἑωυτὸν καὶ ἀναδήσαντι τὴν πατριὴν ἐς ἑκκαιδέκατον θεὸν ἐποίησαν οἱ ἱρέες τοῦ Διὸς οἷόν τι καὶ ἐμοὶ οὐ γενεηλογήσαντι ἐμεωυτόν ·
Hecataeus the historian was once at    Thebes    , where he made a genealogy for himself that had him descended from a god in the sixteenth generation. But the priests of Zeus did with him as they also did with me (who had not traced my own lineage).


2.143.2
2590
ἐσαγαγόντες ἐς τὸ μέγαρον ἔσω ἐὸν μέγα ἐξηρίθμεον δεικνύντες κολοσσοὺς ξυλίνους τοσούτους ὅσους περ εἶπον ·
They brought me into the great inner court of the temple and showed me wooden figures there which they counted to the total they had already given,


2.143.2
2591
ἀρχιερεὺς γὰρ ἕκαστος αὐτόθι ἱστᾷ ἐπὶ τῆς ἑωυτοῦ ζόης εἰκόνα ἑωυτοῦ ·
for every high priest sets up a statue of himself there during his lifetime;


2.143.3
2592
ἀριθμέοντες ὦν καὶ δεικνύντες οἱ ἱρέες ἐμοὶ ἀπεδείκνυσαν παῖδα πατρὸς ἑωυτῶν ἕκαστον ἐόντα , ἐκ τοῦ ἄγχιστα ἀποθανόντος τῆς εἰκόνος διεξιόντες διὰ πασέων , ἕως οὗ ἀπέδεξαν ἁπάσας αὐτάς .
pointing to these and counting, the priests showed me that each succeeded his father; they went through the whole line of figures, back to the earliest from that of the man who had most recently died.


2.143.4
2593
Ἑκαταίῳ δὲ γενεηλογήσαντι ἑωυτὸν καὶ ἀναδήσαντι ἐς ἑκκαιδέκατον θεὸν ἀντεγενεηλόγησαν ἐπὶ τῇ ἀριθμήσι , οὐ δεκόμενοι παρ’ αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ θεοῦ γενέσθαι ἄνθρωπον ·
Thus, when Hecataeus had traced his descent and claimed that his sixteenth forefather was a god,


2.143.4
2594
ἀντεγενεηλόγησαν δὲ ὧδε , φάμενοι ἕκαστον τῶν κολοσσῶν πίρωμιν ἐκ πιρώμιος γεγονέναι , ἐς ὃ τοὺς πέντε καὶ τεσσεράκοντα καὶ τριηκοσίους ἀπέδεξαν κολοσσούς πίρωμιν ἐπονομαζόμενον ,καὶ οὔτε ἐς θεὸν οὔτε ἐς ἥρωα ἀνέδησαν αὐτούς .
the priests too traced a line of descent according to the method of their counting; for they would not be persuaded by him that a man could be descended from a god; they traced descent through the whole line of three hundred and forty-five figures, not connecting it with any ancestral god or hero, but declaring each figure to be a “Piromis” the son of a “Piromis”;


2.143.4
2595
πίρωμις δὲ ἐστὶ κατὰ Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν καλὸς κ- ἀγαθός .
in Greek, one who is in all respects a good man.


2.144.1
2596
ἤδη ὦν τῶν αἱ εἰκόνες ἦσαν , τοιούτους ἀπεδείκνυσαν σφέας πάντας ἐόντας , θεῶν δὲ πολλὸν ἀπαλλαγμένους .
Thus they showed that all those whose statues stood there had been good men, but quite unlike gods.


2.144.2
2597
τὸ δὲ πρότερον τῶν ἀνδρῶν τούτων θεοὺς εἶναι τοὺς ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἄρχοντας , οὐκ ἐόντας ἅμα τοῖσι ἀνθρώποισι , καὶ τούτων αἰεὶ ἕνα τὸν κρατέοντα εἶναι ·
Before these men, they said, the rulers of Egypt were gods, but none had been contemporary with the human priests.


2.144.2
2598
ὕστατον δὲ αὐτῆς βασιλεῦσαι ὦρον τὸν Ὀσίριος παῖδα , τὸν Ἀπόλλωνα Ἕλληνες ὀνομάζουσι ·
Of these gods one or another had in succession been supreme; the last of them to rule the country was Osiris' son Horus, whom the Greeks call Apollo;


2.144.2
2599
τοῦτον καταπαύσαντα Τυφῶνα βασιλεῦσαι ὕστατον Αἰγύπτου .
he deposed Typhon, and was the last divine king of Egypt.


2.144.2
2600
Ὄσιρις δὲ ἐστὶ Διόνυσος κατὰ Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν .
Osiris is, in the Greek language, Dionysus.


2.145.1
2601
ἐν Ἕλλησι μέν νυν νεώτατοι τῶν θεῶν νομίζονται εἶναι Ἡρακλέης τε καὶ Διόνυσος καὶ Πάν , παρ’ Αἰγυπτίοισι δὲ Πὰν μὲν ἀρχαιότατος καὶ τῶν ὀκτὼ τῶν πρώτων λεγομένων θεῶν , Ἡρακλέης δὲ τῶν δευτέρων τῶν δυώδεκα λεγομένων εἶναι , Διόνυσος δὲ τῶν τρίτων , οἳ ἐκ τῶν δυώδεκα θεῶν ἐγένοντο .
Among the Greeks, Heracles, Dionysus, and Pan are held to be the youngest of the gods. But in    Egypt   , Pan is the most ancient of these and is one of the eight gods who are said to be the earliest of all; Heracles belongs to the second dynasty (that of the so-called twelve gods); and Dionysus to the third, which came after the twelve.


2.145.2
2602
Ἡρακλέι μὲν δὴ ὅσα αὐτοὶ Αἰγύπτιοι φασὶ εἶναι ἔτεα ἐς Ἄμασιν βασιλέα , δεδήλωταί μοι πρόσθε ·
How many years there were between Heracles and the reign of Amasis, I have already shown;


2.145.2
2603
Πανὶ δὲ ἔτι τούτων πλέονα λέγεται εἶναι , Διονύσῳ δ’ ἐλάχιστα τούτων , καὶ τούτῳ πεντακισχίλια καὶ μύρια λογίζονται εἶναι ἐς Ἄμασιν βασιλέα .
Pan is said to be earlier still; the years between Dionysus and Amasis are the fewest, and they are reckoned by the Egyptians at fifteen thousand.


2.145.3
2604
καὶ ταῦτα Αἰγύπτιοι ἀτρεκέως φασὶ .
The Egyptians claim to be sure of all this,


2.145.3
2605
ἐπίστασθαι , αἰεί τε λογιζόμενοι καὶ αἰεὶ ἀπογραφόμενοι τὰ ἔτεα .
since they have reckoned the years and chronicled them in writing.


2.145.4
2606
Διονύσῳ μέν νυν τῷ ἐκ Σεμέλης τῆς Κάδμου λεγομένῳ γενέσθαι κατὰ ἑξακόσια ἔτεα καὶ χίλια μάλιστα ἐστὶ ἐς ἐμέ , Ἡρακλέι δὲ τῷ Ἀλκμήνης κατὰ εἰνακόσια ἔτεα ·
Now the Dionysus who was called the son of Semele, daughter of Cadmus, was about sixteen hundred years before my time,


2.145.4
2607
Πανὶ δὲ τῷ ἐκ Πηνελόπης ( ἐκ ταύτης γὰρ καὶ Ἑρμέω λέγεται γενέσθαι ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων ὁ Πάν ) ἐλάσσω ἔτεα ἐστὶ τῶν Τρωικῶν , κατὰ ὀκτακόσια μάλιστα ἐς ἐμέ .
and Heracles son of Alcmene about nine hundred years; and Pan the son of Penelope (for according to the Greeks Penelope and Hermes were the parents of Pan) was about eight hundred years before me, and thus of a later date than the Trojan war.


2.146.1
2608
τούτων ὦν ἀμφοτέρων πάρεστι χρᾶσθαι τοῖσί τις πείσεται λεγομένοισι μᾶλλον ·
With regard to these two, Pan and Dionysus, one may follow whatever story one thinks most credible;


2.146.1
2609
ἐμοὶ δ’ ὦν ἡ περὶ αὐτῶν γνώμη ἀποδέδεκται .
but I give my own opinion concerning them here.


2.146.1
2610
εἰ μὲν γὰρ φανεροί τε ἐγένοντο καὶ κατεγήρασαν καὶ οὗτοι ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι , κατά περ Ἡρακλέης ὁ ἐξ Ἀμφιτρύωνος γενόμενος , καὶ δὴ καὶ Διόνυσος ὁ ἐκ Σεμέλης καὶ Πὰν ὁ ἐκ Πηνελόπης γενόμενος , ἔφη ἄν τις καὶ τούτους ἄλλους ἄνδρας γενομένους ἔχειν τὰ ἐκείνων οὐνόματα τῶν προγεγονότων θεῶν .
Had Dionysus son of Semele and Pan son of Penelope appeared in Hellas and lived there to old age, like Heracles the son of Amphitryon, it might have been said that they too (like Heracles) were but men, named after the older Pan and Dionysus, the gods of antiquity;


2.146.2
2611
νῦν δὲ Διόνυσόν τε λέγουσι οἱ Ἕλληνες ὡς αὐτίκα γενόμενον ἐς τὸν μηρὸν ἐνερράψατο Ζεὺς καὶ ἤνεικε ἐς Νύσαν τὴν ὑπὲρ Αἰγύπτου ἐοῦσαν ἐν τῇ Αἰθιοπίῃ , καὶ Πανός γε πέρι οὐκ ἔχουσι εἰπεῖν ὅκῃ ἐτράπετο γενόμενος .
but as it is, the Greek story has it that no sooner was Dionysus born than Zeus sewed him up in his thigh and carried him away to Nysa in Ethiopia beyond Egypt;


2.146.2
2612
δῆλά μοι γέγονε ὅτι ὕστερον ἐπύθοντο οἱ Ἕλληνες τούτων τὰ οὐνόματα ἢ τὰ τῶν ἄλλων θεῶν ·
and as for Pan, the Greeks do not know what became of him after his birth.


2.146.2
2613
ἀπ’ οὗ δὲ ἐπύθοντο χρόνου , ἀπὸ τούτου γενεηλογέουσι αὐτῶν τὴν γένεσιν .
It is therefore plain to me that the Greeks learned the names of these two gods later than the names of all the others, and trace the birth of both to the time when they gained the knowledge.


2.147.1
2614
ταῦτα μέν νυν αὐτοὶ Αἰγύπτιοι λέγουσι ·
So far I have recorded what the Egyptians themselves say.


2.147.1
2615
ὅσα δὲ οἵ τε ἄλλοι ἄνθρωποι καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι λέγουσι ὁμολογέοντες τοῖσι ἄλλοισι κατὰ ταύτην τὴν χώρην γενέσθαι , ταῦτ’ ἤδη φράσω ·
I shall now relate what is recorded alike by Egyptians and foreigners.


2.147.1
2616
προσέσται δέ τι αὐτοῖσι καὶ τῆς ἐμῆς ὄψιος .
and I shall add something of what I myself have seen.


2.147.2
2617
ἐλευθερωθέντες Αἰγύπτιοι μετὰ τὸν ἱρέα τοῦ Ἡφαίστου βασιλεύσαντα , οὐδένα γὰρ χρόνον οἷοί τε ἦσαν ἄνευ βασιλέος διαιτᾶσθαι , ἐστήσαντο δυώδεκα βασιλέας , δυώδεκα μοίρας δασάμενοι Αἴγυπτον πᾶσαν .
After the reign of the priest of Hephaestus the Egyptians were made free. But they could never live without a king, so they divided    Egypt    into twelve districts and set up twelve kings.


2.147.3
2618
οὗτοι ἐπιγαμίας ποιησάμενοι ἐβασίλευον νόμοισι τοῖσιδε χρεώμενοι , μήτε καταιρέειν ἀλλήλους μήτε πλέον τι δίζησθαι ἔχειν τὸν ἕτερον τοῦ ἑτέρου , εἶναί τε φίλους τὰ μάλιστα .
These kings intermarried, and agreed to be close friends, no one deposing another or seeking to possess more than another.


2.147.4
2619
τῶνδε δὲ εἵνεκα τοὺς νόμους τούτους ἐποιέοντο , ἰσχυρῶς περιστέλλοντες ·
The reason for this agreement, which they scrupulously kept, was this:


2.147.4
2620
ἐκέχρηστό σφι κατ’ ἀρχὰς αὐτίκα ἐνισταμένοισι ἐς τὰς τυραννίδας τὸν χαλκέῃ φιάλῃ σπείσαντα αὐτῶν ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ τοῦ Ἡφαίστου , τοῦτον ἁπάσης βασιλεύσειν Αἰγύπτου ·
no sooner were they established in their districts than an oracle was given them that whichever of them poured a libation from a bronze vessel in the temple of Hephaestus


2.147.4
2621
ἐς γὰρ δὴ τὰ πάντα ἱρὰ συνελέγοντο .
(where, as in all the temples, they used to assemble) would be king of all Egypt.


2.148.1
2622
καὶ δή σφι μνημόσυνα ἔδοξε λιπέσθαι κοινῇ , δόξαν δέ σφι ἐποιήσαντο λαβύρινθον , ὀλίγον ὑπὲρ τῆς λίμνης τῆς Μοίριος κατὰ Κροκοδείλων καλεομένην πόλιν μάλιστά κῃ κείμενον ·
Moreover, they decided to preserve the memory of their names by a common memorial,


2.148.1
2623
τὸν ἐγὼ ἤδη εἶδον λόγου μέζω .
and so they made a labyrinth a little way beyond lake Moeris and near the place called the City of Crocodiles. I have seen it myself, and indeed words cannot describe it;


2.148.2
2624
εἰ γάρ τις τὰ ἐξ Ἑλλήνων τείχεά τε καὶ ἔργων ἀπόδεξιν συλλογίσαιτο , ἐλάσσονος πόνου τε ἂν καὶ δαπάνης φανείη ἐόντα τοῦ λαβυρίνθου τούτου .
if one were to collect the walls and evidence of other efforts of the Greeks,


2.148.2
2625
καίτοι ἀξιόλογός γε καὶ ὁ ἐν Ἐφέσῳ ἐστὶ νηὸς καὶ ὁ ἐν Σάμῳ .
the sum would not amount to the labor and cost of this labyrinth. And yet the temple at Ephesus and the one on Samos are noteworthy.


2.148.3
2626
ἦσαν μέν νυν καὶ αἱ πυραμίδες λόγου μέζονες , καὶ πολλῶν ἑκάστη αὐτέων Ἑλληνικῶν ἔργων καὶ μεγάλων ἀνταξίη , ὁ δὲ δὴ λαβύρινθος καὶ τὰς πυραμίδας ὑπερβάλλει ·
Though the pyramids beggar description and each one of them is a match for many great monuments built by Greeks, this maze surpasses even the pyramids.


2.148.4
2627
τοῦ γὰρ δυώδεκα μὲν εἰσὶ αὐλαὶ κατάστεγοι , ἀντίπυλοι ἀλλήλῃσι , ἓξ μὲν πρὸς βορέω ἓξ δὲ πρὸς νότον τετραμμέναι , συνεχέες ·
It has twelve roofed courts with doors facing each other: six face north and six south, in two continuous lines.


2.148.4
2628
τοῖχος δὲ ἔξωθεν ὁ αὐτός σφεας περιέργει .
All are within one outer wall.


2.148.4
2629
οἰκήματα δ’ ἔνεστι διπλᾶ , τὰ μὲν ὑπόγαια τὰ δὲ μετέωρα ἐπ’ ἐκείνοισι , τρισχίλια ἀριθμόν , πεντακοσίων καὶ χιλίων ἑκάτερα .
There are also double sets of chambers, three thousand altogether, fifteen hundred above and the same number under ground.


2.148.5
2630
τὰ μέν νυν μετέωρα τῶν οἰκημάτων αὐτοί τε ὡρῶμεν διεξιόντες καὶ αὐτοὶ θεησάμενοι λέγομεν , τὰ δὲ αὐτῶν ὑπόγαια λόγοισι ἐπυνθανόμεθα ·
We ourselves viewed those that are above ground, and speak of what we have seen,


2.148.5
2631
οἱ γὰρ ἐπεστεῶτες τῶν Αἰγυπτίων δεικνύναι αὐτὰ οὐδαμῶς ἤθελον , φάμενοι θήκας αὐτόθι εἶναι τῶν τε ἀρχὴν τὸν λαβύρινθον τοῦτον οἰκοδομησαμένων βασιλέων καὶ τῶν ἱρῶν κροκοδείλων .
but we learned through conversation about the underground chambers; the Egyptian caretakers would by no means show them, as they were, they said, the burial vaults of the kings who first built this labyrinth, and of the sacred crocodiles.


2.148.6
2632
οὕτω τῶν μὲν κάτω πέρι οἰκημάτων ἀκοῇ παραλαβόντες λέγομεν , τὰ δὲ ἄνω μέζονα ἀνθρωπηίων ἔργων αὐτοὶ ὡρῶμεν ·
Thus we can only speak from hearsay of the lower chambers;


2.148.6
2633
αἵ τε γὰρ διέξοδοι διὰ τῶν στεγέων καὶ οἱ ἑλιγμοὶ διὰ τῶν αὐλέων ἐόντες ποικιλώτατοι θῶμα μυρίον παρείχοντο ἐξ αὐλῆς τε ἐς τὰ οἰκήματα διεξιοῦσι καὶ ἐκ τῶν οἰκημάτων ἐς παστάδας , ἐς στέγας τε ἄλλας ἐκ τῶν παστάδων καὶ ἐς αὐλὰς ἄλλας ἐκ τῶν οἰκημάτων .
the upper we saw for ourselves, and they are creations greater than human. The exits of the chambers and the mazy passages hither and thither through the courts were an unending marvel to us as we passed from court to apartment and from apartment to colonnade, from colonnades again to more chambers and then into yet more courts.


2.148.7
2634
ὀροφὴ δὲ πάντων τούτων λιθίνη κατά περ οἱ τοῖχοι , οἱ δὲ τοῖχοι τύπων ἐγγεγλυμμένων πλέοι , αὐλὴ δὲ ἑκάστη περίστυλος λίθου λευκοῦ ἁρμοσμένου τὰ μάλιστα .
Over all this is a roof, made of stone like the walls, and the walls are covered with cut figures, and every court is set around with pillars of white stone very precisely fitted together.


2.148.7
2635
τῆς δὲ γωνίης τελευτῶντος τοῦ λαβυρίνθου ἔχεται πυραμὶς τεσσερακοντόργυιος , ἐν τῇ ζῷα μεγάλα ἐγγέγλυπται ·
Near the corner where the labyrinth ends stands a pyramid two hundred and forty feet high, on which great figures are cut.


2.148.7
2636
ὁδὸς δ’ ἐς αὐτὴν ὑπὸ γῆν πεποίηται .
A passage to this has been made underground.


2.149.1
2637
τοῦ δὲ λαβυρίνθου τούτου ἐόντος τοιούτου θῶμα ἔτι μέζον παρέχεται ἡ Μοίριος καλεομένη λίμνη , παρ’ ἣν ὁ λαβύρινθος οὗτος οἰκοδόμηται ·
Such is this labyrinth; and still more marvellous is lake Moeris, on which it stands.


2.149.1
2638
τῆς τὸ περίμετρον τῆς περιόδου εἰσὶ στάδιοι ἑξακόσιοι καὶ τρισχίλιοι , σχοίνων ἑξήκοντα ἐόντων , ἴσοι καὶ αὐτῆς Αἰγύπτου τὸ παρὰ θάλασσαν .
This lake has a circumference of four hundred and fifty miles, or sixty schoeni: as much as the whole seaboard of Egypt.


2.149.1
2639
κεῖται δὲ μακρὴ ἡ λίμνη πρὸς βορέην τε καὶ νότον , ἐοῦσα βάθος , τῇ βαθυτάτη αὐτὴ ἑωυτῆς , πεντηκοντόργυιος .
Its length is from north to south; the deepest part has a depth of fifty fathoms.


2.149.2
2640
ὅτι δὲ χειροποίητος ἐστὶ καὶ ὀρυκτή , αὐτὴ δηλοῖ ·
That it has been dug out and made by men's hands the lake shows for itself;


2.149.2
2641
ἐν γὰρ μέσῃ τῇ λίμνῃ μάλιστά κῃ ἑστᾶσι δύο πυραμίδες , τοῦ ὕδατος ὑπερέχουσαι πεντήκοντα ὀργυιὰς ἑκατέρη , καὶ τὸ κατ’ ὕδατος οἰκοδόμηται ἕτερον τοσοῦτον , καὶ ἐπ’ ἀμφοτέρῃσι ἔπεστι κολοσσὸς λίθινος κατήμενος ἐν θρόνῳ .
for almost in the middle of it stand two pyramids, so built that fifty fathoms of each are below and fifty above the water; atop each is a colossal stone figure seated on a throne.


2.149.3
2642
οὕτω αἱ μὲν πυραμίδες εἰσὶ ἑκατὸν ὀργυιέων , αἱ δ’ ἑκατὸν ὀργυιαὶ δίκαιαι εἰσὶ στάδιον ἑξάπλεθρον , ἑξαπέδου τε τῆς ὀργυιῆς μετρεομένης καὶ τετραπήχεος , τῶν ποδῶν μὲν τετραπαλαίστων ἐόντων , τοῦ δὲ πήχεος ἑξαπαλαίστου .
Thus these pyramids are a hundred fathoms high; and a hundred fathoms equal a furlong of six hundred feet, the fathom measuring six feet or four cubits, the foot four spans and the cubit six spans.


2.149.4
2643
τὸ δὲ ὕδωρ τὸ ἐν τῇ λίμνῃ αὐθιγενὲς μὲν οὐκ ἔστι ( ἄνυδρος γὰρ δὴ δεινῶς ἐστι ἡ ταύτῃ ) , ἐκ τοῦ Νείλου δὲ κατὰ διώρυχα ἐσῆκται , καὶ ἓξ μὲν μῆνας ἔσω ῥέει ἐς τὴν λίμνην , ἓξ δὲ μῆνας ἔξω ἐς τὸν Νεῖλον αὖτις ·
The water of the lake is not natural (for the country here is exceedingly arid) but brought by a channel from the    Nile   ; six months it flows into the lake, and six back into the river.


2.149.5
2644
καὶ ἐπεὰν μὲν ἐκρέῃ ἔξω , ἣ δὲ τότε τοὺς ἓξ μῆνας ἐς τὸ βασιλήιον καταβάλλει ἐπ’ ἡμέρην ἑκάστην τάλαντον ἀργυρίου ἐκ τῶν ἰχθύων , ἐπεὰν δὲ ἐσίῃ τὸ ὓδωρ ἐς αὐτήν , εἴκοσι μνέας .
For the six months that it flows out of the lake, the daily take of fish brings a silver talent into the royal treasury, and twenty minae for each day of the flow into the lake.


2.150.1
2645
ἔλεγον δὲ οἱ ἐπιχώριοι καὶ ὡς ἐς τὴν Σύρτιν τὴν ἐς Λιβύην ἐκδιδοῖ ἡ λίμνη αὕτη ὑπὸ γῆν , τετραμμένη τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρην ἐς τὴν μεσόγαιαν παρὰ τὸ ὄρος τὸ ὑπὲρ Μέμφιος .
Furthermore, the natives said that this lake drains underground into the    Libyan Syrtis   , and extends under the mountains that are above    Memphis   , having the inland country on its west.


2.150.2
2646
ἐπείτε δὲ τοῦ ὀρύγματος τούτου οὐκ ὥρων τὸν χοῦν οὐδαμοῦ ἐόντα , ἐπιμελὲς γὰρ δή μοι ἦν , εἰρόμην τοὺς ἄγχιστα οἰκέοντας τῆς λίμνης ὅκου εἴη ὁ χοῦς ὁ ἐξορυχθείς .
When I could not see anywhere the earth taken from the digging of this lake, since this was curious to me,


2.150.2
2647
οἳ δὲ ἔφρασάν μοι ἵνα ἐξεφορήθη , καὶ εὐπετέως ἔπειθον ·
I asked those who live nearest the lake where the stuff was that had been dug out.


2.150.2
2648
ᾔδεα γὰρ λόγῳ καὶ ἐν Νίνῳ τῇ Ἀσσυρίων πόλι γενόμενον ἕτερον τοιοῦτον .
They told me where it had been carried, and I readily believed them, for I had heard of a similar thing happening in the Assyrian city of Ninus.


2.150.3
2649
τὰ γὰρ Σαρδαναπάλλου τοῦ Νίνου βασιλέος ἐόντα μεγάλα χρήματα καὶ φυλασσόμενα ἐν θησαυροῖσι καταγαίοισι ἐπενόησαν κλῶπες ἐκφορῆσαι .
Sardanapallus king of Ninus had great wealth, which he kept in an underground treasury.


2.150.3
2650
ἐκ δὴ ὦν τῶν σφετέρων οἰκίων ἀρξάμενοι οἱ κλῶπες ὑπὸ γῆν σταθμεόμενοι ἐς τὰ βασιλήια οἰκία ὤρυσσον , τὸν δὲ χοῦν τὸν ἐκφορεόμενον ἐκ τοῦ ὀρύγματος , ὅκως γένοιτο νύξ , ἐς τὸν Τίγρην ποταμὸν παραρρέοντα τὴν Νίνον ἐξεφόρεον , ἐς ὃ κατεργάσαντο ὅ τι ἐβούλοντο .
Some thieves plotted to carry it off; they surveyed their course and dug an underground way from their own house to the palace, carrying the earth taken out of the passage dug by night to the Tigris, which runs past Ninus, until at last they accomplished their end.


2.150.4
2651
τοιοῦτον ἕτερον ἤκουσα καὶ κατὰ τὸ τῆς ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ λίμνης ὄρυγμα γενέσθαι , πλὴν οὐ νυκτὸς ἀλλὰ μετ’ ἡμέρην ποιεύμενον ·
This, I was told, had happened when the Egyptian lake was dug, except that the work went on not by night but by day.


2.150.4
2652
ὀρύσσοντας γὰρ τὸν χοῦν τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους ἐς τὸν Νεῖλον φορέειν ·
The Egyptians bore the earth dug out by them to the Nile,


2.150.4
2653
ὁ δὲ ὑπολαμβάνων ἔμελλε διαχέειν .
to be caught and scattered (as was to be expected) by the river.


2.150.4
2654
ἡ μέν νυν λίμνη αὕτη οὕτω λέγεται ὀρυχθῆναι ·
Thus is this lake said to have been dug.


2.151.1
2655
τῶν δὲ δυώδεκα βασιλέων δικαιοσύνῃ χρεωμένων , ἀνὰ χρόνον ὡς ἔθυσαν ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ τοῦ Ἡφαίστου , τῇ ὑστάτῃ τῆς ὁρτῆς , μελλόντων κατασπείσειν , ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς ἐξήνεικέ σφι φιάλας χρυσέας , τῇσί περ ἐώθεσαν σπένδειν , ἁμαρτὼν τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ , ἕνδεκα δυώδεκα ἐοῦσι .
Now the twelve kings were just, and in time came to sacrifice in Hephaestus' temple. On the last day of the feast, as they were about to pour libations, the high priest brought out the golden vessels which they commonly used for this; but he counted wrongly and had only eleven for the twelve.


2.151.2
2656
ἐνθαῦτα ὡς οὐκ εἶχε φιάλην ὁ ἔσχατος ἑστεὼς αὐτῶν Ψαμμήτιχος , περιελόμενος τὴν κυνέην ἐοῦσαν χαλκέην ὑπέσχε τε καὶ ἔσπενδε .
So the last in line, Psammetichus, as he had no vessel, took off his bronze helmet and held it out and poured the libation with it.


2.151.2
2657
κυνέας δὲ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι ἅπαντες ἐφόρεόν τε βασιλέες καὶ ἐτύγχανον τότε ἔχοντες .
All the kings were accustomed to wear helmets, and were then helmeted;


2.151.3
2658
Ψαμμήτιχος μέν νυν οὐδενὶ δολερῷ νόῳ χρεώμενος ὑπέσχε τὴν κυνέην ·
it was not in guile, then, that Psammetichus held out his headgear;


2.151.3
2659
οἳ δὲ ἐν φρενὶ λαβόντες τό τε ποιηθὲν ἐκ Ψαμμητίχου καὶ τὸ χρηστήριον , ὅτι ἐκέχρηστό σφι τὸν χαλκέῃ σπείσαντα αὐτῶν φιάλῃ τοῦτον βασιλέα ἔσεσθαι μοῦνον Αἰγύπτου , ἀναμνησθέντες τοῦ χρησμοῦ κτεῖναι μὲν οὐκ ἐδικαίωσαν Ψαμμήτιχον , ὡς ἀνεύρισκον βασανίζοντες ἐξ οὐδεμιῆς προνοίης αὐτὸν ποιήσαντα , ἐς δὲ τὰ ἕλεα ἔδοξέ σφι διῶξαι ψιλώσαντας τὰ πλεῖστα τῆς δυνάμιος , ἐκ δὲ τῶν ἑλέων ὁρμώμενον μὴ ἐπιμίσγεσθαι τῇ ἄλλῃ Αἰγύπτῳ .
but the rest perceived what Psammetichus had done, and remembered the oracle that promised the sovereignty of all Egypt to whoever poured a libation from a vessel of bronze; therefore, though they considered Psammetichus not deserving of death (for they examined him and found that he had acted without intent), they decided to strip him of most of his power and to chase him away into the marshes, and that he was not to concern himself with the rest of Egypt.


2.152.1
2660
τὸν δὲ Ψαμμήτιχον τοῦτον πρότερον φεύγοντα τὸν Αἰθίοπα Σαβακῶν , ὅς οἱ τὸν πατέρα Νεκῶν ἀπέκτεινε , τοῦτον φεύγοντα τότε ἐς Συρίην , ὡς ἀπαλλάχθη ἐκ τῆς ὄψιος τοῦ ὀνείρου ὁ Αἰθίοψ , κατήγαγον Αἰγυπτίων οὗτοι οἳ ἐκ νομοῦ τοῦ Σαΐτεω εἰσί .
This Psammetichus had formerly been in exile in    Syria   , where he had fled from Sabacos the Ethiopian, who killed his father Necos; then, when the Ethiopian departed because of what he saw in a dream, the Egyptians of the district of Saïs brought him back from    Syria   .


2.152.2
2661
μετὰ δὲ βασιλεύοντα τὸ δεύτερον πρὸς τῶν ἕνδεκα βασιλέων καταλαμβάνει μιν διὰ τὴν κυνέην φεύγειν ἐς τὰ ἕλεα .
Psammetichus was king for the second time when he found himself driven away into the marshes by the eleven kings because of the helmet.


2.152.3
2662
ἐπιστάμενος ὦν ὡς περιυβρισμένος εἴη πρὸς αὐτῶν , ἐπενόεε τίσασθαι τοὺς διώξαντας .
Believing, therefore, that he had been abused by them, he meant to be avenged on those who had expelled him.


2.152.3
2663
πέμψαντι δέ οἱ ἐς Βουτοῦν πόλιν ἐς τὸ χρηστήριον τῆς Λητοῦς , ἔνθα δὴ Αἰγυπτίοισι ἐστὶ μαντήιον ἀψευδέστατον , ἦλθε χρησμὸς ὡς τίσις ἥξει ἀπὸ θαλάσσης χαλκέων ἀνδρῶν ἐπιφανέντων .
He sent to inquire in the town of Buto, where the most infallible oracle in Egypt is; the oracle answered that he would have vengeance when he saw men of bronze coming from the sea.


2.152.4
2664
καὶ τῷ μὲν δὴ ἀπιστίη μεγάλη ὑπεκέχυτο χαλκέους οἱ ἄνδρας ἥξειν ἐπικούρους .
Psammetichus did not in the least believe that men of bronze would come to aid him.


2.152.4
2665
χρόνου δὲ οὐ πολλοῦ διελθόντος ἀναγκαίη κατέλαβε Ἴωνάς τε καὶ Κᾶρας ἄνδρας κατὰ ληίην ἐκπλώσαντας ἀπενειχθῆναι ἐς Αἴγυπτον , ἐκβάντας δὲ ἐς γῆν καὶ ὁπλισθέντας χαλκῷ ἀγγέλλει τῶν τις Αἰγυπτίων ἐς τὰ ἕλεα ἀπικόμενος τῷ Ψαμμητίχῳ , ὡς οὐκ ἰδὼν πρότερον χαλκῷ ἄνδρας ὁπλισθέντας , ὡς χάλκεοι ἄνδρες ἀπιγμένοι ἀπὸ θαλάσσης λεηλατεῦσι τὸ πεδίον .
But after a short time, Ionians and Carians, voyaging for plunder, were forced to put in on the coast of Egypt, where they disembarked in their armor of bronze; and an Egyptian came into the marsh country and brought news to Psammetichus (for he had never before seen armored men) that men of bronze had come from the sea and were foraging in the plain.


2.152.5
2666
ὁ δὲ μαθὼν τὸ χρηστήριον ἐπιτελεύμενον φίλα τε τοῖσι Ἴωσι καὶ Καρσὶ ποιέεται καί σφεας μεγάλα ὑπισχνεύμενος πείθει μετ’ ἑωυτοῦ γενέσθαι .
Psammetichus saw in this the fulfillment of the oracle;


2.152.5
2667
ὡς δὲ ἔπεισε , οὕτω ἅμα τοῖσι τὰ ἑωυτοῦ βουλομένοισι Αἰγυπτίοισι καὶ τοῖσι ἐπικούροισι καταιρέει τοὺς βασιλέας .
he made friends with the Ionians and Carians, and promised them great rewards if they would join him and, having won them over, deposed the eleven kings with these allies and those Egyptians who volunteered.


2.153.1
2668
κρατήσας δὲ Αἰγύπτου πάσης ὁ Ψαμμήτιχος ἐποίησε τῷ Ἡφαίστῳ προπύλαια ἐν Μέμφι τὰ πρὸς νότον ἄνεμον τετραμμένα , αὐλήν τε τῷ Ἄπι , ἐν τῇ τρέφεται ἐπεὰν φανῇ ὁ Ἆπις , οἰκοδόμησε ἐναντίον τῶν προπυλαίων , πᾶσάν τε περίστυλον ἐοῦσαν καὶ τύπων πλέην ·
Having made himself master of all Egypt, he made the southern outer court of Hephaestus' temple at Memphis, and built facing this a court for Apis, where Apis is kept and fed whenever he appears;


2.153.1
2669
ἀντὶ δὲ κιόνων ὑπεστᾶσι κολοσσοὶ δυωδεκαπήχεες τῇ αὐλῇ .
this court has an inner colonnade all around it and many cut figures;


2.153.1
2670
ὁ δὲ Ἆπις κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλήνων γλῶσσαν ἐστὶ Ἔπαφος .
the roof is held up by great statues twenty feet high for pillars. Apis in Greek is Epaphus.


2.154.1
2671
τοῖσι δὲ Ἴωσι καὶ τοῖσι Καρσὶ τοῖσι συγκατεργασαμένοισι αὐτῷ ὁ Ψαμμήτιχος δίδωσι χώρους ἐνοικῆσαι ἀντίους ἀλλήλων , τοῦ Νείλου τὸ μέσον ἔχοντος , τοῖσι οὐνόματα ἐτέθη Στρατόπεδα ·
To the Ionians and Carians who had helped him, Psammetichus gave places to live in called The Camps, opposite each other on either side of the Nile;


2.154.1
2672
τούτους τε δή σφι τοὺς χώρους δίδωσι καὶ τὰ ἄλλα τὰ ὑπέσχετο πάντα ἀπέδωκε .
and besides this, he paid them all that he had promised.


2.154.2
2673
καὶ δὴ καὶ παῖδας παρέβαλε αὐτοῖσι Αἰγυπτίους τὴν Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν ἐκδιδάσκεσθαι .
Moreover, he put Egyptian boys in their hands to be taught Greek,


2.154.2
2674
ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων ἐκμαθόντων τὴν γλῶσσαν οἱ νῦν ἑρμηνέες ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ γεγόνασι .
and from these, who learned the language, are descended the present-day Egyptian interpreters.


2.154.3
2675
οἱ δὲ Ἴωνές τε καὶ οἱ Κᾶρες τούτους τοὺς χώρους οἴκησαν χρόνον ἐπὶ πολλόν ·
The Ionians and Carians lived for a long time in these places,


2.154.3
2676
εἰσὶ δὲ οὗτοι οἱ χῶροι πρὸς θαλάσσης ὀλίγον ἔνερθε Βουβάστιος πόλιος , ἐπὶ τῷ Πηλουσίῳ καλεομένῳ στόματι τοῦ Νείλου .
which are near the sea, on the arm of the Nile called the Pelusian, a little way below the town of Bubastis.


2.154.3
2677
τούτους μὲν δὴ χρόνῳ ὕστερον βασιλεὺς Ἄμασις ἐξαναστήσας ἐνθεῦτεν κατοίκισε ἐς Μέμφιν , φυλακὴν ἑωυτοῦ ποιεύμενος πρὸς Αἰγυπτίων .
Long afterwards, king Amasis removed them and settled them at Memphis to be his guard against the Egyptians.


2.154.4
2678
τούτων δὲ οἰκισθέντων ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ , οἱ Ἕλληνες οὕτω ἐπιμισγόμενοι τούτοισι τὰ περὶ Αἴγυπτον γινόμενα ἀπὸ Ψαμμητίχου βασιλέος ἀρξάμενοι πάντα καὶ τὰ ὕστερον ἐπιστάμεθα ἀτρεκέως ·
It is a result of our communication with these settlers in Egypt (the first of foreign speech to settle in that country)


2.154.4
2679
πρῶτοι γὰρ οὗτοι ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἀλλόγλωσσοι κατοικίσθησαν .
that we Greeks have exact knowledge of the history of Egypt from the reign of Psammetichus onwards.


2.154.5
2680
ἐξ ὧν δὲ ἐξανέστησαν χώρων , ἐν τούτοισι δὲ οἵ τε ὁλκοὶ τῶν νεῶν καὶ τὰ ἐρείπια τῶν οἰκημάτων τὸ μέχρι ἐμεῦ ἦσαν .
There still remained in my day, in the places out of which the Ionians and Carians were turned, the winches for their ships and the ruins of their houses. This is how Psammetichus got    Egypt   .


2.155.1
2681
Ψαμμήτιχος μέν νυν οὕτω ἔσχε Αἴγυπτον .
Psammetichus ruled Egypt.


2.155.1
2682
τοῦ δὲ χρηστηρίου τοῦ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ πολλὰ ἐπεμνήσθην ἤδη , καὶ δὴ λόγον περὶ αὐτοῦ ὡς ἀξίου ἐόντος ποιήσομαι .
I have often mentioned the Egyptian oracle, and shall give an account of this, as it deserves.


2.155.1
2683
τὸ γὰρ χρηστήριον τοῦτο τὸ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἐστὶ μὲν Λητοῦς ἱρόν , ἐν πόλι δὲ μεγάλῃ ἱδρυμένον κατὰ τὸ Σεβεννυτικὸν καλεόμενον στόμα τοῦ Νείλου , ἀναπλέοντι ἀπὸ θαλάσσης ἄνω .
This oracle is sacred to Leto, and is situated in a great city by the Sebennytic arm of the Nile, on the way up from the sea.


2.155.2
2684
οὔνομα δὲ τῇ πόλι ταύτῃ ὅκου τὸ χρηστήριον ἐστὶ Βουτώ , ὡς καὶ πρότερον ὠνόμασταί μοι .
Buto is the name of the city where this oracle is; I have already mentioned it.


2.155.2
2685
ἱρὸν δὲ ἐστὶ ἐν τῇ Βουτοῖ ταύτῃ Ἀπόλλωνος καὶ Ἀρτέμιδος , καὶ ὅ γε νηὸς τῆς Λητοῦς , ἐν τῷ δὴ τὸ χρηστήριον ἔνι , αὐτός τε τυγχάνει ἐὼν μέγας καὶ τὰ προπύλαια ἔχει ἐς ὕψος δέκα ὀργυιέων .
In Buto there is a temple of Apollo and Artemis. The shrine of Leto where the oracle is, is itself very great, and its outer court is sixty feet high.


2.155.3
2686
τὸ δέ μοι τῶν φανερῶν ἦν θῶμα μέγιστον παρεχόμενον , φράσω ·
But what caused me the most wonder among the things apparent there I shall mention.


2.155.3
2687
ἔστι ἐν τῷ τεμένεϊ τούτῳ Λητοῦς νηὸς ἐξ ἑνὸς λίθου πεποιημένος ἔς τε ὕψος καὶ ἐς μῆκος καὶ τοῖχος ἕκαστος τούτοισι ἴσος τεσσεράκοντα πηχέων τούτων ἕκαστον ἐστί , τὸ δὲ καταστέγασμα τῆς ὀροφῆς ἄλλος ἐπίκειται λίθος , ἔχων τὴν παρωροφίδα τετράπηχυν .
In this precinct is the shrine of Leto, the height and length of whose walls is all made of a single stone slab; each wall has an equal length and height; namely, seventy feet. Another slab makes the surface of the roof, the cornice of which is seven feet broad.


2.156.1
2688
οὕτω μέν νυν ὁ νηὸς τῶν φανερῶν μοι τῶν περὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἱρὸν ἐστὶ θωμαστότατον , τῶν δὲ δευτέρων νῆσος ἡ Χέμμις καλευμένη ·
Thus, then, the shrine is the most marvellous of all the things that I saw in this temple; but of things of second rank, the most wondrous is the island called    Khemmis   .


2.156.2
2689
ἔστι μὲν ἐν λίμνῃ βαθέῃ καὶ πλατέῃ κειμένη παρὰ τὸ ἐν Βουτοῖ ἱρόν , λέγεται δὲ ὑπ’ Αἰγυπτίων εἶναι αὕτη ἡ νῆσος πλωτή .
This lies in a deep and wide lake near the temple at Buto, and the Egyptians say that it floats.


2.156.2
2690
αὐτὸς μὲν ἔγωγε οὔτε πλέουσαν οὔτε κινηθεῖσαν εἶδον , τέθηπα δὲ ἀκούων εἰ νῆσος ἀληθέως ἐστὶ πλωτή .
I never saw it float, or move at all, and I thought it a marvellous tale, that an island should truly float.


2.156.3
2691
ἐν δὲ ὦν ταύτῃ νηός τε Ἀπόλλωνος μέγας ἔνι καὶ βωμοὶ τριφάσιοι ἐνιδρύαται , ἐμπεφύκασι δ’ ἐν αὐτῇ φοίνικες συχνοὶ καὶ ἄλλα δένδρεα καὶ καρποφόρα καὶ ἄφορα πολλά .
However that may be, there is a great shrine of Apollo on it, and three altars stand there; many palm trees grow on the island, and other trees too, some yielding fruit and some not.


2.156.4
2692
λόγον δὲ τόνδε ἐπιλέγοντες οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι φασὶ εἶναι αὐτὴν πλωτήν , ὡς ἐν τῇ νήσῳ ταύτῃ οὐκ ἐούσῃ πρότερον πλωτῇ Λητώ , ἐοῦσα τῶν ὀκτὼ θεῶν τῶν πρώτων γενομένων , οἰκέουσα δὲ ἐν Βουτοῖ πόλι , ἵνα δή οἱ τὸ χρηστήριον τοῦτο ἐστί , Ἀπόλλωνα παρ’ Ἴσιος παρακαταθήκην δεξαμένη διέσωσε κατακρύψασα ἐν τῇ νῦν πλωτῇ λεγομένῃ νήσῳ , ὅτε τὸ πᾶν διζήμενος ὁ Τυφῶν ἐπῆλθε , θέλων ἐξευρεῖν τοῦ Ὀσίριος τὸν παῖδα .
This is the story that the Egyptians tell to explain why the island moves: that on this island that did not move before, Leto, one of the eight gods who first came to be, who was living at    Buto    where this oracle of hers is, taking charge of Apollo from Isis, hid him for safety in this island which is now said to float, when Typhon came hunting through the world, keen to find the son of Osiris.


2.156.5
2693
Ἀπόλλωνα δὲ καὶ Ἄρτεμιν Διονύσου καὶ Ἴσιος λέγουσι εἶναι παῖδας , Λητοῦν δὲ τροφὸν αὐτοῖσι καὶ σώτειραν γενέσθαι .
Apollo and Artemis were (they say) children of Dionysus and Isis, and Leto was made their nurse and preserver;


2.156.5
2694
Αἰγυπτιστὶ δὲ Ἀπόλλων μὲν Ὦρος , Δημήτηρ δὲ Ἶσις , Ἄρτεμις δὲ Βούβαστις .
in Egyptian, Apollo is Horus, Demeter Isis, Artemis Bubastis.


2.156.6
2695
ἐκ τούτου δὲ τοῦ λόγου καὶ οὐδενὸς ἄλλου Αἰσχύλος ὁ Εὐφορίωνος ἥρπασε τὸ ἐγὼ φράσω , μοῦνος δὴ ποιητέων τῶν προγενομένων ·
It was from this legend and no other that Aeschylus son of Euphorion took a notion which is in no poet before him:


2.156.6
2696
ἐποίησε γὰρ Ἄρτεμιν εἶναι θυγατέρα Δήμητρος .
that Artemis was the daughter of Demeter.


2.156.6
2697
τὴν δὲ νῆσον διὰ τοῦτο γενέσθαι πλωτήν .
For this reason the island was made to float.


2.156.6
2698
ταῦτα μὲν οὕτω λέγουσι .
So they say.


2.157.1
2699
Ψαμμήτιχος δὲ ἐβασίλευσε Αἰγύπτου τέσσερα καὶ πεντήκοντα ἔτεα , τῶν τὰ ἑνὸς δέοντα τριήκοντα Ἄζωτον τῆς Συρίης μεγάλην πόλιν προσκατήμενος ἐπολιόρκεε , ἐς ὃ ἐξεῖλε .
Psammetichus ruled Egypt for fifty-three years, twenty-nine of which he spent before Azotus, a great city in Syria, besieging it until he took it.


2.157.1
2700
αὕτη δὲ ἡ Ἄζωτος ἁπασέων πολίων ἐπὶ πλεῖστον χρόνον πολιορκεομένη ἀντέσχε τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν .
Azotus held out against a siege longer than any city of which we know.


2.158.1
2701
Ψαμμητίχου δὲ Νεκῶς παῖς ἐγένετο καὶ ἐβασίλευσε Αἰγύπτου , ὃς τῇ διώρυχι ἐπεχείρησε πρῶτος τῇ ἐς τὴν Ἐρυθρὴν θάλασσαν φερούσῃ , τὴν Δαρεῖος ὁ Πέρσης δεύτερα διώρυξε ·
Psammetichus had a son, Necos, who became king of Egypt. It was he who began building the canal into the Red Sea, which was finished by Darius the Persian.


2.158.1
2702
τῆς μῆκος ἐστὶ πλόος ἡμέραι τέσσερες , εὖρος δὲ ὠρύχθη ὥστε τριήρεας δύο πλέειν ὁμοῦ ἐλαστρευμένας .
This is four days' voyage in length, and it was dug wide enough for two triremes to move in it rowed abreast.


2.158.2
2703
ἦκται δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ Νείλου τὸ ὕδωρ ἐς αὐτήν ·
It is fed by the Nile,


2.158.2
2704
ἦκται δὲ κατύπερθε ὀλίγον Βουβάστιος πόλιος παρὰ Πάτουμον τὴν Ἀραβίην πόλιν , ἐσέχει δὲ ἐς τὴν Ἐρυθρὴν θάλασσαν .
and is carried from a little above Bubastis by the Arabian town of Patumus; it issues into the Red Sea.


2.158.2
2705
ὀρώρυκται δὲ πρῶτον μὲν τοῦ πεδίου τοῦ Αἰγυπτίου τὰ πρὸς Ἀραβίην ἔχοντα ·
Digging began in the part of the Egyptian plain nearest to Arabia;


2.158.2
2706
ἔχεται δὲ κατύπερθε τοῦ πεδίου τὸ κατὰ Μέμφιν τεῖνον ὄρος , ἐν τῷ αἱ λιθοτομίαι ἔνεισι ·
the mountains that extend to Memphis (the mountains where the stone quarries are) come close to this plain;


2.158.3
2707
τοῦ ὦν δὴ ὄρεος τούτου παρὰ τὴν ὑπώρεαν ἦκται ἡ διῶρυξ ἀπ’ ἑσπέρης μακρὴ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ , καὶ ἔπειτα τείνει ἐς διασφάγας , φέρουσα ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄρεος πρὸς μεσαμβρίην τε καὶ νότον ἄνεμον ἐς τὸν κόλπον τὸν Ἀράβιον .
the canal is led along the foothills of these mountains in a long reach from west to east; passing then into a ravine, it bears southward out of the hill country towards the    Arabian Gulf   .


2.158.4
2708
τῇ δὲ ἐλάχιστον ἐστὶ καὶ συντομώτατον ἐκ τῆς βορηίης θαλάσσης ὑπερβῆναι ἐς τὴν νοτίην καὶ Ἐρυθρὴν τὴν αὐτὴν ταύτην καλεομένην , ἀπὸ τοῦ Κασίου ὄρεος τοῦ οὐρίζοντος Αἴγυπτόν τε καὶ Συρίην , ἀπὸ τούτου εἰσὶ στάδιοι ἀπαρτὶ χίλιοι ἐς τὸν Ἀράβιον κόλπον .
Now the shortest and most direct passage from the northern to the southern or    Red Sea    is from the Casian promontory, the boundary between    Egypt    and    Syria   , to the    Arabian Gulf   , and this is a distance of one hundred and twenty five miles, neither more nor less;


2.158.5
2709
τοῦτο μὲν τὸ συντομώτατον , ἡ δὲ διῶρυξ πολλῷ μακροτέρη , ὅσῳ σκολιωτέρη ἐστί ·
this is the most direct route, but the canal is far longer, inasmuch as it is more crooked.


2.158.5
2710
τὴν ἐπὶ Νεκῶ βασιλέος ὀρύσσοντες Αἰγυπτίων ἀπώλοντο δυώδεκα μυριάδες .
In Necos' reign, a hundred and twenty thousand Egyptians died digging it.


2.158.5
2711
Νεκῶς μέν νυν μεταξὺ ὀρύσσων ἐπαύσατο μαντηίου ἐμποδίου γενομένου τοιοῦδε , τῷ βαρβάρῳ αὐτὸν προεργάζεσθαι .
Necos stopped work, stayed by a prophetic utterance that he was toiling beforehand for the barbarian.


2.158.5
2712
βαρβάρους δὲ πάντας οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι καλέουσι τοὺς μὴ σφίσι ὁμογλώσσους .
The Egyptians call all men of other languages barbarians.


2.159.1
2713
παυσάμενος δὲ τῆς διώρυχος ὁ Νεκῶς ἐτράπετο πρὸς στρατηίας , καὶ τριήρεες αἳ μὲν ἐπὶ τῇ βορηίῃ θαλάσσῃ ἐποιήθησαν , αἳ δ’ ἐν τῷ Ἀραβίῳ κόλπῳ ἐπὶ τῇ Ἐρυθρῇ θαλάσσῃ , τῶν ἔτι οἱ ὁλκοὶ ἐπίδηλοι .
Necos, then, stopped work on the canal and engaged in preparations for war; some of his ships of war were built on the northern sea, and some in the    Arabian Gulf   , by the    Red Sea    coast: the winches for landing these can still be seen.


2.159.2
2714
καὶ ταύτῃσί τε ἐχρᾶτο ἐν τῷ δέοντι καὶ Σύροισι πεζῇ ὁ Νεκῶς συμβαλὼν ἐν Μαγδώλῳ ἐνίκησε , μετὰ δὲ τὴν μάχην Κάδυτιν πόλιν τῆς Συρίης ἐοῦσαν μεγάλην εἷλε .
He used these ships when needed, and with his land army met and defeated the Syrians at Magdolus, taking the great Syrian city of Cadytis after the battle.


2.159.3
2715
ἐν τῇ δὲ ἐσθῆτι ἔτυχε ταῦτα κατεργασάμενος , ἀνέθηκε τῷ Ἀπόλλωνι πέμψας ἐς Βραγχίδας τὰς Μιλησίων .
He sent to Branchidae of Miletus and dedicated there to Apollo the garments in which he won these victories.


2.159.3
2716
μετὰ δέ , ἑκκαίδεκα ἔτεα τὰ πάντα ἄρξας , τελευτᾷ , τῷ παιδὶ Ψάμμι παραδοὺς τὴν ἀρχήν .
Then he died after a reign of sixteen years, and his son Psammis reigned in his place.


2.160.1
2717
ἐπὶ τοῦτον δὴ τὸν Ψάμμιν βασιλεύοντα Αἰγύπτου ἀπίκοντο Ἠλείων ἄγγελοι , αὐχέοντες δικαιότατα καὶ κάλλιστα τιθέναι τὸν ἐν Ὀλυμπίῃ ἀγῶνα πάντων ἀνθρώπων , καὶ δοκέοντες παρὰ ταῦτα οὐδ’ ἂν τοὺς σοφωτάτους ἀνθρώπων Αἰγυπτίους οὐδὲν ἐπεξευρεῖν ·
While this Psammis was king of    Egypt   , he was visited by ambassadors from    Elis   , the Eleans boasting that they had arranged the Olympic games with all the justice and fairness in the world, and claiming that even the Egyptians, although the wisest of all men, could not do better.


2.160.2
2718
ὡς δὲ ἀπικόμενοι ἐς τὴν Αἴγυπτον οἱ Ἠλεῖοι ἔλεγον τῶν εἵνεκα ἀπίκοντο , ἐνθαῦτα ὁ βασιλεὺς οὗτος συγκαλέεται Αἰγυπτίων τοὺς λεγομένους εἶναι σοφωτάτους .
When the Eleans came to Egypt and announced why they had come, Psammis assembled the Egyptians reputed to be wisest.


2.160.2
2719
συνελθόντες δὲ οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι ἐπυνθάνοντο τῶν Ἠλείων λεγόντων ἅπαντα τὰ κατήκει σφέας ποιέειν περὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα ·
These assembled and learned all that the Eleans were to do regarding the games;


2.160.2
2720
ἀπηγησάμενοι δὲ τὰ πάντα ἔφασαν ἥκειν ἐπιμαθησόμενοι εἴ τι ἔχοιεν Αἰγύπτιοι τούτων δικαιότερον ἐπεξευρεῖν .
after explaining this, the Eleans said that they had come to learn whether the Egyptians could discover any juster way.


2.160.3
2721
οἳ δὲ βουλευσάμενοι ἐπειρώτων τοὺς Ἠλείους εἴ σφι οἱ πολιῆται ἐναγωνίζονται .
The Egyptians deliberated, and then asked the Eleans if their own citizens took part in the contests.


2.160.3
2722
οἳ δὲ ἔφασαν καὶ σφέων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων ὁμοίως τῷ βουλομένῳ ἐξεῖναι ἀγωνίζεσθαι .
The Eleans answered that they did: all Greeks from Elis or elsewhere might contend.


2.160.4
2723
οἱ δὲ Αἰγύπτιοι ἔφασαν σφέας οὕτω τιθέντας παντὸς τοῦ δικαίου ἡμαρτηκέναι .
Then the Egyptians said that in establishing this rule they fell short of complete fairness:


2.160.4
2724
οὐδεμίαν γὰρ εἶναι μηχανὴν ὅκως οὐ τῷ ἀστῷ ἀγωνιζομένῳ προσθήσονται , ἀδικέοντες τὸν ξεῖνον .
“For there is no way that you will not favor your own townsfolk in the contest and wrong the stranger;


2.160.4
2725
ἀλλ’ εἰ δὴ βούλονται δικαίως τιθέναι καὶ τούτου εἵνεκα ἀπικοίατο ἐς Αἴγυπτον , ξείνοισι ἀγωνιστῇσι ἐκέλευον τὸν ἀγῶνα τιθέναι , Ἠλείων δὲ μηδενὶ εἶναι ἀγωνίζεσθαι .
if you wish in fact to make just rules and have come to Egypt for that reason, you should admit only strangers to the contest, and not Eleans.”


2.160.4
2726
ταῦτα μὲν Αἰγύπτιοι Ἠλείοισι ὑπεθήκαντο .
Such was the counsel of the Egyptians to the Eleans.


2.161.1
2727
ψάμμιος δὲ ἓξ ἔτεα μοῦνον βασιλεύσαντος Αἰγύπτου καὶ στρατευσαμένου ἐς Αἰθιοπίην καὶ μεταυτίκα τελευτήσαντος ἐξεδέξατο Ἀπρίης ὁ Ψάμμιος ·
Psammis reigned over    Egypt    for only six years; he invaded    Ethiopia   , and immediately thereafter died, and Apries the son of Psammis reigned in his place.


2.161.2
2728
ὃς μετὰ Ψαμμήτιχον τὸν ἑωυτοῦ προπάτορα ἐγένετο εὐδαιμονέστατος τῶν πρότερον βασιλέων , ἐπ’ ἔτεα πέντε καὶ εἴκοσι ἄρξας , ἐν τοῖσι ἐπί τε Σιδῶνα στρατὸν ἤλασε καὶ ἐναυμάχησε τῷ Τυρίῳ .
He was more fortunate than any former king (except his great-grandfather Psammetichus) during his rule of twenty-five years, during which he sent an army against    Sidon    and fought at sea with the king of    Tyre   .


2.161.3
2729
ἐπεὶ δέ οἱ ἔδεε κακῶς γενέσθαι , ἐγίνετο ἀπὸ προφάσιος τὴν ἐγὼ μεζόνως μὲν ἐν τοῖσι Λιβυκοῖσι λόγοισι ἀπηγήσομαι , μετρίως δ’ ἐν τῷ παρεόντι .
But when it was fated that evil should overtake him, the cause of it was something that I will now deal with briefly, and at greater length in the Libyan part of this history.


2.161.4
2730
ἀποπέμψας γὰρ στράτευμα ὁ Ἀπρίης ἐπὶ Κυρηναίους μεγαλωστὶ προσέπταισε , Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ ταῦτα ἐπιμεμφόμενοι ἀπέστησαν ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ , δοκέοντες τὸν Ἀπρίην ἐκ προνοίης αὐτοὺς ἀποπέμψαι ἐς φαινόμενον κακόν , ἵνα δὴ σφέων φθορὴ γένηται , αὐτὸς δὲ τῶν λοιπῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἀσφαλέστερον ἄρχοι .
Apries sent a great force against Cyrene and suffered a great defeat.


2.161.4
2731
ταῦτα δὲ δεινὰ ποιεύμενοι οὗτοί τε οἱ ἀπονοστήσαντες καὶ οἱ τῶν ἀπολομένων φίλοι ἀπέστησαν ἐκ τῆς ἰθέης .
The Egyptians blamed him for this and rebelled against him; for they thought that Apries had knowingly sent his men to their doom, so that after their perishing in this way he might be the more secure in his rule over the rest of the Egyptians. Bitterly angered by this, those who returned home and the friends of the slain openly revolted.


2.162.1
2732
πυθόμενος δὲ Ἀπρίης ταῦτα πέμπει ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς Ἄμασιν καταπαύσοντα λόγοισι .
Hearing of this, Apries sent Amasis to dissuade them.


2.162.1
2733
ὁ δὲ ἐπείτε ἀπικόμενος κατελάμβανε τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους ταῦτα μὴ ποιέειν , λέγοντος αὐτοῦ τῶν τις Αἰγυπτίων ὄπισθε στὰς περιέθηκέ οἱ κυνέην , καὶ περιτιθεὶς ἔφη ἐπὶ βασιληίῃ περιτιθέναι .
When Amasis came up with the Egyptians, he exhorted them to desist; but as he spoke an Egyptian came behind him and put a helmet on his head, saying it was the token of royalty.


2.162.2
2734
καὶ τῷ οὔ κως ἀεκούσιον ἐγίνετο τὸ ποιεύμενον , ὡς διεδείκνυε .
And Amasis showed that this was not displeasing to him,


2.162.2
2735
ἐπείτε γὰρ ἐστήσαντό μιν βασιλέα τῶν Αἰγυπτίων οἱ ἀπεστεῶτες , παρεσκευάζετο ὡς ἐλῶν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀπρίην .
for after being made king by the rebel Egyptians he prepared to march against Apries.


2.162.3
2736
πυθόμενος δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Ἀπρίης ἔπεμπε ἐπ’ Ἄμασιν ἄνδρα δόκιμον τῶν περὶ ἑωυτὸν Αἰγυπτίων , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Πατάρβημις , ἐντειλάμενος αὐτῷ ζῶντα Ἄμασιν ἀγαγεῖν παρ’ ἑωυτόν .
When Apries heard of it, he sent against Amasis an esteemed Egyptian named Patarbemis, one of his own court, instructing him to take the rebel alive and bring him into his presence.


2.162.3
2737
ὡς δὲ ἀπικόμενος τὸν Ἄμασιν ἐκάλεε ὁ Πατάρβημις , ὁ Ἄμασις , ἔτυχε γὰρ ἐπ’ ἵππου κατήμενος , ἐπαείρας ἀπεματάισε , καὶ τοῦτό μιν ἐκέλευε Ἀπρίῃ ἀπάγειν .
When Patarbemis came and summoned Amasis, Amasis (who was on horseback) rose up and farted, telling the messenger to take that back to Apries.


2.162.4
2738
ὅμως δὲ αὐτὸν ἀξιοῦν τὸν Πατάρβημιν βασιλέος μεταπεμπομένου ἰέναι πρὸς αὐτόν ·
But when in spite of this Patarbemis insisted that Amasis obey the king's summons and go to him,


2.162.4
2739
τὸν δὲ αὐτῷ ὑποκρίνεσθαι ὡς ταῦτα πάλαι παρεσκευάζετο ποιέειν , καὶ αὐτῷ οὐ μέμψεσθαι Ἀπρίην ·
Amasis answered that he had long been preparing to do just that, and Apries would find him above reproach,


2.162.4
2740
παρέσεσθαι γὰρ καὶ αὐτὸς καὶ ἄλλους ἄξειν .
for he would present himself, and bring others.


2.162.5
2741
τὸν δὲ Πατάρβημιν ἔκ τε τῶν λεγομένων οὐκ ἀγνοέειν τὴν διάνοιαν , καὶ παρασκευαζόμενον ὁρῶντα σπουδῇ ἀπιέναι , βουλόμενον τὴν ταχίστην βασιλέι δηλῶσαι τὰ πρησσόμενα .
Hearing this, Patarbemis could not mistake Amasis; he saw his preparations and hastened to depart, the more quickly to make known to the king what was going on.


2.162.5
2742
ὡς δὲ ἀπικέσθαι αὐτὸν πρὸς τὸν Ἀπρίην οὐκ ἄγοντα τὸν Ἄμασιν , οὐδένα λόγον αὐτῷ δόντα ἀλλὰ περιθύμως ἔχοντα περιταμεῖν προστάξαι αὐτοῦ τά τε ὦτα καὶ τὴν ῥῖνα .
When Apries saw him return without Amasis, he did not stop to reflect, but in his rage and fury had Patarbemis' ears and nose cut off.


2.162.6
2743
ἰδόμενοι δ’ οἱ λοιποὶ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων , οἳ ἔτι τὰ ἐκείνου ἐφρόνεον , ἄνδρα τὸν δοκιμώτατον ἑωυτῶν οὕτω αἰσχρῶς λύμῃ διακείμενον , οὐδένα δὴ χρόνον ἐπισχόντες ἀπιστέατο πρὸς τοὺς ἑτέρους καὶ ἐδίδοσαν σφέας αὐτοὺς Ἀμάσι .
The rest of the Egyptians, who were until now Apries' friends, seeing this outrage done to the man who was most prominent among them, changed sides without delay and offered themselves to Amasis.


2.163.1
2744
πυθόμενος δὲ καὶ ταῦτα ὁ Ἀπρίης ὥπλιζε τοὺς ἐπικούρους καὶ ἤλαυνε ἐπὶ τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους ·
Learning of this, too, Apries armed his guard and marched against the Egyptians;


2.163.1
2745
εἶχε δὲ περὶ ἑωυτὸν Κᾶράς τε καὶ Ἴωνας ἄνδρας ἐπικούρους τρισμυρίους ·
he had a bodyguard of Carians and Ionians, thirty thousand of them,


2.163.1
2746
ἦν δέ οἱ τὰ βασιλήια ἐν Σάι πόλι , μεγάλα ἐόντα καὶ ἀξιοθέητα .
and his royal palace was in the city of Saïs, a great and marvellous palace.


2.163.2
2747
καὶ οἵ τε περὶ τὸν Ἀπρίην ἐπὶ τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους ἤισαν καὶ οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἄμασιν ἐπὶ τοὺς ξείνους ·
Apries' men marched against the Egyptians, and so did Amasis' men against the foreigners.


2.163.2
2748
ἔν τε δὴ Μωμέμφι πόλι ἐγένοντο ἀμφότεροι καὶ πειρήσεσθαι ἔμελλον ἀλλήλων .
So they both came to Momemphis and were going to make trial of one another.


2.164.1
2749
ἔστι δὲ Αἰγυπτίων ἑπτὰ γένεα , καὶ τούτων οἳ μὲν ἱρέες οἳ δὲ μάχιμοι κεκλέαται , οἳ δὲ βουκόλοι οἳ δὲ συβῶται , οἳ δὲ κάπηλοι , οἳ δὲ ἑρμηνέες , οἳ δὲ κυβερνήται .
The Egyptians are divided into seven classes: priests, warriors, cowherds, swineherds, merchants, interpreters, and pilots.


2.164.1
2750
γένεα μὲν Αἰγυπτίων τοσαῦτα ἐστί , οὐνόματα δέ σφι κέεται ἀπὸ τῶν τεχνέων .
There are this many classes, each named after its occupation.


2.164.2
2751
οἱ δὲ μάχιμοι αὐτῶν καλέονται μὲν Καλασίριές τε καὶ Ἑρμοτύβιες , ἐκ νομῶν δὲ τῶνδε εἰσί ·
The warriors are divided into Kalasiries and Hermotubies,


2.164.2
2752
κατὰ γὰρ δὴ νομοὺς Αἴγυπτος ἅπασα διαραίρηται .
and they belong to the following districts (for all divisions in Egypt are made according to districts).


2.165.1
2753
Ἑρμοτυβίων μὲν οἵδε εἰσὶ νομοί , Βουσιρίτης , Σαΐτης , Χεμμίτης , Παπρημίτης , νῆσος ἡ Προσωπῖτις καλεομένη , Ναθῶ τὸ ἥμισυ .
The Hermotubies are from the districts of Busiris, Saïs, Khemmis, and Papremis, the island called Prosopitis, and half of Natho — from all of these;


2.165.1
2754
ἐκ μὲν τούτων τῶν νομῶν Ἑρμοτύβιες εἰσί , γενόμενοι , ὅτε ἐπὶ πλείστους ἐγένοντο , ἑκκαίδεκα μυριάδες .
Their number, at its greatest, attained to a hundred and sixty thousand.


2.165.1
2755
καὶ τούτων βαναυσίης οὐδεὶς δεδάηκε οὐδέν , ἀλλ’ ἀνέωνται ἐς τὸ μάχιμον .
None of these has learned any common trade; they are free to follow the profession of arms alone.


2.166.1
2756
καλασιρίων δὲ οἵδε ἄλλοι νομοί εἰσι , Θηβαῖος , Βουβαστίτης , Ἀφθίτης , Τανίτης , Μενδήσιος , Σεβεννύτης , Ἀθριβίτης , Φαρβαϊθίτης , Θμουΐτης , Ὀνουφίτης , Ἀνύτιος , Μυεκφορίτης ·
The Kalasiries are from the districts of Thebes, Bubastis, Aphthis, Tanis, Mendes, Sebennys, Athribis, Pharbaïthis, Thmuis, Onuphis, Anytis, Myecphoris


2.166.1
2757
οὗτος ὁ νομὸς ἐν νήσῳ οἰκέει ἀντίον Βουβάστιος πόλιος .
(this last is in an island opposite the city of Bubastis) —


2.166.2
2758
οὗτοι δὲ οἱ νομοὶ Καλασιρίων εἰσί , γενόμενοι , ὅτε ἐπὶ πλείστους ἐγένοντο , πέντε καὶ εἴκοσι μυριάδες ἀνδρῶν .
From all of these; their number, at its greatest, attained to two hundred and fifty thousand men.


2.166.2
2759
οὐδὲ τούτοισι ἔξεστι τέχνην ἐπασκῆσαι οὐδεμίαν , ἀλλὰ τὰ ἐς πόλεμον ἐπασκέουσι μοῦνα , παῖς παρὰ πατρὸς ἐκδεκόμενος .
These too may practise no trade but war, which is their hereditary calling.


2.167.1
2760
εἰ μέν νυν καὶ τοῦτο παρ’ Αἰγυπτίων μεμαθήκασι οἱ Ἕλληνες , οὐκ ἔχω ἀτρεκέως κρῖναι , ὁρέων καὶ Θρήικας καὶ Σκύθας καὶ Πέρσας καὶ Λυδοὺς καὶ σχεδὸν πάντας τοὺς βαρβάρους ἀποτιμοτέρους τῶν ἄλλων ἡγημένους πολιητέων τοὺς τὰς τέχνας μανθάνοντας καὶ τοὺς ἐκγόνους τούτων , τοὺς δὲ ἀπαλλαγμένους τῶν χειρωναξιέων γενναίους νομιζομένους εἶναι , καὶ μάλιστα τοὺς ἐς τὸν πόλεμον ἀνειμένους ·
Now whether this, too, the Greeks have learned from the Egyptians, I cannot confidently judge. I know that in    Thrace    and    Scythia    and    Persia    and    Lydia    and nearly all foreign countries, those who learn trades are held in less esteem than the rest of the people, and those who have least to do with artisans' work, especially men who are free to practise the art of war, are highly honored.


2.167.2
2761
μεμαθήκασι δ’ ὦν τοῦτο πάντες οἱ Ἕλληνες καὶ μάλιστα Λακεδαιμόνιοι .
This much is certain: that this opinion, which is held by all Greeks and particularly by the Lacedaemonians, is of foreign origin.


2.167.2
2762
ἥκιστα δὲ Κορίνθιοι ὄνονται τοὺς χειροτέχνας .
It is in Corinth that artisans are held in least contempt.


2.168.1
2763
γέρεα δέ σφι ἦν τάδε ἐξαραιρημένα μούνοισι Αἰγυπτίων πάρεξ τῶν ἱρέων , ἄρουραι ἐξαίρετοι δυώδεκα ἑκάστῳ ἀτελέες .
The warriors were the only Egyptians, except the priests, who had special privileges: for each of them an untaxed plot of twelve acres was set apart.


2.168.1
2764
ἡ δὲ ἄρουρα ἑκατὸν πηχέων ἐστὶ Αἰγυπτίων πάντῃ , ὁ δὲ Αἰγύπτιος πῆχυς τυγχάνει ἴσος ἐὼν τῷ Σαμίῳ .
This acre is a square of a hundred Egyptian cubits each way, the Egyptian cubit being equal to the Samian.


2.168.2
2765
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ τοῖσι ἅπασι ἦν ἐξαραιρημένα , τάδε δὲ ἐν περιτροπῇ ἐκαρποῦντο καὶ οὐδαμὰ ὡυτοί .
These lands were set apart for all; it was never the same men who cultivated them, but each in turn.


2.168.2
2766
Καλασιρίων χίλιοι καὶ Ἑρμοτυβίων ἐδορυφόρεον ἐνιαυτὸν ἕκαστοι τὸν βασιλέα ·
A thousand Kalasiries and as many Hermotubies were the king's annual bodyguard.


2.168.2
2767
τούτοισι ὦν τάδε πάρεξ τῶν ἀρουρέων ἄλλα ἐδίδοτο ἐπ’ ἡμέρῃ ἑκάστῃ , ὀπτοῦ σίτου σταθμὸς πέντε μνέαι ἑκάστῳ , κρεῶν βοέων δύο μνέαι , οἴνου τέσσερες ἀρυστῆρες .
These men, besides their lands, each received a daily provision of five minae's weight of roast grain, two minae of beef, and four cups of wine.


2.168.2
2768
ταῦτα τοῖσι αἰεὶ δορυφορέουσι ἐδίδοτο .
These were the gifts received by each bodyguard.


2.169.1
2769
ἐπείτε δὲ συνιόντες ὅ τε Ἀπρίης ἄγων τοὺς ἐπικούρους καὶ ὁ Ἄμασις πάντας Αἰγυπτίους ἀπίκοντο ἐς Μώμεμφιν πόλιν , συνέβαλον ·
When Apries with his guards and Amasis with the whole force of Egyptians came to the town of Momemphis, they engaged;


2.169.1
2770
καὶ ἐμαχέσαντο μὲν εὖ οἱ ξεῖνοι , πλήθεϊ δὲ πολλῷ ἐλάσσονες ἐόντες κατὰ τοῦτο ἑσσώθησαν .
And though the foreigners fought well, they were vastly outnumbered, and therefore were beaten.


2.169.2
2771
Ἀπρίεω δὲ λέγεται εἶναι ἥδε διάνοια , μηδ’ ἂν θεόν μιν μηδένα δύνασθαι παῦσαι τῆς βασιληίης ·
Apries, they say, supposed that not even a god could depose him from his throne,


2.169.2
2772
οὕτω ἀσφαλέως ἑωυτῷ ἱδρῦσθαι ἐδόκεε .
so firmly did he think he was established;


2.169.2
2773
καὶ δὴ τότε συμβαλὼν ἑσσώθη καὶ ζωγρηθεὶς ἀπήχθη ἐς Σάιν πόλιν , ἐς τὰ ἑωυτοῦ οἰκία πρότερον ἐόντα , τότε δὲ Ἀμάσιος ἤδη βασιληία .
And now, defeated in battle and taken captive, he was brought to Saïs, to the royal dwelling which belonged to him once but now belonged to Amasis.


2.169.3
2774
ἐνθαῦτα δὲ τέως μὲν ἐτρέφετο ἐν τοῖσι βασιληίοισι , καί μιν Ἄμασις εὖ περιεῖτε ·
There, he was kept alive for a while in the palace and well treated by Amasis.


2.169.3
2775
τέλος δὲ μεμφομένων Αἰγυπτίων ὡς οὐ ποιέοι δίκαια τρέφων τὸν σφίσι τε καὶ ἑωυτῷ ἔχθιστον , οὕτω δὴ παραδιδοῖ τὸν Ἀπρίην τοῖσι Αἰγυπτίοισι .
But presently the Egyptians complained that there was no justice in keeping alive one who was their own and their king's bitterest enemy; whereupon Amasis gave Apries up to them,


2.169.3
2776
οἳ δέ μιν ἀπέπνιξαν καὶ ἔπειτα ἔθαψαν ἐν τῇσι πατρωίῃσι ταφῇσι ·
And they strangled him and then buried him in the burial-place of his fathers.


2.169.4
2777
αἳ δὲ εἰσὶ ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ τῆς Ἀθηναίης , ἀγχοτάτω τοῦ μεγάρου , ἐσιόντι ἀριστερῆς χειρός .
This is in the temple of Athena, very near to the sanctuary, on the left of the entrance.


2.169.4
2778
ἔθαψαν δὲ Σαῗται πάντας τοὺς ἐκ νομοῦ τούτου γενομένους βασιλέας ἔσω ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ .
The people of Saïs buried within the temple precinct all kings who were natives of their district.


2.169.5
2779
καὶ γὰρ τὸ τοῦ Ἀμάσιος σῆμα ἑκαστέρω μὲν ἐστὶ τοῦ μεγάρου ἢ τὸ τοῦ Ἀπρίεω καὶ τῶν τούτου προπατόρων , ἔστι μέντοι καὶ τοῦτο ἐν τῇ αὐλῇ τοῦ ἱροῦ , παστὰς λιθίνη μεγάλη καὶ ἠσκημένη στύλοισί τε φοίνικας τὰ δένδρεα μεμιμημένοισι καὶ τῇ ἄλλῃ δαπάνῃ ·
The tomb of Amasis is farther from the sanctuary than the tomb of Apries and his ancestors; yet it, too, is within the temple court; It is a great colonnade of stone, richly adorned, the pillars made in the form of palm trees.


2.169.5
2780
ἔσω δὲ ἐν τῇ παστάδι διξὰ θυρώματα ἕστηκε , ἐν δὲ τοῖσι θυρώμασι ἡ θήκη ἐστί .
In this colonnade are two portals, and the place where the coffin lies is within their doors.


2.170.1
2781
εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ αἱ ταφαὶ τοῦ οὐκ ὅσιον ποιεῦμαι ἐπὶ τοιούτῳ πρήγματι ἐξαγορεύειν τὸ οὔνομα ἐν Σάι , ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ τῆς Ἀθηναίης , ὄπισθε τοῦ νηοῦ , παντὸς τοῦ τῆς Ἀθηναίης ἐχόμεναι τοίχου .
There is also at Saïs the burial-place of one whose name I think it impious to mention in speaking of such a matter; it is in the temple of Athena, behind and close to the length of the wall of the shrine.


2.170.2
2782
καὶ ἐν τῷ τεμένεϊ ὀβελοὶ ἑστᾶσι μεγάλοι λίθινοι , λίμνη τε ἐστὶ ἐχομένη λιθίνῃ κρηπῖδι κεκοσμημένη καὶ ἐργασμένη εὖ κύκλῳ καὶ μέγαθος , ὡς ἐμοὶ ἐδόκεε , ὅση περ ἡ ἐν Δήλῳ ἡ τροχοειδὴς καλεομένη .
Moreover, great stone obelisks stand in the precinct; and there is a lake nearby, adorned with a stone margin and made in a complete circle; it is, as it seemed to me, the size of the lake at    Delos    which they call the Round Pond.


2.171.1
2783
ἐν δὲ τῇ λίμνῃ ταύτῃ τὰ δείκηλα τῶν παθέων αὐτοῦ νυκτὸς ποιεῦσι , τὰ καλέουσι μυστήρια Αἰγύπτιοι .
On this lake they enact by night the story of the god's sufferings, a rite which the Egyptians call the Mysteries.


2.171.1
2784
περὶ μέν νυν τούτων εἰδότι μοι ἐπὶ πλέον ὡς ἕκαστα αὐτῶν ἔχει , εὔστομα κείσθω .
I could say more about this, for I know the truth, but let me preserve a discreet silence.


2.171.2
2785
καὶ τῆς Δήμητρος τελετῆς πέρι , τὴν οἱ Ἕλληνες θεσμοφόρια καλέουσι , καὶ ταύτης μοι πέρι εὔστομα κείσθω , πλὴν ὅσον αὐτῆς ὁσίη ἐστὶ λέγειν ·
Let me preserve a discreet silence, too, concerning that rite of Demeter which the Greeks call Thesmophoria , except as much of it as I am not forbidden to mention.


2.171.3
2786
αἱ Δαναοῦ θυγατέρες ἦσαν αἱ τὴν τελετὴν ταύτην ἐξ Αἰγύπτου ἐξαγαγοῦσαι καὶ διδάξασαι τὰς Πελασγιώτιδας γυναῖκας ·
The daughters of Danaus were those who brought this rite out of Egypt and taught it to the Pelasgian women;


2.171.3
2787
μετὰ δὲ ἐξαναστάσης πάσης Πελοποννήσου ὑπὸ Δωριέων ἐξαπώλετο ἡ τελετή , οἱ δὲ ὑπολειφθέντες Πελοποννησίων καὶ οὐκ ἐξαναστάντες Ἀρκάδες διέσωζον αὐτὴν μοῦνοι .
Afterwards, when the people of the Peloponnese were driven out by the Dorians, it was lost, except in so far as it was preserved by the Arcadians, the Peloponnesian people which was not driven out but left in its home.


2.172.1
2788
Ἀπρίεω δὲ ὧδε καταραιρημένου ἐβασίλευσε Ἄμασις , νομοῦ μὲν Σαΐτεω ἐών , ἐκ τῆς δὲ ἦν πόλιος , οὔνομά οἱ ἐστὶ Σιούφ .
After Apries was deposed, Amasis became king; he was from a town called Siuph in the district of Saïs.


2.172.2
2789
τὰ μὲν δὴ πρῶτα κατώνοντο τὸν Ἄμασιν Αἰγύπτιοι καὶ ἐν οὐδεμιῇ μοίρῃ μεγάλῃ ἦγον ἅτε δὴ δημότην τὸ πρὶν ἐόντα καὶ οἰκίης οὐκ ἐπιφανέος ·
Now at first he was scorned and held in low regard by the Egyptians on the ground that he was a common man and of no high family;


2.172.2
2790
μετὰ δὲ σοφίῃ αὐτοὺς ὁ Ἄμασις , οὐκ ἀγνωμοσύνῃ προσηγάγετο .
But presently he won them over by being shrewd and not arrogant.


2.172.3
2791
ἦν οἱ ἄλλα τε ἀγαθὰ μυρία , ἐν δὲ καὶ ποδανιπτὴρ χρύσεος , ἐν τῷ αὐτός τε ὁ Ἄμασις καὶ οἱ δαιτυμόνες οἱ πάντες τοὺς πόδας ἑκάστοτε ἐναπενίζοντο ·
He had among his countless treasures a golden washbowl, in which he and all those who ate with him were accustomed to clean their feet.


2.172.3
2792
τοῦτον κατ’ ὦν κόψας ἄγαλμα δαίμονος ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἐποιήσατο , καὶ ἵδρυσε τῆς πόλιος ὅκου ἦν ἐπιτηδεότατον ·
This he broke in pieces and out of it made a god's image, which he set in a most conspicuous spot in the city;


2.172.3
2793
οἱ δὲ Αἰγύπτιοι φοιτέοντες πρὸς τ- ἄγαλμα ἐσέβοντο μεγάλως .
And the Egyptians came frequently to this image and held it in great reverence.


2.172.4
2794
μαθὼν δὲ ὁ Ἄμασις τὸ ἐκ τῶν ἀστῶν ποιεύμενον , συγκαλέσας Αἰγυπτίους ἐξέφηνε φὰς ἐκ τοῦ ποδανιπτῆρος τ- ἄγαλμα γεγονέναι , ἐς τὸν πρότερον μὲν τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους ἐνεμέειν τε καὶ ἐνουρέειν καὶ πόδας ἐναπονίζεσθαι , τότε δὲ μεγάλως σέβεσθαι .
When Amasis learned what the townsfolk were doing, he called the Egyptians together and told them that the image had been made out of the washbowl, in which Egyptians had once vomited and urinated and cleaned their feet, but which now they greatly revered.


2.172.5
2795
ἤδη ὦν ἔφη λέγων ὁμοίως αὐτὸς τῷ ποδανιπτῆρι πεπρηγέναι ·
“Now then,” he said, “I have fared like the washbowl,


2.172.5
2796
εἰ γὰρ πρότερον εἶναι δημότης , ἀλλ’ ἐν τῷ παρεόντι εἶναι αὐτῶν βασιλεύς ·
since if before I was a common man, still, I am your king now.”


2.172.5
2797
καὶ τιμᾶν τε καὶ προμηθέεσθαι ἑωυτοῦ ἐκέλευε .
And he told them to honor and show respect for him.


2.173.1
2798
τοιούτῳ μὲν τρόπῳ προσηγάγετο τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους ὥστε δικαιοῦν δουλεύειν , ἐχρᾶτο δὲ καταστάσι πρηγμάτων τοιῇδε ·
The following was how he scheduled his affairs: in the morning, until the the hour when the marketplace filled, he readily conducted whatever business was brought to him;


2.173.1
2799
τὸ μὲν ὄρθριον μέχρι ὅτευ πληθούσης ἀγορῆς προθύμως ἔπρησσε τὰ προσφερόμενα πρήγματα , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτου ἔπινέ τε καὶ κατέσκωπτε τοὺς συμπότας καὶ ἦν μάταιός τε καὶ παιγνιήμων .
The rest of the day, he drank and joked at the expense of his companions and was idle and playful.


2.173.2
2800
ἀχθεσθέντες δὲ τούτοισι οἱ φίλοι αὐτοῦ ἐνουθέτεον αὐτὸν τοιάδε λέγοντες .
But this displeased his friends, who admonished him thus:


2.173.2
2801
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , οὐκ ὀρθῶς , σεωυτοῦ προέστηκας , ἐς τὸ ἄγαν φαῦλον προάγων σεωυτόν .
“O King, you do not conduct yourself well by indulging too much in vulgarity.


2.173.2
2802
σὲ γὰρ ἐχρῆν ἐν θρόνῳ σεμνῷ σεμνὸν θωκέοντα δι’ ἡμέρης πρήσσειν τὰ πρήγματα , καὶ οὕτω Αἰγύπτιοί τ’ ἂν ἠπιστέατο ὡς ὑπ’ ἀνδρὸς μεγάλου ἄρχονται , καὶ ἄμεινον σὺ ἂν ἤκουες ·
You, a celebrated man, ought to conduct your business throughout the day, sitting on a celebrated throne; and thus the Egyptians would know that they are governed by a great man, and you would be better spoken of;


2.173.2
2803
νῦν δὲ ποιέεις οὐδαμῶς βασιλικά " .
As it is, what you do is by no means kingly.”


2.173.3
2804
ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε αὐτούς .
But he answered them like this:


2.173.3
2805
" τὰ τόξα οἱ ἐκτημένοι , ἐπεὰν μὲν δέωνται χρᾶσθαι , ἐντανύουσι ·
“Men that have bows string them when they must use them, and unstring them when they have used them;


2.173.3
2806
εἰ γὰρ δὴ τὸν πάντα χρόνον ἐντεταμένα εἴη , ἐκραγείη ἄν , ὥστε ἐς τὸ δέον οὐκ ἂν ἔχοιεν αὐτοῖσι χρᾶσθαι .
Were bows kept strung forever, they would break, and so could not be used when needed.


2.173.4
2807
οὕτω δὲ καὶ ἀνθρώπου κατάστασις ·
Such, too, is the nature of man.


2.173.4
2808
εἰ ἐθέλοι κατεσπουδάσθαι αἰεὶ μηδὲ ἐς παιγνίην τὸ μέρος ἑωυτὸν ἀνιέναι , λάθοι ἂν ἤτοι μανεὶς ἢ ὅ γε ἀπόπληκτος γενόμενος ·
Were one to be always at serious work and not permit oneself a bit of relaxation, he would go mad or idiotic before he knew it;


2.173.4
2809
τὰ ἐγὼ ἐπιστάμενος μέρος ἑκατέρῳ νέμω " .
I am well aware of that, and give each of the two its turn.”


2.173.4
2810
ταῦτα μὲν τοὺς φίλους ἀμείψατο .
Such was his answer to his friends.


2.174.1
2811
λέγεται δὲ ὁ Ἄμασις , καὶ ὅτε ἦν ἰδιώτης , ὡς φιλοπότης ἦν καὶ φιλοσκώμμων καὶ οὐδαμῶς κατεσπουδασμένος ἀνήρ ·
It is said that even when Amasis was a private man he was fond of drinking and joking and was not at all a sober man;


2.174.1
2812
ὅκως δέ μιν ἐπιλείποι πίνοντά τε καὶ εὐπαθέοντα τὰ ἐπιτήδεα , κλέπτεσκε ἂν περιιών ·
And that when his drinking and pleasure-seeking cost him the bare necessities, he would go around stealing.


2.174.1
2813
οἳ δ’ ἄν μιν φάμενοι ἔχειν τὰ σφέτερα χρήματα ἀρνεύμενον ἄγεσκον ἐπὶ μαντήιον , ὅκου ἑκάστοισι εἴη .
Then when he contradicted those who said that he had their possessions, they would bring him to whatever place of divination was nearby,


2.174.1
2814
πολλὰ μὲν δὴ καὶ ἡλίσκετο ὑπὸ τῶν μαντηίων , πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἀπέφευγε .
And sometimes the oracles declared him guilty and sometimes they acquitted him.


2.174.2
2815
ἐπείτε δὲ καὶ ἐβασίλευσε , ἐποίησε τοιάδε ·
When he became king, he did not take care of the shrines of the gods who had acquitted him of theft,


2.174.2
2816
ὅσοι μὲν αὐτὸν τῶν θεῶν ἀπέλυσαν μὴ φῶρα εἶναι , τούτων μὲν τῶν ἱρῶν οὔτε ἐπεμέλετο οὔτε ἐς ἐπισκευὴν ἐδίδου οὐδέν , οὐδὲ φοιτέων ἔθυε ὡς οὐδενὸς ἐοῦσι ἀξίοισι ψευδέα τε μαντήια ἐκτημένοισι ·
or give them anything for maintenance, or make it his practice to sacrifice there, for he knew them to be worthless and their oracles false;


2.174.2
2817
ὅσοι δέ μιν κατέδησαν φῶρα εἶναι , τούτων δὲ ὡς ἀληθέων θεῶν ἐόντων καὶ ἀψευδέα μαντήια παρεχομένων τὰ μάλιστα ἐπεμέλετο .
But he took scrupulous care of the gods who had declared his guilt, considering them to be gods in very deed and their oracles infallible.


2.175.1
2818
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ἐν Σάι τῇ Ἀθηναίῃ προπύλαια θωμάσια οἷα ἐξεποίησε , πολλὸν πάντας ὑπερβαλόμενος τῷ τε ὕψεϊ καὶ τῷ μεγάθεϊ , ὅσων τε τὸ μέγαθος λίθων ἐστὶ καὶ ὁκοίων τεῶν ·
Amasis made a marvellous outer court for the temple of Athena at Saïs, far surpassing all in its height and size, and in the size and quality of the stone blocks;


2.175.1
2819
τοῦτο δὲ κολοσσοὺς μεγάλους καὶ ἀνδρόσφιγγας περιμήκεας ἀνέθηκε , λίθους τε ἄλλους ἐς ἐπισκευὴν ὑπερφυέας τὸ μέγαθος ἐκόμισε .
Moreover, he set up huge images and vast man-headed sphinxes, and brought enormous blocks of stone besides for the building.


2.175.2
2820
ἠγάγετο δὲ τούτων τοὺς μὲν ἐκ τῶν κατὰ Μέμφιν ἐουσέων λιθοτομιέων , τοὺς δὲ ὑπερμεγάθεας ἐξ Ἐλεφαντίνης πόλιος πλόον καὶ εἴκοσι ἡμερέων ἀπεχούσης ἀπὸ Σάιος .
Some of these he brought from the stone quarries of    Memphis   ; the largest came from the city of Elephantine, twenty days' journey distant by river from Saïs.


2.175.3
2821
τὸ δὲ οὐκ ἥκιστα αὐτῶν ἀλλὰ μάλιστα θωμάζω , ἔστι τόδε ·
But what I admire most of his works is this: he brought from Elephantine a shrine made of one single block of stone;


2.175.3
2822
οἴκημα μουνόλιθον ἐκόμισε ἐξ Ἐλεφαντίνης πόλιος , καὶ τοῦτο ἐκόμιζον μὲν ἐπ’ ἔτεα τρία , δισχίλιοι δέ οἱ προσετετάχατο ἄνδρες ἀγωγέες , καὶ οὗτοι ἅπαντες ἦσαν κυβερνῆται .
Its transport took three years and two thousand men had the carriage of it, all of them pilots.


2.175.3
2823
τῆς δὲ στέγης ταύτης τὸ μὲν μῆκος ἔξωθεν ἐστὶ εἷς τε καὶ εἴκοσι πήχεες , εὖρος δὲ τεσσερεσκαίδεκα , ὕψος δὲ ὀκτώ .
This chamber is thirty-five feet long, twenty-three feet wide, thirteen feet high.


2.175.4
2824
ταῦτα μὲν τὰ μέτρα ἔξωθεν τῆς στέγης τῆς μουνολίθου ἐστί , ἀτὰρ ἔσωθεν τὸ μῆκος ὀκτωκαίδεκα πηχέων καὶ πυγόνος G? ,τὸ δὲ ὕψος πέντε πηχέων ἐστί .
These are the external dimensions of the chamber which is made of one block; its internal dimensions are: thirty-one feet long, twenty feet wide, eight feet high.


2.175.4
2825
αὕτη τοῦ ἱροῦ κέεται παρὰ τὴν ἔσοδον ·
It stands at the entrance of the temple;


2.175.5
2826
ἔσω γάρ μιν ἐς τὸ ἱρόν φασι τῶνδε εἵνεκα οὐκ ἐσελκύσαι ·
It was not dragged within (so they say)


2.175.5
2827
τὸν ἀρχιτέκτονα αὐτῆς ἑλκομένης τῆς στέγης ἀναστενάξαι , οἷά τε χρόνου ἐγγεγονότος πολλοῦ καὶ ἀχθόμενον τῷ ἔργῳ , τὸν δὲ Ἄμασιν ἐνθύμιον ποιησάμενον οὐκ ἐᾶν ἔτι προσωτέρω ἑλκύσαι .
because while it was being drawn the chief builder complained aloud of the great expense of time and his loathing of the work, and Amasis taking this to heart would not let it be drawn further.


2.175.5
2828
ἤδη δὲ τινὲς λέγουσι ὡς ἄνθρωπος διεφθάρη ὑπ’ αὐτῆς τῶν τις αὐτὴν μοχλευόντων , καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου οὐκ ἐσελκυσθῆναι .
Some also say that a man, one of those who heaved up the shrine, was crushed by it, and therefore it was not dragged within.


2.176.1
2829
ἀνέθηκε δὲ καὶ ἐν τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ἱροῖσι ὁ Ἄμασις πᾶσι τοῖσι ἐλλογίμοισι ἔργα τὸ μέγαθος ἀξιοθέητα , ἐν δὲ καὶ ἐν Μέμφι τὸν ὕπτιον κείμενον κολοσσὸν τοῦ Ἡφαιστείου ἔμπροσθε , τοῦ πόδες πέντε καὶ ἑβδομήκοντα εἰσὶ τὸ μῆκος ·
Furthermore, Amasis dedicated, besides monuments of marvellous size in all the other temples of note, the huge image that lies supine before Hephaestus' temple at Memphis;


2.176.1
2830
ἐπὶ δὲ τῷ αὐτῷ βάθρῳ ἑστᾶσι τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἐόντος λίθου δύο κολοσσοί , εἴκοσι ποδῶν τὸ μέγαθος ἐὼν ἑκάτερος , ὃ μὲν ἔνθεν ὃ δ’ ἔνθεν τοῦ μεγάλου .
This image is seventy-five feet in length; there stand on the same base, on either side of the great image, two huge statues hewn from the same block, each of them twenty feet high.


2.176.2
2831
ἔστι δὲ λίθινος ἕτερος τοσοῦτος καὶ ἐν Σάι , κείμενος κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον τῷ ἐν Μέμφι .
There is at Saïs another stone figure of like size, supine as is the figure at Memphis.


2.176.2
2832
τῇ Ἴσι τε τὸ ἐν Μέμφι ἱρὸν Ἄμασις ἐστὶ ὁ ἐξοικοδομήσας , ἐὸν μέγα τε καὶ ἀξιοθεητότατον .
It was Amasis, too, who built the great and most marvellous temple of Isis at Memphis.


2.177.1
2833
ἐπ’ Ἀμάσιος δὲ βασιλέος λέγεται Αἴγυπτος μάλιστα δὴ τότε εὐδαιμονῆσαι καὶ τὰ ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ τῇ χώρῃ γινόμενα καὶ τὰ ἀπὸ τῆς χώρης τοῖσι ἀνθρώποισι , καὶ πόλις ἐν αὐτῇ γενέσθαι τὰς ἁπάσας τότε δισμυρίας τὰς οἰκεομένας .
It is said that in the reign of Amasis   Egypt    attained to its greatest prosperity, in respect of what the river did for the land and the land for its people: and that the number of inhabited cities in the country was twenty thousand.


2.177.2
2834
νόμον τε Αἰγυπτίοισι τόνδε Ἄμασις ἐστὶ ὁ καταστήσας , ἀποδεικνύναι ἔτεος ἑκάστου τῷ νομάρχῃ πάντα τινὰ Αἰγυπτίων ὅθεν βιοῦται ·
It was Amasis also who made the law that every Egyptian declare his means of livelihood to the ruler of his district annually,


2.177.2
2835
μὴ δὲ ποιεῦντα ταῦτα μηδὲ ἀποφαίνοντα δικαίην ζόην ἰθύνεσθαι θανάτῳ .
and that omitting to do so or to prove that one had a legitimate livelihood be punishable with death.


2.177.2
2836
Σόλων δὲ ὁ Ἀθηναῖος λαβὼν ἐξ Αἰγύπτου τοῦτον τὸν νόμον Ἀθηναίοισι ἔθετο ·
Solon the Athenian got this law from Egypt and established it among his people;


2.177.2
2837
τῷ ἐκεῖνοι ἐς αἰεὶ χρέωνται ἐόντι ἀμώμῳ νόμῳ .
may they always have it, for it is a perfect law.


2.178.1
2838
φιλέλλην δὲ γενόμενος ὁ Ἄμασις ἄλλα τε ἐς Ἑλλήνων μετεξετέρους ἀπεδέξατο , καὶ δὴ καὶ τοῖσι ἀπικνευμένοισι ἐς Αἴγυπτον ἔδωκε Ναύκρατιν πόλιν ἐνοικῆσαι ·
Amasis became a philhellene, and besides other services which he did for some of the Greeks, he gave those who came to Egypt the city of Naucratis to live in;


2.178.1
2839
τοῖσι δὲ μὴ βουλομένοισι αὐτῶν οἰκέειν , αὐτοῦ δὲ ναυτιλλομένοισι ἔδωκε χώρους ἐνιδρύσασθαι βωμοὺς καὶ τεμένεα θεοῖσι .
And to those who travelled to the country without wanting to settle there, he gave lands where they might set up altars and make holy places for their gods.


2.178.2
2840
τὸ μέν νυν μέγιστον αὐτῶν τέμενος , καὶ ὀνομαστότατον ἐὸν καὶ χρησιμώτατον , καλεύμενον δὲ Ἑλλήνιον , αἵδε αἱ πόλιες εἰσὶ αἱ ἱδρυμέναι κοινῇ , Ἱώνων μὲν Χίος καὶ Τέως καὶ Φώκαια καὶ Κλαζομεναί , Δωριέων δὲ Ῥόδος καὶ Κνίδος καὶ Ἁλικαρνησσὸς καὶ Φάσηλις , Αἰολέων δὲ ἡ Μυτιληναίων μούνη .
Of these the greatest and most famous and most visited precinct is that which is called the Hellenion, founded jointly by the Ionian cities of    Chios   ,    Teos   ,    Phocaea   , and    Clazomenae   , the Dorian cities of    Rhodes   ,    Cnidus   ,    Halicarnassus   , and Phaselis, and one Aeolian city,    Mytilene   .


2.178.3
2841
τουτέων μὲν ἐστὶ τοῦτο τὸ τέμενος , καὶ προστάτας τοῦ ἐμπορίου αὗται αἱ πόλιες εἰσὶ αἱ παρέχουσαι ·
It is to these that the precinct belongs, and these are the cities that furnish overseers of the trading port;


2.178.3
2842
ὅσαι δὲ ἄλλαι πόλιες μεταποιεῦνται , οὐδέν σφι μετεὸν μεταποιεῦνται .
if any other cities advance claims, they claim what does not belong to them.


2.178.3
2843
χωρὶς δὲ Αἰγινῆται ἐπὶ ἑωυτῶν ἱδρύσαντο τέμενος Διός , καὶ ἄλλο Σάμιοι Ἥρης καὶ Μιλήσιοι Ἀπόλλωνος .
The Aeginetans made a precinct of their own, sacred to Zeus; and so did the Samians for Hera and the Milesians for Apollo.


2.179.1
2844
ἦν δὲ τὸ παλαιὸν μούνη Ναύκρατις ἐμπόριον καὶ ἄλλο οὐδὲν Αἰγύπτου ·
Naucratis was in the past the only trading port in Egypt.


2.179.1
2845
εἰ δέ τις ἐς τῶν τι ἄλλο στομάτων τοῦ Νείλου ἀπίκοιτο , χρῆν ὀμόσαι μὴ μὲν ἑκόντα ἐλθεῖν , ἀπομόσαντα δὲ τῇ νηὶ αὐτῇ πλέειν ἐς τὸ Κανωβικόν ·
Whoever came to any other mouth of the Nile had to swear that he had not come intentionally, and had then to take his ship and sail to the Canobic mouth;


2.179.1
2846
ἢ εἰ μή γε οἷά τε εἴη πρὸς ἀνέμους ἀντίους πλέειν , τὰ φορτία ἔδεε περιάγειν ἐν βάρισι περὶ τὸ Δέλτα , μέχρι οὗ ἀπίκοιτο ἐς Ναύκρατιν .
Or if he could not sail against contrary winds, he had to carry his cargo in barges around the Delta until he came to Naucratis.


2.179.1
2847
οὕτω μὲν δὴ Ναύκρατις ἐτετίμητο .
In such esteem was Naucratis held.


2.180.1
2848
ἀμφικτυόνων δὲ μισθωσάντων τὸν ἐν Δελφοῖσι νῦν ἐόντα νηὸν τριηκοσίων ταλάντων ἐξεργάσασθαι ( ὁ γὰρ πρότερον ἐὼν αὐτόθι αὐτόματος κατεκάη ) , τοὺς Δελφοὺς δὴ ἐπέβαλλε τεταρτημόριον τοῦ μισθώματος παρασχεῖν .
When the Amphictyons paid three hundred talents to have the temple that now stands at    Delphi    finished (as that which was formerly there burnt down by accident), it was the Delphians' lot to pay a fourth of the cost.


2.180.2
2849
πλανώμενοι δὲ οἱ Δελφοὶ περὶ τὰς πόλις ἐδωτίναζον , ποιεῦντες δὲ τοῦτο οὐκ ἐλάχιστον ἐξ Αἰγύπτου ἠνείκαντο ·
They went about from city to city collecting gifts, and got most from Egypt;


2.180.2
2850
Ἄμασις μὲν γάρ σφι ἔδωκε χίλια στυπτηρίης τάλαντα , οἱ δὲ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ οἰκέοντες Ἕλληνες εἴκοσι μνέας .
For Amasis gave them a thousand talents' weight of astringent earth, and the Greek settlers in Egypt twenty minae.


2.181.1
2851
Κυρηναίοισι δὲ Ἄμασις φιλότητά τε καὶ συμμαχίην συνεθήκατο , ἐδικαίωσε δὲ καὶ γῆμαι αὐτόθεν , εἴτ’ ἐπιθυμήσας Ἑλληνίδος γυναικὸς εἴτε καὶ ἄλλως φιλότητος Κυρηναίων εἵνεκα ·
Amasis made friends and allies of the people of    Cyrene   . And he decided to marry from there, either because he had his heart set on a Greek wife, or for the sake of the Corcyreans' friendship;


2.181.2
2852
γαμέει δὲ ὦν οἳ μὲν λέγουσι Βάττου οἳ δ’ Ἀρκεσίλεω θυγατέρα , οἳ δὲ Κριτοβούλου ἀνδρὸς τῶν ἀστῶν δοκίμου , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Λαδίκη ·
In any case, he married a certain Ladice, said by some to be the daughter of Battus, of Arcesilaus by others, and by others again of Critobulus, an esteemed citizen of the place.


2.181.2
2853
τῇ ἐπείτε συγκλίνοιτο ὁ Ἄμασις , μίσγεσθαι οὐκ οἷός τε ἐγίνετο , τῇσι δὲ ἄλλῃσι γυναιξὶ ἐχρᾶτο .
But whenever Amasis lay with her, he became unable to have intercourse, though he managed with every other woman;


2.181.3
2854
ἐπείτε δὲ πολλὸν τοῦτο ἐγίνετο , εἶπε ὁ Ἄμασις πρὸς τὴν Λαδίκην ταύτην καλεομένην , " ὦ γύναι , κατά με ἐφάρμαξας , καὶ ἔστι τοι οὐδεμία μηχανὴ μὴ οὐκ ἀπολωλέναι κάκιστα γυναικῶν πασέων " .
and when this happened repeatedly, Amasis said to the woman called Ladice, “Woman, you have cast a spell on me, and there is no way that you shall avoid perishing the most wretchedly of all women.”


2.181.4
2855
ἡ δὲ Λαδίκη , ἐπείτε οἱ ἀρνευμένῃ οὐδὲν ἐγίνετο πρηΰτερος ὁ Ἄμασις , εὔχεται ἐν τῷ νόῳ τῇ Ἀφροδίτῃ , ἤν οἱ ὑπ’ ἐκείνην τὴν νύκτα μιχθῇ ὁ Ἄμασις , τοῦτο γάρ οἱ κακοῦ εἶναι μῆχος , ἄγαλμά οἱ ἀποπέμψειν ἐς Κυρήνην .
So Ladice, when the king did not relent at all although she denied it, vowed in her heart to Aphrodite that, if Amasis could have intercourse with her that night, since that would remedy the problem, she would send a statue to Cyrene to her.


2.181.4
2856
μετὰ δὲ τὴν εὐχὴν αὐτίκα οἱ ἐμίχθη ὁ Ἄμασις .
And after the prayer, immediately, Amasis did have intercourse with her.


2.181.4
2857
καὶ τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν ἤδη , ὁκότε ἔλθοι Ἄμασις πρὸς αὐτήν , ἐμίσγετο , καὶ κάρτα μιν ἔστερξε μετὰ τοῦτο .
And whenever Amasis came to her thereafter, he had intercourse, and he was very fond of her after this.


2.181.5
2858
ἡ δὲ Λαδίκη ἀπέδωκε τὴν εὐχὴν τῇ θεῷ ·
Ladice paid her vow to the goddess;


2.181.5
2859
ποιησαμένη γὰρ ἄγαλμα ἀπέπεμψε ἐς Κυρήνην , τὸ ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἦν σόον , ἔξω τετραμμένον τοῦ Κυρηναίων ἄστεος .
She had an image made and sent it to Cyrene, where it stood safe until my time, facing outside the city.


2.181.5
2860
ταύτην τὴν Λαδίκην , ὡς ἐπεκράτησε Καμβύσης Αἰγύπτου καὶ ἐπύθετο αὐτῆς ἥτις εἴη , ἀπέπεμψε ἀσινέα ἐς Κυρήνην .
Cambyses, when he had conquered Egypt and learned who Ladice was, sent her away to Cyrene unharmed.


2.182.1
2861
ἀνέθηκε δὲ καὶ ἀναθήματα ὁ Ἄμασις ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα , τοῦτο μὲν ἐς Κυρήνην ἄγαλμα ἐπίχρυσον Ἀθηναίης καὶ εἰκόνας ἑωυτοῦ γραφῇ εἰκασμένην , τοῦτο δὲ τῇ ἐν Λίνδῳ Ἀθηναίῃ δύο τε ἀγάλματα λίθινα καὶ θώρηκα λίνεον ἀξιοθέητον , τοῦτο δ’ ἐς Σάμον τῇ Ἥρῃ εἰκόνας ἑωυτοῦ διφασίας ξυλίνας , αἳ ἐν τῷ νηῷ τῷ μεγάλῳ ἱδρύατο ἔτι καὶ τὸ μέχρι ἐμεῦ , ὄπισθε τῶν θυρέων .
Moreover, Amasis dedicated offerings in    Hellas   . He gave to    Cyrene    a gilt image of Athena and a painted picture of himself; to Athena of    Lindus   , two stone images and a marvellous linen breast-plate; and to Hera in    Samos   , two wooden statues of himself that were still standing in my time behind the doors in the great shrine.


2.182.2
2862
ἐς μέν νυν Σάμον ἀνέθηκε κατὰ ξεινίην τὴν ἑωυτοῦ τε καὶ Πολυκράτεος τοῦ Αἰάκεος , ἐς δὲ Λίνδον ξεινίης μὲν οὐδεμιῆς εἵνεκεν , ὅτι δὲ τὸ ἱρὸν τὸ ἐν Λίνδῳ τὸ τῆς Ἀθηναίης λέγεται τὰς Δαναοῦ θυγατέρας ἱδρύσασθαι προσσχούσας , ὅτε ἀπεδίδρησκον τοὺς Αἰγύπτου παῖδας .
The offerings in Samos were dedicated because of the friendship between Amasis and Polycrates, son of Aeaces; What he gave to Lindus was not out of friendship for anyone, but because the temple of Athena in Lindus is said to have been founded by the daughters of Danaus, when they landed there in their flight from the sons of Egyptus.


2.182.2
2863
ταῦτα μὲν ἀνέθηκε ὁ Ἄμασις , εἷλε δὲ Κύπρον πρῶτος ἀνθρώπων καὶ κατεστρέψατο ἐς φόρου ἀπαγωγήν .
Such were Amasis' offerings. Moreover, he was the first conqueror of Cyprus, which he made tributary to himself.



3.1.1
2864
ἐπὶ τοῦτον δὴ τὸν Ἄμασιν Καμβύσης ὁ Κύρου ἐστρατεύετο , ἄγων καί ἄλλους τῶν ἦρχε καὶ Ἑλλήνων Ἴωνάς τε καὶ Αἰολέας , δι’ αἰτίην τοιήνδε .
Cyrus' son Cambyses was leading an army of his subjects, Ionian and Aeolian Greeks among them, against this Amasis for the following reason.


3.1.1
2865
πέμψας Καμβύσης ἐς Αἴγυπτον κήρυκα αἴτεε Ἄμασιν θυγατέρα , αἴτεε δὲ ἐκ βουλῆς ἀνδρὸς Αἰγυπτίου , ὃς μεμφόμενος Ἄμασιν ἔπρηξε ταῦτα ὅτι μιν ἐξ ἁπάντων τῶν ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἰητρῶν ἀποσπάσας ἀπὸ γυναικός τε καὶ τέκνων ἔκδοτον ἐποίησε ἐς Πέρσας , ὅτε Κῦρος πέμψας παρὰ Ἄμασιν αἴτεε ἰητρὸν ὀφθαλμῶν ὃς εἴη ἄριστος τῶν ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ .
Cambyses had sent a herald to Egypt asking Amasis for his daughter; he asked on the advice of an Egyptian, who advised it out of resentment against Amasis, that out of all the Egyptian physicians Amasis had dragged him away from his wife and children and sent him up to Persia when Cyrus sent to Amasis asking for the best eye-doctor in Egypt.


3.1.2
2866
ταῦτα δὴ ἐπιμεμφόμενος ὁ Αἰγύπτιος ἐνῆγε τῇ συμβουλῇ κελεύων αἰτέειν τὸν Καμβύσεα Ἄμασιν θυγατέρα , ἵνα ἢ δοὺς ἀνιῷτο ἢ μὴ δοὺς Καμβύσῃ ἀπέχθοιτο .
Out of resentment, the Egyptian by his advice induced Cambyses to ask Amasis for his daughter, so that Amasis would either be wretched if he gave her, or hated by Cambyses if he did not.


3.1.2
2867
ὁ δὲ Ἄμασις τῇ δυνάμι τῶν Περσέων ἀχθόμενος καὶ ἀρρωδέων οὐκ εἶχε οὔτε δοῦναι οὔτε ἀρνήσασθαι ·
Amasis, intimidated by the power of Persia and frightened, could neither give his daughter nor refuse her;


3.1.2
2868
εὖ γὰρ ἠπίστατο ὅτι οὐκ ὡς γυναῖκά μιν ἔμελλε Καμβύσης ἕξειν ἀλλ’ ὡς παλλακήν .
for he knew well that Cambyses was not going to take her as his wife but as his concubine.


3.1.3
2869
ταῦτα δὴ ἐκλογιζόμενος ἐποίησε τάδε .
After considering the matter, he did as follows.


3.1.3
2870
ἦν Ἀπρίεω τοῦ προτέρου βασιλέος θυγάτηρ κάρτα μεγάλη τε καὶ εὐειδὴς μούνη τοῦ οἴκου λελειμμένη , οὔνομα δέ οἱ ἦν Νίτητις ·
There was a daughter of the former king Apries, all that was left of that family, quite tall and pretty, and her name was Nitetis;


3.1.3
2871
ταύτην δὴ τὴν παῖδα ὁ Ἄμασις κοσμήσας ἐσθῆτί τε καὶ χρυσῷ ἀποπέμπει ἐς Πέρσας ὡς ἑωυτοῦ θυγατέρα .
this girl Amasis adorned with clothes and gold and sent to Cambyses as his own daughter.


3.1.4
2872
μετὰ δὲ χρόνον ὥς μιν ἠσπάζετο πατρόθεν ὀνομάζων , λέγει πρὸς αὐτὸν ἡ παῖς " ὦ βασιλεῦ , διαβεβλημένος ὑπὸ Ἀμάσιος οὐ μανθάνεις .
But after a time, as he embraced her addressing her as the daughter of Amasis, the girl said to him,


3.1.4
2873
ὃς ἐμὲ σοὶ κόσμῳ ἀσκήσας ἀπέπεμψε ὡς ἑωυτοῦ θυγατέρα διδούς , ἐοῦσαν τῇ ἀληθείῃ Ἀπρίεω , τὸν ἐκεῖνος ἐόντα ἑωυτοῦ δεσπότεα μετ’ Αἰγυπτίων ἐπαναστὰς ἐφόνευσε " .
“O King, you do not understand how you have been made a fool of by Amasis, who dressed me in finery and sent me to you as his own daughter, when I am in fact the daughter of Apries, the ruler Amasis revolted from with the Egyptians and killed.”


3.1.5
2874
τοῦτο δὴ τὸ ἔπος καὶ αὕτη ἡ αἰτίη ἐγγενομένη ἤγαγε Καμβύσεα τὸν Κύρου μεγάλως θυμωθέντα ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον .
This speech and this crime that occurred turned Cyrus' son Cambyses, furiously angry, against    Egypt   . So the Persians say.


3.2.1
2875
οὕτω μέν νυν λέγουσι Πέρσαι .
That is what the Persians now say.


3.2.1
2876
Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ οἰκηιοῦνται Καμβύσεα , φάμενοί μιν ἐκ ταύτης δὴ τῆς Ἀπρίεω θυγατρὸς γενέσθαι ·
But the Egyptians, who say that Cambyses was the son of this daughter of Apries, claim him as one of theirs;


3.2.1
2877
Κῦρον γὰρ εἶναι τὸν πέμψαντα παρὰ Ἄμασιν ἐπὶ τὴν θυγατέρα , ἀλλ’ οὐ Καμβύσεα .
they say that it was Cyrus who asked Amasis for his daughter, and not Cambyses.


3.2.1
2878
λέγοντες δὲ ταῦτα οὐκ ὀρθῶς λέγουσι .
But what they say is false.


3.2.2
2879
οὐ μὲν οὐδὲ λέληθε αὐτούς ( εἰ γὰρ τινὲς καὶ ἄλλοι , τὰ Περσέων νόμιμα ἐπιστέαται καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι ) ὅτι πρῶτα μὲν νόθον οὔ σφι νόμος ἐστὶ βασιλεῦσαι γνησίου παρεόντος , αὖτις δὲ ὅτι Κασσανδάνης τῆς Φαρνάσπεω θυγατρὸς ἦν παῖς Καμβύσης , ἀνδρὸς Ἀχαιμενίδεω , ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἐκ τῆς Αἰγυπτίης .
They are certainly not unaware (for if any understand the customs of the Persians the Egyptians do) firstly, that it is not their custom for illegitimate offspring to rule when there are legitimate offspring; and secondly, that Cambyses was the son of Cassandane, the daughter of Pharnaspes, who was an Achaemenid, and not of the Egyptian woman.


3.2.2
2880
ἀλλὰ παρατρέπουσι τὸν λόγον προσποιεύμενοι τῇ Κύρου οἰκίῃ συγγενέες εἶναι .
But they falsify the story, pretending to be related to the house of Cyrus. That is the truth of the matter.


3.3.1
2881
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ὧδε ἔχει .
The following story, incredible to me, is also told: that one of the Persian women who came to visit Cyrus' wives, and saw the tall and attractive children who stood by Cassandane, expressed her admiration in extravagant terms.


3.3.1
2882
λέγεται δὲ καὶ ὅδε λόγος , ἐμοὶ μὲν οὐ πιθανός , ὡς τῶν Περσίδων γυναικῶν ἐσελθοῦσά τις παρὰ τὰς Κύρου γυναῖκας , ὡς εἶδε τῇ Κασσανδάνῃ παρεστεῶτα τέκνα εὐειδέα τε καὶ μεγάλα , πολλῷ ἐχρᾶτο τῷ ἐπαίνῳ ὑπερθωμάζουσα , ἡ δὲ Κασσανδάνη ἐοῦσα τοῦ Κύρου γυνὴ εἶπε τάδε ·
Then Cassandane, Cyrus' wife, said,


3.3.2
2883
" τοιῶνδε μέντοι ἐμὲ παίδων μητέρα ἐοῦσαν Κῦρος ἐν ἀτιμίῃ ἔχει , τὴν δὲ ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου ἐπίκτητον ἐν τιμῇ τίθεται " .
“Although I am the mother of such children, Cyrus dishonors me and honors his new woman from Egypt.”


3.3.2
2884
τὴν μὲν ἀχθομένην τῇ Νιτήτι εἰπεῖν ταῦτα , τῶν δέ οἱ παίδων τὸν πρεσβύτερον εἰπεῖν Καμβύσεα ·
So she spoke in her bitterness against Nitetis; and Cambyses, the eldest of her sons, said,


3.3.3
2885
" τοιγάρ τοι ὦ μῆτερ , ἐπεὰν ἐγὼ γένωμαι ἀνήρ , Αἰγύπτου τὰ μὲν ἄνω κάτω θήσω , τὰ δὲ κάτω ἄνω " .
“Then, mother, when I am grown up, I will turn all Egypt upside down.”


3.3.3
2886
ταῦτα εἰπεῖν αὐτὸν ἔτεα ὡς δέκα κου γεγονότα , καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας ἐν θώματι γενέσθαι ·
When he said this, he was about ten years old, and the women were amazed;


3.3.3
2887
τὸν δὲ διαμνημονεύοντα οὕτω δή , ἐπείτε ἀνδρώθη καὶ ἔσχε τὴν βασιληίην , ποιήσασθαι τὴν ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον στρατηίην .
but he kept it in mind, and it was thus that when he grew up and became king, he made the campaign against Egypt.


3.4.1
2888
συνήνεικε δὲ καὶ ἄλλο τι τοιόνδε πρῆγμα γενέσθαι ἐς τὴν ἐπιστράτευσιν ταύτην .
It so happened, too, that something else occurred contributing to this campaign.


3.4.1
2889
ἦν τῶν ἐπικούρων Ἀμάσιος ἀνὴρ γένος μὲν Ἁλικαρνησσεύς , οὔνομα δέ οἱ Φάνης , καὶ γνώμην ἱκανὸς καὶ τὰ πολεμικὰ ἄλκιμος .
There was among Amasis' mercenaries a man who was a Halicarnassian by birth, a clever man and a good soldier, whose name was Phanes.


3.4.2
2890
οὗτος ὁ Φάνης μεμφόμενός κού τι Ἀμάσι ἐκδιδρήσκει πλοίῳ ἐξ Αἰγύπτου , βουλόμενος Καμβύσῃ ἐλθεῖν ἐς λόγους .
This Phanes had some grudge against Amasis, and fled from Egypt aboard ship, hoping to talk to Cambyses.


3.4.2
2891
οἷα δὲ ἐόντα αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖσι ἐπικούροισι λόγου οὐ σμικροῦ ἐπιστάμενόν τε τὰ περὶ Αἴγυπτον ἀτρεκέστατα , μεταδιώκει ὁ Ἄμασις σπουδὴν ποιεύμενος ἑλεῖν , μεταδιώκει δὲ τῶν εὐνούχων τὸν πιστότατον ἀποστείλας τριήρεϊ κατ’ αὐτόν , ὃς αἱρέει μιν ἐν Λυκίῃ , ἑλὼν δὲ οὐκ ἀνήγαγε ἐς Αἴγυπτον ·
Since he was a man much admired among the mercenaries and had an exact knowledge of all Egyptian matters, Amasis was anxious to catch him, and sent a trireme with his most trusted eunuch to pursue him. This eunuch caught him in Lycia but never brought him back to Egypt;


3.4.2
2892
σοφίῃ γάρ μιν περιῆλθε ὁ Φάνης ·
for Phanes was too clever for him.


3.4.3
2893
καταμεθύσας γὰρ τοὺς φυλάκους ἀπαλλάσσετο ἐς Πέρσας .
He made his guards drunk and so escaped to Persia.


3.4.3
2894
ὁρμημένῳ δὲ στρατεύεσθαι Καμβύσῃ ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον καὶ ἀπορέοντι τὴν ἔλασιν , ὅκως τὴν ἄνυδρον διεκπερᾷ , ἐπελθὼν φράζει μὲν καὶ τὰ ἄλλα τὰ Ἀμάσιος πρήγματα , ἐξηγέεται δὲ καὶ τὴν ἔλασιν , ὧδε παραινέων , πέμψαντα παρὰ τὸν Ἀραβίων βασιλέα δέεσθαι τὴν διέξοδόν οἱ ἀσφαλέα παρασχεῖν .
There he found Cambyses prepared to set out against Egypt, but in doubt as to his march, how he should cross the waterless desert; so Phanes showed him what was Amasis' condition and how he should march; as to this, he advised Cambyses to send and ask the king of the Arabians for a safe passage.


3.5.1
2895
μούνῃ δὲ ταύτῃ εἰσὶ φανεραὶ ἐσβολαὶ ἐς Αἴγυπτον .
Now the only apparent way of entry into Egypt is this.


3.5.1
2896
ἀπὸ γὰρ Φοινίκης μέχρι οὔρων τῶν Καδύτιος πόλιος ἐστὶ Σύρων τῶν Παλαιστίνων καλεομένων ·
The road runs from Phoenicia as far as the borders of the city of Cadytis, which belongs to the so-called Syrians of Palestine.


3.5.2
2897
ἀπὸ δὲ Καδύτιος ἐούσης πόλιος , ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέει , Σαρδίων οὐ πολλῷ ἐλάσσονος , ἀπὸ ταύτης τὰ ἐμπόρια τὰ ἐπὶ θαλάσσης μέχρι Ἰηνύσου πόλιος ἐστὶ τοῦ Ἀραβίου , ἀπὸ δὲ Ἰηνύσου αὖτις Σύρων μέχρι Σερβωνίδος λίμνης , παρ’ ἣν δὴ τὸ Κάσιον ὄρος τείνει ἐς θάλασσαν ·
From Cadytis (which, as I judge, is a city not much smaller than    Sardis   ) to the city of Ienysus the seaports belong to the Arabians; then they are Syrian again from Ienysus as far as the Serbonian marsh, beside which the Casian promontory stretches seawards;


3.5.3
2898
ἀπὸ δὲ Σερβωνίδος λίμνης , ἐν τῇ δὴ λόγος τὸν Τυφῶ κεκρύφθαι , ἀπὸ ταύτης ἤδη Αἴγυπτος .
from this Serbonian marsh, where Typho is supposed to have been hidden, the country is Egypt.


3.5.3
2899
τὸ δὴ μεταξὺ Ἰηνύσου πόλιος καὶ Κασίου τε ὄρεος καὶ τῆς Σερβωνίδος λίμνης , ἐὸν τοῦτο οὐκ ὀλίγον χωρίον ἀλλὰ ὅσον τε ἐπὶ τρεῖς ἡμέρας ὁδόν , ἄνυδρον ἐστὶ δεινῶς .
Now between Ienysus and the Casian mountain and the Serbonian marsh there lies a wide territory for as much as three days' journey, terribly arid.


3.6.1
2900
τὸ δὲ ὀλίγοι τῶν ἐς Αἴγυπτον ναυτιλλομένων ἐννενώκασι , τοῦτο ἔρχομαι φράσων .
I am going to mention something now which few of those who sail to Egypt know.


3.6.1
2901
ἐς Αἴγυπτον ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος πάσης καὶ πρὸς ἐκ Φοινίκης κέραμος ἐσάγεται πλήρης οἴνου δὶς τοῦ ἔτεος ἑκάστου , καὶ ἓν κεράμιον οἰνηρὸν ἀριθμῷ κεινὸν οὐκ ἔστι ὡς λόγῳ εἰπεῖν ἰδέσθαι .
Earthen jars full of wine are brought into Egypt twice a year from all Greece and Phoenicia besides: yet one might safely say there is not a single empty wine jar anywhere in the country.


3.6.2
2902
κοῦ δῆτα , εἴποι τις ἄν , ταῦτα ἀναισιμοῦται ;
What then (one may ask) becomes of them?


3.6.2
2903
ἐγὼ καὶ τοῦτο φράσω ·
I shall explain this too.


3.6.2
2904
δεῖ τὸν μὲν δήμαρχον ἕκαστον ἐκ τῆς ἑωυτοῦ πόλιος συλλέξαντα πάντα τὸν κέραμον ἄγειν ἐς Μέμφιν , τοὺς δὲ ἐκ Μέμφιος ἐς ταῦτα δὴ τὰ ἄνυδρα τῆς Συρίης κομίζειν πλήσαντας ὕδατος .
Each governor of a district must gather in all the earthen pots from his own township and take them to Memphis, and the people of Memphis must fill them with water and carry them to those arid lands of Syria;


3.6.2
2905
οὕτω ὁ ἐπιφοιτέων κέραμος καὶ ἐξαιρεόμενος ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἐπὶ τὸν παλαιὸν κομίζεται ἐς Συρίην .
so the earthen pottery that is brought to Egypt and unloaded or emptied there is carried to Syria to join the stock that has already been taken there.


3.7.1
2906
οὕτω μέν νυν Πέρσαι εἰσὶ οἱ τὴν ἐσβολὴν ταύτην παρασκευάσαντες ἐς Αἴγυπτον , κατὰ δὴ τὰ εἰρημένα σάξαντες ὕδατι , ἐπείτε τάχιστα παρέλαβον Αἴγυπτον .
Now as soon as the Persians took possession of    Egypt   , they became the caretakers of the entryway into it, having it provisioned with water in the way I have described.


3.7.2
2907
τότε δὲ οὐκ ἐόντος κω ὕδατος ἑτοίμου , Καμβύσης πυθόμενος τοῦ Ἁλικαρνησσέος ξείνου , πέμψας παρὰ τὸν Ἀράβιον ἀγγέλους καὶ δεηθεὶς τῆς ἀσφαλείης ἔτυχε , πίστις δούς τε καὶ δεξάμενος παρ’ αὐτοῦ .
But at this time there was as yet no ready supply of water; and so Cambyses, hearing what was said by the stranger from    Halicarnassus   , sent messengers to the Arabian and asked and obtained safe conduct, giving to him and receiving from him pledges.


3.8.1
2908
σέβονται δὲ Ἀράβιοι πίστις ἀνθρώπων ὅμοια τοῖσι μάλιστα , ποιεῦνται δὲ αὐτὰς τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
There are no men who respect pledges more than the Arabians.


3.8.1
2909
τῶν βουλομένων τὰ πιστὰ ποιέεσθαι ἄλλος ἀνήρ , ἀμφοτέρων αὐτῶν ἐν μέσῳ ἑστεώς , λίθῳ ὀξέι τὸ ἔσω τῶν χειρῶν παρὰ τοὺς δακτύλους τοὺς μεγάλους ἐπιτάμνει τῶν ποιευμένων τὰς πίστις , καὶ ἔπειτα λαβὼν ἐκ τοῦ ἱματίου ἑκατέρου κροκύδα ἀλείφει τῷ αἵματι ἐν μέσῳ κειμένους λίθους ἑπτά ·
This is how they give them: a man stands between the two pledging parties, and with a sharp stone cuts the palms of their hands, near the thumb;


3.8.1
2910
τοῦτο δὲ ποιέων ἐπικαλέει τε τὸν Διόνυσον καὶ τὴν Οὐρανίην .
then he takes a piece of wool from the cloak of each and smears with their blood seven stones that lie between them, meanwhile calling on Dionysus and the Heavenly Aphrodite;


3.8.2
2911
ἐπιτελέσαντος δὲ τούτου ταῦτα , ὁ τὰς πίστις ποιησάμενος τοῖσι φίλοισι παρεγγυᾷ τὸν ξεῖνον ἢ καὶ τὸν ἀστόν , ἢν πρὸς ἀστὸν ποιέηται ·
after this is done, the one who has given his pledge commends the stranger (or his countryman if the other be one) to his friends,


3.8.2
2912
οἱ δὲ φίλοι καὶ αὐτοὶ τὰς πίστις δικαιεῦσι σέβεσθαι .
and his friends hold themselves bound to honor the pledge.


3.8.3
2913
Διόνυσον δὲ θεῶν μοῦνον καὶ τὴν Οὐρανίην ἡγέονται εἶναι , καὶ τῶν τριχῶν τὴν κουρὴν κείρεσθαι φασὶ κατά περ αὐτὸν τὸν Διόνυσον κεκάρθαι ·
They believe in no other gods except Dionysus and the Heavenly Aphrodite;


3.8.3
2914
κείρονται δὲ περιτρόχαλα , ὑποξυρῶντες τοὺς κροτάφους .
and they say that they wear their hair as Dionysus does his, cutting it round the head and shaving the temples.


3.8.3
2915
ὀνομάζουσι δὲ τὸν μὲν Διόνυσον Ὀροτάλτ , τὴν δὲ Οὐρανίην Ἀλιλάτ .
They call Dionysus, Orotalt; and Aphrodite, Alilat.


3.9.1
2916
ἐπεὶ ὦν τὴν πίστιν τοῖσι ἀγγέλοισι τοῖσι παρὰ Καμβύσεω ἀπιγμένοισι ἐποιήσατο ὁ Ἀράβιος , ἐμηχανᾶτο τοιάδε ·
When, then, the Arabian had made the pledge to the messengers who had come from Cambyses,


3.9.1
2917
ἀσκοὺς καμήλων πλήσας , ὕδατος ἐπέσαξε ἐπὶ τὰς ζωὰς τῶν καμήλων πάσας , τοῦτο δὲ ποιήσας ἤλασε ἐς τὴν ἄνυδρον καὶ ὑπέμενε ἐνθαῦτα τὸν Καμβύσεω στρατόν .
he devised the following expedient: he filled camel-skins with water and loaded all his camels with these; then he drove them into the waterless land and there awaited Cambyses' army.


3.9.2
2918
οὗτος μὲν ὁ πιθανώτερος τῶν λόγων εἴρηται , δεῖ δὲ καὶ τὸν ἧσσον πιθανόν , ἐπεί γε δὴ λέγεται , ῥηθῆναι .
This is the most credible of the stories told; but I must relate the less credible tale also, since they tell it.


3.9.2
2919
ποταμός ἐστι μέγας ἐν τῇ Ἀραβίῃ τῷ οὔνομα Κόρυς , ἐκδιδοῖ δὲ οὗτος ἐς τὴν Ἐρυθρὴν καλεομένην θάλασσαν ·
There is a great river in Arabia called Corys, emptying into the sea called Red.


3.9.3
2920
ἀπὸ τούτου δὴ ὦν τοῦ ποταμοῦ λέγεται τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Ἀραβίων , ῥαψάμενον τῶν ὠμοβοέων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων δερμάτων ὀχετὸν μήκεϊ ἐξικνεύμενον ἐς τὴν ἄνυδρον , ἀγαγεῖν διὰ δὴ τούτων τὸ ὕδωρ , ἐν δὲ τῇ , ἀνύδρῳ μεγάλας δεξαμενὰς ὀρύξασθαι , ἵνα δεκόμεναι τὸ ὕδωρ σώζωσι .
From this river (it is said) the king of the Arabians brought water by an aqueduct made of sewn oxhides and other hides and extensive enough to reach to the dry country; and he had great tanks dug in that country to try to receive and keep the water.


3.9.4
2921
ὁδὸς δ’ ἐστὶ δυώδεκα ἡμερέων ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἐς ταύτην τὴν ἄνυδρον .
It is a twelve days' journey from the river to that desert.


3.9.4
2922
ἄγειν δέ μιν δι’ ὀχετῶν τριῶν ἐς τριξὰ χωρία .
By three aqueducts (they say) he brought the water to three different places.


3.10.1
2923
ἐν δὲ τῷ Πηλουσίῳ καλεομένῳ στόματι τοῦ Νείλου ἐστρατοπεδεύετο Ψαμμήνιτος ὁ Ἀμάσιος παῖς ὑπομένων Καμβύσεα .
Psammenitus, son of Amasis, was encamped by the mouth of the    Nile    called Pelusian, awaiting Cambyses.


3.10.2
2924
Ἄμασιν γὰρ οὐ κατέλαβε ζῶντα Καμβύσης ἐλάσας ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον , ἀλλὰ βασιλεύσας ὁ Ἄμασις τέσσερα καὶ τεσσεράκοντα ἔτεα ἀπέθανε , ἐν τοῖσι οὐδέν οἱ μέγα ἀνάρσιον πρῆγμα συνηνείχθη ·
For when Cambyses marched against Egypt, he found Amasis no longer alive; he had died after reigning forty-four years, during which he had suffered no great misfortune;


3.10.2
2925
ἀποθανὼν δὲ καὶ ταριχευθεὶς ἐτάφη ἐν τῇσι ταφῇσι ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ , τὰς αὐτὸς οἰκοδομήσατο .
and being dead he was embalmed and laid in the burial-place built for him in the temple.


3.10.3
2926
ἐπὶ Ψαμμηνίτου δὲ τοῦ Ἀμάσιος βασιλεύοντος Αἰγύπτου φάσμα Αἰγυπτίοισι μέγιστον δὴ ἐγένετο ·
While his son Psammenitus was king of Egypt, the people saw an extraordinary thing,


3.10.3
2927
ὕσθησαν γὰρ Θῆβαι αἱ Αἰγύπτιαι , οὔτε πρότερον οὐδαμὰ ὑσθεῖσαι οὔτε ὕστερον τὸ μέχρι ἐμεῦ , ὡς λέγουσι αὐτοὶ Θηβαῖοι ·
namely, rain at Thebes of Egypt, where, as the Thebans themselves say, there had never been rain before, nor since to my lifetime;


3.10.3
2928
οὐ γὰρ δὴ ὕεται τὰ ἄνω τῆς Αἰγύπτου τὸ παράπαν ·
for indeed there is no rain at all in the upper parts of Egypt;


3.10.3
2929
ἀλλὰ καὶ τότε ὕσθησαν αἱ Θῆβαι ψακάδι .
but at that time a drizzle of rain fell at Thebes.


3.11.1
2930
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ἐπείτε διεξελάσαντες τὴν ἄνυδρον ἵζοντο πέλας τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ὡς συμβαλέοντες , ἐνθαῦτα οἱ ἐπίκουροι οἱ τοῦ Αἰγυπτίου , ἐόντες ἄνδρες Ἕλληνές τε καὶ Κᾶρες , μεμφόμενοι τῷ Φάνῃ ὅτι στρατὸν ἤγαγε ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον ἀλλόθροον , μηχανῶνται πρῆγμα ἐς αὐτὸν τοιόνδε .
When the Persians had crossed the waterless country and encamped near the Egyptians intending to engage them, the Egyptian mercenaries, Greeks and Carians, devised a plan to punish Phanes, angered at him for leading a foreign army into    Egypt   .


3.11.2
2931
ἦσαν τῷ Φάνῃ παῖδες ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ καταλελειμμένοι ·
Phanes had left sons in Egypt;


3.11.2
2932
τοὺς ἀγαγόντες ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον καὶ ἐς ὄψιν τοῦ πατρὸς κρητῆρα ἐν μέσῳ ἔστησαν ἀμφοτέρων τῶν στρατοπέδων , μετὰ δὲ ἀγινέοντες κατὰ ἕνα ἕκαστον τῶν παίδων ἔσφαζον ἐς τὸν κρητῆρα ·
these they brought to the camp, into their father's sight, and set a great bowl between the two armies; then they brought the sons one by one and cut their throats over the bowl.


3.11.3
2933
διὰ πάντων δὲ διεξελθόντες τῶν παίδων οἶνόν τε καὶ ὕδωρ ἐσεφόρεον ἐς αὐτόν , ἐμπιόντες δὲ τοῦ αἵματος πάντες οἱ ἐπίκουροι οὕτω δὴ συνέβαλον .
When all the sons had been slaughtered, they poured wine and water into the bowl, and the mercenaries drank this and then gave battle.


3.11.3
2934
μάχης δὲ γενομένης καρτερῆς καὶ πεσόντων ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν στρατοπέδων πλήθεϊ πολλῶν ἐτράποντο οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι .
The fighting was fierce, and many of both armies fell; but at last the Egyptians were routed.


3.12.1
2935
θῶμα δὲ μέγα εἶδον πυθόμενος παρὰ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων ·
I saw a strange thing on the site of the battle, of which the people of the country had told me.


3.12.1
2936
τῶν γὰρ ὀστέων περικεχυμένων χωρὶς ἑκατέρων τῶν ἐν τῇ μάχῃ ταύτῃ πεσόντων ( χωρὶς μὲν γὰρ τῶν Περσέων ἔκειτο τὰ ὀστέα , ὡς ἐχωρίσθη κατ’ ἀρχάς , ἑτέρωθι δὲ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ) , αἱ μὲν τῶν Περσέων κεφαλαί εἰσι ἀσθενέες οὕτω ὥστε , εἰ θέλεις ψήφῳ μούνῃ βαλεῖν , διατετρανέεις , αἱ δὲ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων οὕτω δή τι ἰσχυραί , μόγις ἂν λίθῳ παίσας διαρρήξειας .
The bones of those killed on either side in this fight lying scattered separately (for the Persian bones lay in one place and the Egyptian in another, where the armies had first separately stood), the skulls of the Persians are so brittle that if you throw no more than a pebble it will pierce them, but the Egyptian skulls are so strong that a blow of a stone will hardly crack them.


3.12.2
2937
αἴτιον δὲ τούτου τόδε ἔλεγον , καὶ ἐμέ γ’ εὐπετέως ἔπειθον , ὅτι Αἰγύπτιοι μὲν αὐτίκα ἀπὸ παιδίων ἀρξάμενοι ξυρῶνται τὰς κεφαλὰς καὶ πρὸς τὸν ἥλιον παχύνεται τὸ ὀστέον .
And this, the people said (which for my own part I readily believed), is the explanation of it: the Egyptians shave their heads from childhood, and the bone thickens by exposure to the sun.


3.12.3
2938
τ- αὐτὸ δὲ τοῦτο καὶ τοῦ μὴ φαλακροῦσθαι αἴτιον ἐστί ·
This also is the reason why they do not grow bald;


3.12.3
2939
Αἰγυπτίων γὰρ ἄν τις ἐλαχίστους ἴδοιτο φαλακροὺς πάντων ἀνθρώπων .
for nowhere can one see so few bald heads as in Egypt.


3.12.4
2940
τούτοισι μὲν δὴ τοῦτο ἐστὶ αἴτιον ἰσχυρὰς φορέειν τὰς κεφαλάς , τοῖσι δὲ Πέρσῃσι ὅτι ἀσθενέας φορέουσι τὰς κεφαλὰς αἴτιον τόδε ·
Their skulls then are strong for this reason;


3.12.4
2941
σκιητροφέουσι ἐξ ἀρχῆς πίλους τιάρας φορέοντες .
while the Persian skulls are weak because they cover their heads throughout their lives with the felt hats (called tiaras) which they wear.


3.12.4
2942
ταῦτα μέν νυν τοιαῦτα ·
Such is the truth of the matter.


3.12.4
2943
εἶδον δὲ καὶ ἄλλα ὅμοια τούτοισι ἐν Παπρήμι τῶν ἅμα Ἀχαιμένεϊ τῷ Δαρείου διαφθαρέντων ὑπὸ Ἰνάρω τοῦ Λίβυος .
I saw too the skulls of those Persians at Papremis who were killed with Darius' son Achaemenes by Inaros the Libyan, and they were like the others.


3.13.1
2944
οἱ δὲ Αἰγύπτιοι ἐκ τῆς μάχης ὡς ἐτράποντο , ἔφευγον οὐδενὶ κόσμῳ ·
After their rout in the battle the Egyptians fled in disorder;


3.13.1
2945
κατειληθέντων δὲ ἐς Μέμφιν , ἔπεμπε ἀνὰ ποταμὸν Καμβύσης νέα Μυτιληναίην κήρυκα ἄγουσαν ἄνδρα Πέρσην , ἐς ὁμολογίην προκαλεόμενος Αἰγυπτίους .
and when they had been overtaken in Memphis, Cambyses sent a Persian herald up the river aboard a Mytilenean boat to invite the Egyptians to an accord.


3.13.2
2946
οἳ δὲ ἐπείτε τὴν νέα εἶδον ἐσελθοῦσαν ἐς τὴν Μέμφιν , ἐκχυθέντες ἁλέες ἐκ τοῦ τείχεος τήν τε νέα διέφθειραν καὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας κρεουργηδὸν διασπάσαντες ἐφόρεον ἐς τὸ τεῖχος .
But when they saw the boat coming to    Memphis   , they sallied out all together from their walls, destroyed the boat, dismembered the crew (like butchers) and carried them within the walls.


3.13.3
2947
καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι μὲν μετὰ τοῦτο πολιορκεύμενοι χρόνῳ παρέστησαν , οἱ δὲ προσεχέες Λίβυες δείσαντες τὰ περὶ τὴν Αἴγυπτον γεγονότα παρέδοσαν σφέας αὐτοὺς ἀμαχητὶ καὶ φόρον τε ἐτάξαντο καὶ δῶρα ἔπεμπον .
So the Egyptians were besieged, and after a long while surrendered;


3.13.3
2948
ὣς δὲ Κυρηναῖοι καὶ Βαρκαῖοι , δείσαντες ὁμοίως καὶ οἱ Λίβυες , τοιαῦτα ἐποίησαν .
but the neighboring Libyans, frightened by what had happened in Egypt, surrendered without a fight, laying tribute on themselves and sending gifts; and so too did the people of Cyrene and Barca, frightened like the Libyans.


3.13.4
2949
Καμβύσης δὲ τὰ μὲν παρὰ Λιβύων ἐλθόντα δῶρα φιλοφρόνως ἐδέξατο ·
Cambyses received in all kindness the gifts of the Libyans;


3.13.4
2950
τὰ δὲ παρὰ Κυρηναίων ἀπικόμενα μεμφθείς , ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέει , ὅτι ἦν ὀλίγα ·
but he seized what came from Cyrene and, displeased, I think, because it was so little —


3.13.4
2951
ἔπεμψαν γὰρ δὴ πεντακοσίας μνέας ἀργυρίου οἱ Κυρηναῖοι ·
for the Cyrenaeans had sent five hundred silver minae —


3.13.4
2952
ταύτας δρασσόμενος αὐτοχειρίῃ διέσπειρε τῇ στρατιῇ .
cast it with his own hands among his army.


3.14.1
2953
ἡμέρῃ δὲ δεκάτῃ ἀπ’ ἧς παρέλαβε τὸ τεῖχος τὸ ἐν Μέμφι Καμβύσης , κατίσας ἐς τὸ προάστειον ἐπὶ λύμῃ τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Αἰγυπτίων Ψαμμήνιτον , βασιλεύσαντα μῆνας ἕξ , τοῦτον κατίσας σὺν ἄλλοισι Αἰγυπτίοισι διεπειρᾶτο αὐτοῦ τῆς ψυχῆς ποιέων τοιάδε ·
On the tenth day after the surrender of the walled city of    Memphis   , Cambyses took Psammenitus king of    Egypt   , who had reigned for six months, and confined him in the outer part of the city with other Egyptians, to insult him; having confined him there, he tried Psammenitus' spirit, as I shall show.


3.14.2
2954
στείλας αὐτοῦ τὴν θυγατέρα ἐσθῆτι δουληίῃ ἐξέπεμπε ἐπ’ ὕδωρ ἔχουσαν ὑδρήιον , συνέπεμπε δὲ καὶ ἄλλας παρθένους ἀπολέξας ἀνδρῶν τῶν πρώτων , ὁμοίως ἐσταλμένας τῇ τοῦ βασιλέος .
He dressed the daughter of the king as a slave and sent her out with a pitcher to fetch water, together with other girls from the families of the leading men, dressed like the daughter of the king.


3.14.3
2955
ὡς δὲ βοῇ τε καὶ κλαυθμῷ παρήισαν αἱ παρθένοι παρὰ τοὺς πατέρας , οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι πάντες ἀντεβόων τε καὶ ἀντέκλαιον ὁρῶντες τὰ τέκνα κεκακωμένα , ὁ δὲ Ψαμμήνιτος προϊδὼν καὶ μαθὼν ἔκυψε ἐς τὴν γῆν .
So when the girls went out before their fathers' eyes crying and lamenting, all the rest answered with cries and weeping, seeing their children abused; but Psammenitus, having seen with his own eyes and learned all, bowed himself to the ground.


3.14.4
2956
παρελθουσέων δὲ τῶν ὑδροφόρων , δεύτερά οἱ τὸν παῖδα ἔπεμπε μετ’ ἄλλων Αἰγυπτίων δισχιλίων τὴν αὐτὴν ἡλικίην ἐχόντων , τούς τε αὐχένας κάλῳ δεδεμένους καὶ τὰ στόματα ἐγκεχαλινωμένους ·
After the water-carriers had passed by, Cambyses next made Psammenitus' son go out before him with two thousand Egyptians of the same age, all with ropes bound round their necks and bridle-bits in their mouths;


3.14.5
2957
ἤγοντο δὲ ποινὴν τίσοντες Μυτιληναίων τοῖσι ἐν Μέμφι ἀπολομένοισι σὺν τῇ νηί .
they were led out to be punished for those Mytileneans who had perished with their boat at Memphis;


3.14.5
2958
ταῦτα γὰρ ἐδίκασαν οἱ βασιλήιοι δικασταί , ὑπὲρ ἀνδρὸς ἑκάστου δέκα Αἰγυπτίων τῶν πρώτων ἀνταπόλλυσθαι .
for such was the judgment of the royal judges, that every man's death be paid for by the deaths of ten noble Egyptians.


3.14.6
2959
ὁ δὲ ἰδὼν παρεξιόντας καὶ μαθὼν τὸν παῖδα ἡγεόμενον ἐπὶ θάνατον , τῶν ἄλλων Αἰγυπτίων τῶν περικατημένων αὐτὸν κλαιόντων καὶ δεινὰ ποιεύντων , τ- αὐτὸ ἐποίησε τὸ καὶ ἐπὶ τῇ θυγατρί .
When Psammenitus saw them passing and perceived that his son was being led out to die, and all the Egyptians who sat with him wept and showed their affliction, he did as he had done at the sight of his daughter.


3.14.7
2960
παρελθόντων δὲ καὶ τούτων , συνήνεικε ὥστε τῶν συμποτέων οἱ ἄνδρα ἀπηλικέστερον , ἐκπεπτωκότα ἐκ τῶν ἐόντων ἔχοντά τε οὐδὲν εἰ μὴ ὅσα πτωχὸς καὶ προσαιτέοντα τὴν στρατιήν , παριέναι Ψαμμήνιτόν τε τὸν Ἀμάσιος καὶ τοὺς ἐν τῷ προαστείῳ κατημένους Αἰγυπτίων .
After these too had gone out, it happened that there was one of his companions, a man past his prime, who had lost all his possessions, and had only what a poor man might have, and begged of the army;


3.14.7
2961
ὁ δὲ Ψαμμήνιτος ὡς εἶδε , ἀνακλαύσας μέγα καὶ καλέσας ὀνομαστὶ τὸν ἑταῖρον ἐπλήξατο τὴν κεφαλήν .
this man now went out before Psammenitus son of Amasis and the Egyptians confined in the outer part of the city. When Psammenitus saw him, he broke into loud weeping, striking his head and calling on his companion by name.


3.14.8
2962
ἦσαν δ’ ἄρα αὐτοῦ φύλακοι , οἳ τὸ ποιεύμενον πᾶν ἐξ ἐκείνου ἐπ’ ἑκάστῃ ἐξόδῳ Καμβύσῃ ἐσήμαινον .
Now there were men set to watch Psammenitus, who told Cambyses all that he did as each went forth.


3.14.8
2963
θωμάσας δὲ ὁ Καμβύσης τὰ ποιεύμενα , πέμψας ἄγγελον εἰρώτα αὐτὸν λέγων τάδε .
Wondering at what the king did, Cambyses made this inquiry of him by a messenger:


3.14.9
2964
" δεσπότης σε Καμβύσης , Ψαμμήνιτε , εἰρωτᾷ δι’ ὅ τι δὴ τὴν μὲν θυγατέρα ὁρέων κεκακωμένην καὶ τὸν παῖδα ἐπὶ θάνατον στείχοντα οὔτε ἀνέβωσας οὔτε ἀπέκλαυσας , τὸν δὲ πτωχὸν οὐδὲν σοὶ προσήκοντα , ὡς ἄλλων πυνθάνεται , ἐτίμησας " .
“Psammenitus, Lord Cambyses wants to know why, seeing your daughter abused and your son going to his death, you did not cry out or weep, yet you showed such feeling for the beggar, who (as Cambyses learns from others) is not one of your kindred?”


3.14.9
2965
ὃ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἐπειρώτα , ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
So the messenger inquired. Psammenitus answered:


3.14.10
2966
" ὦ παῖ Κύρου , τὰ μὲν οἰκήια ἦν μέζω κακὰ ἢ ὥστε ἀνακλαίειν , τὸ δὲ τοῦ ἑταίρου πένθος ἄξιον ἦν δακρύων , ὃς ἐκ πολλῶν τε καὶ εὐδαιμόνων ἐκπεσὼν ἐς πτωχηίην ἀπῖκται ἐπὶ γήραος οὐδῷ " .
“Son of Cyrus, my private grief was too great for weeping; but the unhappiness of my companion deserves tears — a man fallen from abundance and prosperity to beggary come to the threshold of old age.”


3.14.10
2967
καὶ ταῦτα ὡς ἀπενειχθέντα ὑπὸ τούτου εὖ δοκέειν σφι εἰρῆσθαι , ὡς δὲ λέγεται ὑπ’ Αἰγυπτίων , δακρύειν μὲν Κροῖσον ( ἐτετεύχεε γὰρ καὶ οὗτος ἐπισπόμενος Καμβύσῃ ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτους ) , δακρύειν δὲ Περσέων τοὺς παρεόντας ·
When the messenger reported this, Cambyses and his court, it is said, thought the answer good.


3.14.11
2968
αὐτῷ τε Καμβύσῃ ἐσελθεῖν οἶκτον τινά , καὶ αὐτίκα κελεύειν τόν τέ οἱ παῖδα ἐκ τῶν ἀπολλυμένων σώζειν καὶ αὐτὸν ἐκ τοῦ προαστείου ἀναστήσαντας ἄγειν παρ’ ἑωυτόν .
And, the Egyptians say, Croesus wept (for it happened that he too had come with Cambyses to    Egypt   ) and the Persians that were there wept; Cambyses himself felt some pity, and he ordered that Psammenitus' son be spared from those that were to be executed, and that Psammenitus himself be brought in from the outer part of the city and brought before him.


3.15.1
2969
τὸν μὲν δὴ παῖδα εὗρον αὐτοῦ οἱ μετιόντες οὐκέτι περιεόντα ἀλλὰ πρῶτον κατακοπέντα , αὐτὸν δὲ Ψαμμήνιτον ἀναστήσαντες ἦγον παρὰ Καμβύσεα ·
Those that went for him found that the son was no longer alive, but had been the first to be slaughtered; but they brought Psammenitus up and led him to Cambyses; and there he lived, and no violence was done him for the rest of his life.


3.15.2
2970
ἔνθα τοῦ λοιποῦ διαιτᾶτο ἔχων οὐδὲν βίαιον .
And if he had known how to mind his own business, he would have regained Egypt to govern;


3.15.2
2971
εἰ δὲ καὶ ἠπιστήθη μὴ πολυπρηγμονέειν , ἀπέλαβε ἂν Αἴγυπτον ὥστε ἐπιτροπεύειν αὐτῆς , ἐπεὶ τιμᾶν ἐώθασι Πέρσαι τῶν βασιλέων τοὺς παῖδας ·
for the Persians are inclined to honor kings' sons; even though kings revolt from them, they give back to their sons the sovereign power.


3.15.2
2972
τῶν , εἰ καὶ σφέων ἀποστέωσι , ὅμως τοῖσί γε παισὶ αὐτῶν ἀποδιδοῦσι τὴν ἀρχήν .
And if he had known how to mind his own business, he would have regained Egypt to govern; for the Persians are inclined to honor kings' sons; even though kings revolt from them, they give back to their sons the sovereign power.


3.15.3
2973
πολλοῖσι μέν νυν καὶ ἄλλοισι ἐστὶ σταθμώσασθαι ὅτι τοῦτο οὕτω νενομίκασι ποιέειν , ἐν δὲ καὶ τῷ τε Ἰνάρω παιδὶ Θαννύρᾳ , ὃς ἀπέλαβε τήν οἱ ὁ πατὴρ εἶχε ἀρχήν , καὶ τῷ Ἀμυρταίου Παυσίρι ·
There are many instances showing that it is their custom so to do, and notably the giving back of his father's sovereign power to Thannyras son of Inaros, and also to Pausiris son of Amyrtaeus;


3.15.3
2974
καὶ γὰρ οὗτος ἀπέλαβε τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς ἀρχήν .
yet none ever did the Persians more harm than Inaros and Amyrtaeus.


3.15.3
2975
καίτοι Ἰνάρω γε καὶ Ἀμυρταίου οὐδαμοί κω Πέρσας κακὰ πλέω ἐργάσαντο .
There are many instances showing that it is their custom so to do, and notably the giving back of his father's sovereign power to Thannyras son of Inaros, and also to Pausiris son of Amyrtaeus; yet none ever did the Persians more harm than Inaros and Amyrtaeus.


3.15.4
2976
νῦν δὲ μηχανώμενος κακὰ ὁ Ψαμμήνιτος ἔλαβε τὸν μισθόν ·
But as it was, Psammenitus plotted evil and got his reward;


3.15.4
2977
ἀπιστὰς γὰρ Αἰγυπτίους ἥλω ·
for he was caught raising a revolt among the Egyptians;


3.15.4
2978
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐπάιστος ἐγένετο ὑπὸ Καμβύσεω , αἷμα ταύρου πιὼν ἀπέθανε παραχρῆμα .
and when Cambyses heard of it, Psammenitus drank bull's blood and died.


3.15.4
2979
οὕτω δὴ οὗτος ἐτελεύτησε .
Such was his end.


3.16.1
2980
Καμβύσης δὲ ἐκ Μέμφιος ἀπίκετο ἐς Σάιν πόλιν , βουλόμενος ποιῆσαι τὰ δὴ καὶ ἐποίησε .
From Memphis Cambyses went to the city Sais, anxious to do exactly what he did do.


3.16.1
2981
ἐπείτε γὰρ ἐσῆλθε ἐς τὰ τοῦ Ἀμάσιος οἰκία , αὐτίκα ἐκέλευε ἐκ τῆς ταφῆς τὸν Ἀμάσιος νέκυν ἐκφέρειν ἔξω ·
Entering the house of Amasis, he had the body of Amasis carried outside from its place of burial;


3.16.1
2982
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ἐπιτελέα ἐγένετο , μαστιγοῦν ἐκέλευε καὶ τὰς τρίχας ἀποτίλλειν καὶ κεντοῦν τε καὶ τ- ἄλλα πάντα λυμαίνεσθαι .
and when this had been done, he gave orders to scourge it and pull out the hair and pierce it with goads, and to desecrate it in every way.


3.16.2
2983
ἐπείτε δὲ καὶ ταῦτα ἔκαμον ποιεῦντες ( ὁ γὰρ δὴ νεκρὸς ἅτε τεταριχευμένος ἀντεῖχέ τε καὶ οὐδὲν διεχέετο ) , ἐκέλευσέ μιν ὁ Καμβύσης κατακαῦσαι , ἐντελλόμενος οὐκ ὅσια ·
When they were weary of doing this (for the body, being embalmed, remained whole and did not fall to pieces), Cambyses gave orders to burn it, a sacrilegious command;


3.16.2
2984
Πέρσαι γὰρ θεὸν νομίζουσι εἶναι πῦρ .
for the Persians hold fire to be a god;


3.16.3
2985
τὸ ὦν κατακαίειν γε τοὺς νεκροὺς οὐδαμῶς ἐν νόμῳ οὐδετέροισι ἐστί , Πέρσῃσι μὲν δι’ ὅ περ εἴρηται , θεῷ οὐ δίκαιον εἶναι λέγοντες νέμειν νεκρὸν ἀνθρώπου ·
therefore neither nation thinks it right to burn the dead, the Persians for the reason given, as they say it is wrong to give the dead body of a man to a god;


3.16.3
2986
Αἰγυπτίοισι δὲ νενόμισται πῦρ θηρίον εἶναι ἔμψυχον , πάντα δὲ αὐτὸ κατεσθίειν τά περ ἂν λάβῃ , πλησθὲν δὲ αὐτὸ τῆς βορῆς συναποθνήσκειν τῷ κατεσθιομένῳ .
while the Egyptians believe fire to be a living beast that devours all that it catches, and when sated with its meal dies together with that on which it feeds.


3.16.4
2987
οὔκων θηρίοισι νόμος οὐδαμῶς σφι ἐστὶ τὸν νέκυν διδόναι , καὶ διὰ ταῦτα ταριχεύουσι , ἵνα μὴ κείμενος ὑπὸ εὐλέων καταβρωθῇ .
Now it is by no means their custom to give the dead to beasts; and this is why they embalm the corpse, that it may not lie and feed worms.


3.16.4
2988
οὕτω οὐδετέροισι νομιζόμενα ἐνετέλλετο ποιέειν ὁ Καμβύσης .
Thus what Cambyses commanded was contrary to the custom of both peoples.


3.16.5
2989
ὡς μέντοι , Αἰγύπτιοι λέγουσι , οὐκ Ἄμασις ἦν ὁ ταῦτα παθών , ἀλλὰ ἄλλος τις τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἔχων τὴν αὐτὴν ἡλικίην Ἀμάσι , τῷ λυμαινόμενοι Πέρσαι ἐδόκεον Ἀμάσι λυμαίνεσθαι .
The Egyptians say, however, that it was not Amasis to whom this was done, but another Egyptian of the same age as Amasis, whom the Persians abused thinking that they were abusing Amasis.


3.16.6
2990
λέγουσι γὰρ ὡς πυθόμενος ἐκ μαντηίου ὁ Ἄμασις τὰ περὶ ἑωυτὸν ἀποθανόντα μέλλοντα γίνεσθαι , οὕτω δὴ ἀκεόμενος τὰ ἐπιφερόμενα τὸν μὲν ἄνθρωπον τοῦτον τὸν μαστιγωθέντα ἀποθανόντα ἔθαψε ἐπὶ τῇσι θύρῃσι ἐντὸς τῆς ἑωυτοῦ θήκης , ἑωυτὸν δὲ ἐνετείλατο τῷ παιδὶ ἐν μυχῷ τῆς θήκης ὡς μάλιστα θεῖναι .
For their story is that Amasis learned from an oracle what was to be done to him after his death, and so to escape this fate buried this dead man, the one that was scourged, near the door inside his own vault, and ordered his son that he himself should be laid in the farthest corner of the vault.


3.16.7
2991
αἱ μέν νυν ἐκ τοῦ Ἀμάσιος ἐντολαὶ αὗται αἱ ἐς τὴν ταφήν τε καὶ τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἔχουσαι οὔ μοι δοκέουσι ἀρχὴν γενέσθαι , ἄλλως δ’ αὐτὰ Αἰγύπτιοι σεμνοῦν .
I think that these commands of Amasis, regarding the burial-place and the man, were never given at all, and that the Egyptians believe in them in vain.


3.17.1
2992
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Καμβύσης ἐβουλεύσατο τριφασίας στρατηίας , ἐπί τε Καρχηδονίους καὶ ἐπὶ Ἀμμωνίους καὶ ἐπὶ τοὺς μακροβίους Αἰθίοπας , οἰκημένους δὲ Λιβύης ἐπὶ τῇ νοτίῃ θαλάσσῃ ·
After this Cambyses planned three expeditions, against the Carchedonians, against the Ammonians, and against the “long-lived” Ethiopians, who inhabit that part of    Libya    that is on the southern sea.


3.17.2
2993
βουλευομένῳ δέ οἱ ἔδοξε ἐπὶ μὲν Καρχηδονίους τὸν ναυτικὸν στρατὸν ἀποστέλλειν , ἐπὶ δὲ Ἀμμωνίους τοῦ πεζοῦ ἀποκρίναντα , ἐπὶ δὲ τοὺς Αἰθίοπας κατόπτας πρῶτον , ὀψομένους τε τὴν ἐν τούτοισι τοῖσι Αἰθίοψι λεγομένην εἶναι ἡλίου τράπεζαν εἰ ἔστι ἀληθέως , καὶ πρὸς ταύτῃ τὰ ἄλλα κατοψομένους , δῶρα δὲ τῷ λόγῳ φέροντας τῷ βασιλέι αὐτῶν .
He decided after consideration to send his fleet against the Carthaginians and a part of his land army against the Ammonians; to    Ethiopia    he would first send spies, to see what truth there was in the story of a Table of the Sun in that country, and to spy out all else besides, under the pretext of bringing gifts for the Ethiopian king.


3.18.1
2994
ἡ δὲ τράπεζα τοῦ ἡλίου τοιήδε τις λέγεται εἶναι , λειμὼν ἐστὶ ἐν τῷ προαστείῳ ἐπίπλεος κρεῶν ἑφθῶν πάντων τῶν τετραπόδων , ἐς τὸν τὰς μὲν νύκτας ἐπιτηδεύοντας τιθέναι τὰ κρέα τοὺς ἐν τέλεϊ ἑκάστοτε ἐόντας τῶν ἀστῶν , τὰς δὲ ἡμέρας δαίνυσθαι προσιόντα τὸν βουλόμενον .
Now the Table of the Sun is said to be something of this kind: there is a meadow outside the city, filled with the boiled flesh of all four-footed things; here during the night the men of authority among the townsmen are careful to set out the meat, and all day whoever wishes comes and feasts on it.


3.18.1
2995
φάναι δὲ τοὺς ἐπιχωρίους ταῦτα τὴν γῆν αὐτὴν ἀναδιδόναι ἑκάστοτε .
These meats, say the people of the country, are ever produced by the earth of itself.


3.19.1
2996
ἡ μὲν δὴ τράπεζα τοῦ ἡλίου καλεομένη λέγεται εἶναι τοιήδε .
On the one hand, the so-called Table of the Sun is said to be of such a type.


3.19.1
2997
Καμβύσῃ δὲ ὡς ἔδοξε πέμπειν τοὺς κατασκόπους , αὐτίκα μετεπέμπετο ἐξ Ἐλεφαντίνης πόλιος τῶν Ἰχθυοφάγων ἀνδρῶν τοὺς ἐπισταμένους τὴν Αἰθιοπίδα γλῶσσαν .
When Cambyses determined to send the spies, he sent for those Fish-eaters from the city of Elephantine who understood the Ethiopian language.


3.19.2
2998
ἐν ᾧ δὲ τούτους μετήισαν , ἐν τούτῳ ἐκέλευε ἐπὶ τὴν Καρχηδόνα πλέειν τὸν ναυτικὸν στρατόν .
While they were fetching them, he ordered his fleet to sail against Carthage.


3.19.2
2999
Φοίνικες δὲ οὐκ ἔφασαν ποιήσειν ταῦτα ·
But the Phoenicians said they would not do it;


3.19.2
3000
ὁρκίοισι γὰρ μεγάλοισι ἐνδεδέσθαι , καὶ οὐκ ἂν ποιέειν ὅσια ἐπὶ τοὺς παῖδας τοὺς ἑωυτῶν στρατευόμενοι .
for they were bound, they said, by strong oaths, and if they sailed against their own progeny they would be doing an impious thing;


3.19.2
3001
Φοινίκων δὲ οὐ βουλομένων οἱ λοιποὶ οὐκ ἀξιόμαχοι ἐγίνοντο .
and the Phoenicians being unwilling, the rest were inadequate fighters.


3.19.3
3002
Καρχηδόνιοι μέν νυν οὕτω δουλοσύνην διέφυγον πρὸς Περσέων ·
Thus the Carthaginians escaped being enslaved by the Persians;


3.19.3
3003
Καμβύσης γὰρ βίην οὐκ ἐδικαίου προσφέρειν Φοίνιξι , ὅτι σφέας τε αὐτοὺς ἐδεδώκεσαν Πέρσῃσι καὶ πᾶς ἐκ Φοινίκων ἤρτητο ὁ ναυτικὸς στρατός .
for Cambyses would not use force with the Phoenicians, seeing that they had willingly surrendered to the Persians, and the whole fleet drew its strength from them.


3.19.3
3004
δόντες δὲ καὶ Κύπριοι σφέας αὐτοὺς Πέρσῃσι ἐστρατεύοντο ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον .
The Cyprians too had come of their own accord to aid the Persians against Egypt.


3.20.1
3005
ἐπείτε δὲ τῷ Καμβύσῃ ἐκ τῆς Ἐλεφαντίνης ἀπίκοντο οἱ Ἰχθυοφάγοι , ἔπεμπε αὐτοὺς ἐς τοὺς Αἰθίοπας ἐντειλάμενος τὰ λέγειν χρῆν καὶ δῶρα φέροντας πορφύρεόν τε εἷμα καὶ χρύσεον στρεπτὸν περιαυχένιον καὶ ψέλια καὶ μύρου ἀλάβαστρον καὶ φοινικηίου οἴνου κάδον .
When the Fish-eaters arrived from Elephantine at Cambyses' summons, he sent them to Ethiopia, with orders what to say, and bearing as gifts a red cloak and a twisted gold necklace and bracelets and an alabaster box of incense and an earthenware jar of palm wine.


3.20.1
3006
οἱ δὲ Αἰθίοπες οὗτοι , ἐς τοὺς ἀπέπεμπε ὁ Καμβύσης , λέγονται εἶναι μέγιστοι καὶ κάλλιστοι ἀνθρώπων πάντων .
These Ethiopians, to whom Cambyses sent them, are said to be the tallest and most handsome of all men.


3.20.2
3007
νόμοισι δὲ καὶ ἄλλοισι χρᾶσθαι αὐτοὺς κεχωρισμένοισι τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων καὶ δὴ καὶ κατὰ τὴν βασιληίην τοιῷδε ·
Their way of choosing kings is different from that of all others, as (it is said) are all their laws;


3.20.2
3008
τὸν ἂν τῶν ἀστῶν κρίνωσι μέγιστόν τε εἶναι καὶ κατὰ τὸ μέγαθος ἔχειν τὴν ἰσχύν , τοῦτον ἀξιοῦσι βασιλεύειν .
they consider that man worthy to be their king whom they judge to be tallest and to have strength proportional to his stature.


3.21.1
3009
ἐς τούτους δὴ ὦν τοὺς ἄνδρας ὡς ἀπίκοντο οἱ Ἰχθυοφάγοι , διδόντες τὰ δῶρα τῷ , βασιλέι αὐτῶν ἔλεγον τάδε .
When the Fish-eaters arrived among these men, they gave the gifts to their king and said:


3.21.1
3010
" βασιλεὺς ὁ Περσέων Καμβύσης , βουλόμενος φίλος καὶ ξεῖνός τοι γενέσθαι , ἡμέας τε ἀπέπεμψε ἐς λόγους τοι ἐλθεῖν κελεύων , καὶ δῶρα ταῦτά τοι διδοῖ τοῖσι καὶ αὐτὸς μάλιστα ἥδεται χρεώμενος " .
“Cambyses, the king of the Persians, wishing to become your friend and ally, sent us with orders to address ourselves to you; and he offers you as gifts these things which he enjoys using himself.”


3.21.2
3011
ὁ δὲ Αἰθίοψ μαθὼν ὅτι κατόπται ἥκοιεν , λέγει πρὸς αὐτοὺς τοιάδε .
But the Ethiopian, perceiving that they had come as spies, spoke thus to them:


3.21.2
3012
" οὔτε ὁ Περσέων βασιλεὺς δῶρα ὑμέας ἔπεμψε φέροντας προτιμῶν πολλοῦ ἐμοὶ ξεῖνος γενέσθαι , οὔτε ὑμεῖς λέγετε ἀληθέα ( ἥκετε γὰρ κατόπται τῆς ἐμῆς ἀρχῆς ) , οὔτε ἐκεῖνος ἀνήρ δίκαιος .
“It is not because he values my friendship that the Persian King sends you with gifts, nor do you speak the truth (for you have come to spy on my realm), nor is that man just;


3.21.2
3013
εἰ γὰρ ἦν δίκαιος , οὔτ’ ἂν ἐπεθύμησε χώρης ἄλλης ἢ τῆς ἑωυτοῦ , οὔτ’ ἂν ἐς δουλοσύνην ἀνθρώπους ἦγε ὑπ’ ὧν μηδὲν ἠδίκηται .
for were he just, he would not have coveted a land other than his own, nor would he try to lead into slavery men by whom he has not been injured.


3.21.2
3014
νῦν δὲ αὐτῷ τόξον τόδε διδόντες τάδε ἔπεα λέγετε " .
Now, give him this bow, and this message:


3.21.3
3015
" βασιλεὺς ὁ Αἰθιόπων συμβουλεύει τῷ Περσέων βασιλέι , ἐπεὰν οὕτω εὐπετέως ἕλκωσι τὰ τόξα Πέρσαι ἐόντα μεγάθεϊ τοσαῦτα , τότε ἐπ’ Αἰθίοπας τοὺς μακροβίους πλήθεϊ ὑπερβαλλόμενον στρατεύεσθαι ·
The King of the Ethiopians advises the King of the Persians to bring overwhelming odds to attack the long-lived Ethiopians when the Persians can draw a bow of this length as easily as I do;


3.21.3
3016
μέχρι δὲ τούτου θεοῖσι εἰδέναι χάριν , οἳ οὐκ ἐπὶ νόον τρέπουσι Αἰθιόπων παισὶ γῆν ἄλλην προσκτᾶσθαι τῇ ἑωυτῶν " .
but until then, to thank the gods who do not incite the sons of the Ethiopians to add other land to their own.


3.22.1
3017
ταῦτα δὲ εἴπας καὶ ἀνεὶς τὸ τόξον παρέδωκε τοῖσι ἥκουσι .
So speaking he unstrung the bow and gave it to the men who had come.


3.22.1
3018
λαβὼν δὲ τὸ εἷμα τὸ πορφύρεον εἰρώτα ὅ τι εἴη καὶ ὅκως πεποιημένον ·
Then, taking the red cloak, he asked what it was and how it was made;


3.22.1
3019
εἰπόντων δὲ τῶν Ἰχθυοφάγων τὴν ἀληθείην περὶ τῆς πορφύρης καὶ τῆς βαφῆς , δολεροὺς μὲν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἔφη εἶναι , δολερὰ δὲ αὐτῶν τὰ εἵματα .
and when the Fish-eaters told him the truth about the color and the process of dyeing, he said that both the men and their garments were full of deceit.


3.22.2
3020
δεύτερα δὲ τὸν χρυσὸν εἰρώτα τὸν στρεπτὸν τὸν περιαυχένιον καὶ τὰ ψέλια ·
Next he inquired about the twisted gold necklace and the bracelets;


3.22.2
3021
ἐξηγεομένων δὲ τῶν Ἰχθυοφάγων τὸν κόσμον αὐτοῦ , γελάσας ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ νομίσας εἶναι σφέα πέδας εἶπε ὡς παρ’ ἑωυτοῖσι εἰσὶ ῥωμαλεώτεραι τουτέων πέδαι .
and when the Fish-eaters told him how they were made, the king smiled, and, thinking them to be fetters, said: “We have stronger chains than these.”


3.22.3
3022
τρίτον δὲ εἰρώτα τὸ μύρον ·
Thirdly he inquired about the incense;


3.22.3
3023
εἰπόντων δὲ τῆς ποιήσιος πέρι καὶ ἀλείψιος , τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον τὸν καὶ περὶ τοῦ εἵματος εἶπε .
and when they described making and applying it, he made the same reply as about the cloak.


3.22.3
3024
ὡς δὲ ἐς τὸν οἶνον ἀπίκετο καὶ ἐπύθετο αὐτοῦ τὴν ποίησιν , ὑπερησθεὶς τῷ πόματι ἐπείρετο ὅ τι τε σιτέεται ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ χρόνον ὁκόσον μακρότατον ἀνὴρ Πέρσης ζώει .
But when he came to the wine and asked about its making, he was vastly pleased with the drink, and asked further what food their king ate, and what was the greatest age to which a Persian lived.


3.22.4
3025
οἳ δὲ σιτέεσθαι μὲν τὸν ἄρτον εἶπον , ἐξηγησάμενοι τῶν πυρῶν τὴν φύσιν , ὀγδώκοντα δὲ ἔτεα ζόης πλήρωμα ἀνδρὶ μακρότατον προκεῖσθαι .
They told him their king ate bread, showing him how wheat grew; and said that the full age to which a man might hope to live was eighty years.


3.22.4
3026
πρὸς ταῦτα ὁ Αἰθίοψ ἔφη οὐδὲν θωμάζειν εἰ σιτεόμενοι κόπρον ἔτεα ὀλίγα ζώουσι ·
Then, said the Ethiopian, it was no wonder that they lived so few years, if they ate dung;


3.22.4
3027
οὐδὲ γὰρ ἂν τοσαῦτα δύνασθαι ζώειν σφέας , εἰ μὴ τῷ πόματι ἀνέφερον , φράζων τοῖσι Ἰχθυοφάγοισι τὸν οἶνον ·
they would not even have been able to live that many unless they were refreshed by the drink — signifying to the Fish-eaters the wine —


3.22.4
3028
τούτῳ γὰρ ἑωυτοὺς ὑπὸ Περσέων ἑσσοῦσθαι .
for in this, he said, the Persians excelled the Ethiopians.


3.23.1
3029
ἀντειρομένων δὲ τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Ἰχθυοφάγων τῆς ζόης καὶ διαίτης πέρι , ἔτεα μὲν ἐς εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατὸν τοὺς πολλοὺς αὐτῶν ἀπικνέεσθαι , ὑπερβάλλειν δὲ τινὰς καὶ ταῦτα , σίτησιν δὲ εἶναι κρέα τε ἑφθὰ καὶ πόμα γάλα .
The Fish-eaters then in turn asking of the Ethiopian length of life and diet, he said that most of them attained to a hundred and twenty years, and some even to more; their food was boiled meat and their drink milk.


3.23.2
3030
θῶμα δὲ ποιευμένων τῶν κατασκόπων περὶ τῶν ἐτέων , ἐπὶ κρήνην σφι ἡγήσασθαι , ἀπ’ ἧς λουόμενοι λιπαρώτεροι ἐγίνοντο , κατά περ εἰ ἐλαίου εἴη ·
The spies showed wonder at the tale of years; whereupon he led them, it is said, to a spring, by washing in which they grew sleeker, as though it were of oil;


3.23.2
3031
ὄζειν δὲ ἀπ’ αὐτῆς ὡς εἰ ἴων .
and it smelled of violets.


3.23.3
3032
ἀσθενὲς δὲ τὸ ὕδωρ τῆς κρήνης ταύτης οὕτω δή τι ἔλεγον εἶναι οἱ κατάσκοποι ὥστε μηδὲν οἷόν τ’ εἶναι ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ ἐπιπλέειν , μήτε ξύλον μήτε τῶν ὅσα ξύλου ἐστὶ ἐλαφρότερα , ἀλλὰ πάντα σφέα χωρέειν ἐς βυσσόν .
So light, the spies said, was this water, that nothing would float on it, neither wood nor anything lighter than wood, but all sank to the bottom.


3.23.3
3033
τὸ δὲ ὕδωρ τοῦτο εἴ σφι ἐστὶ ἀληθέως οἷόν τι λέγεται , διὰ τοῦτο ἂν εἶεν , τούτῳ τὰ πάντα χρεώμενοι , μακρόβιοι .
If this water is truly such as they say, it is likely that their constant use of it makes the people long-lived.


3.23.4
3034
ἀπὸ τῆς κρήνης δὲ ἀπαλλασσομένων , ἀγαγεῖν σφεας ἐς δεσμωτήριον ἀνδρῶν , ἔνθα τοὺς πάντας ἐν πέδῃσι χρυσέῃσι δεδέσθαι .
When they left the spring, the king led them to a prison where all the men were bound with fetters of gold.


3.23.4
3035
ἔστι δὲ ἐν τούτοισι τοῖσι Αἰθίοψι πάντων ὁ χαλκὸς σπανιώτατον καὶ τιμιώτατον .
Among these Ethiopians there is nothing so scarce and so precious as bronze.


3.23.4
3036
θεησάμενοι δὲ καὶ τὸ δεσμωτήριον , ἐθεήσαντο καὶ τὴν τοῦ ἡλίου λεγομένην τράπεζαν .
Then, having seen the prison, they saw what is called the Table of the Sun.


3.24.1
3037
μετὰ δὲ ταύτην τελευταίας ἐθεήσαντο τὰς θήκας αὐτῶν , αἳ λέγονται σκευάζεσθαι ἐξ ὑέλου τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
Last after this they viewed the Ethiopian coffins; these are said to be made of alabaster, as I shall describe:


3.24.2
3038
ἐπεὰν τὸν νεκρὸν ἰσχνήνωσι , εἴτε δὴ κατά περ Αἰγύπτιοι εἴτε ἄλλως κως , γυψώσαντες ἅπαντα αὐτὸν γραφῇ κοσμέουσι , ἐξομοιεῦντες τὸ εἶδος ἐς τὸ δυνατόν , ἔπειτα δέ οἱ περιιστᾶσι στήλην ἐξ ὑέλου πεποιημένην κοίλην ·
they cause the dead body to shrink, either as the Egyptians do or in some other way, then cover it with gypsum and paint it all as far as possible in the likeness of the living man;


3.24.2
3039
ἣ δέ σφι πολλὴ καὶ εὐεργὸς ὀρύσσεται .
and set it in a hollow pillar of crystal, which they dig in abundance and use.


3.24.3
3040
ἐν μέσῃ δὲ τῇ στήλῃ ἐνεὼν διαφαίνεται ὁ νέκυς , οὔτε ὀδμὴν οὐδεμίαν ἄχαριν παρεχόμενος οὔτε ἄλλο ἀεικὲς οὐδέν , καὶ ἔχει πάντα φανερὰ ὁμοίως αὐτῷ τῷ νέκυϊ .
then they set it within a hollow pillar of alabaster, which they dig in abundance from the ground, and it is easily worked; the body can be seen in the pillar through the alabaster, no evil stench nor anything unpleasant proceeding from it, and showing clearly all its parts, as if it were the man himself.


3.24.4
3041
ἐνιαυτὸν μὲν δὴ ἔχουσι τὴν στήλην ἐν τοῖσι οἰκίοισι οἱ μάλιστα προσήκοντες , πάντων ἀπαρχόμενοι καὶ θυσίας οἱ προσάγοντες ·
The nearest of kin keep the pillar in their house for a year, giving it of the first-fruits and offering it sacrifices;


3.24.4
3042
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐκκομίσαντες ἱστᾶσι περὶ τὴν πόλιν .
after which they bring the pillars out and set them round about the city.


3.25.1
3043
θεησάμενοι δὲ τὰ πάντα οἱ κατάσκοποι ἀπαλλάσσοντο ὀπίσω .
Having seen everything, the spies departed again.


3.25.1
3044
ἀπαγγειλάντων δὲ ταῦτα τούτων , αὐτίκα ὁ Καμβύσης ὀργὴν ποιησάμενος ἐστρατεύετο ἐπὶ τοὺς Αἰθίοπας , οὔτε παρασκευὴν σίτου οὐδεμίαν παραγγείλας , οὔτε λόγον ἑωυτῷ δοὺς ὅτι ἐς τὰ ἔσχατα γῆς ἔμελλε στρατεύεσθαι ·
When they reported all this, Cambyses was angry, and marched at once against the Ethiopians, neither giving directions for any provision of food nor considering that he was about to lead his army to the ends of the earth;


3.25.2
3045
οἷα δὲ ἐμμανής τε ἐὼν καὶ οὐ φρενήρης , ὡς ἤκουε τῶν Ἰχθυοφάγων , ἐστρατεύετο , Ἑλλήνων μὲν τοὺς παρεόντας αὐτοῦ τάξας ὑπομένειν , τὸν δὲ πεζὸν πάντα ἅμα ἀγόμενος .
being not in his right mind but mad, however, he marched at once on hearing from the Fish-eaters, ordering the Greeks who were with him to await him where they were, and taking with him all his land army.


3.25.3
3046
ἐπείτε δὲ στρατευόμενος ἐγένετο ἐν Θήβῃσι , ἀπέκρινε τοῦ στρατοῦ ὡς πέντε μυριάδας , καὶ τούτοισι μὲν ἐνετέλλετο Ἀμμωνίους ἐξανδραποδισαμένους τὸ χρηστήριον τὸ τοῦ Διὸς ἐμπρῆσαι , αὐτὸς δὲ τὸν λοιπὸν ἄγων στρατὸν ἤιε ἐπὶ τοὺς Αἰθίοπας .
When he came in his march to    Thebes    , he detached about fifty thousand men from his army, and directed them to enslave the Ammonians and burn the oracle of Zeus; and he himself went on towards    Ethiopia    with the rest of his host.


3.25.4
3047
πρὶν δὲ τῆς ὁδοῦ τὸ πέμπτον μέρος διεληλυθέναι τὴν στρατιήν , αὐτίκα πάντα αὐτοὺς τὰ εἶχον σιτίων ἐχόμενα ἐπελελοίπεε , μετὰ δὲ τὰ σιτία καὶ τὰ ὑποζύγια ἐπέλιπε κατεσθιόμενα .
But before his army had accomplished the fifth part of their journey they had come to an end of all there was in the way of provision, and after the food was gone, they ate the beasts of burden until there was none of these left either.


3.25.5
3048
εἰ μέν νυν μαθὼν ταῦτα ὁ Καμβύσης ἐγνωσιμάχεε καὶ ἀπῆγε ὀπίσω τὸν στρατόν , ἐπὶ τῇ ἀρχῆθεν γενομένῃ ἁμαρτάδι ἦν ἂν ἀνὴρ σοφός ·
Now had Cambyses, when he perceived this, changed his mind and led his army back again, he would have been a wise man at last after his first fault;


3.25.5
3049
νῦν δὲ οὐδένα λόγον ποιεύμενος ἤιε αἰεὶ ἐς τὸ πρόσω .
but as it was, he went ever forward, taking account of nothing.


3.25.6
3050
οἱ δὲ στρατιῶται ἕως μέν τι εἶχον ἐκ τῆς γῆς λαμβάνειν , ποιηφαγέοντες διέζωον , ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐς τὴν ψάμμον ἀπίκοντο , δεινὸν ἔργον αὐτῶν τινες ἐργάσαντο ·
While his soldiers could get anything from the earth, they kept themselves alive by eating grass;


3.25.6
3051
ἐκ δεκάδος γὰρ ἕνα σφέων αὐτῶν ἀποκληρώσαντες κατέφαγον .
but when they came to the sandy desert, some did a terrible thing, taking by lot one man out of ten and eating him.


3.25.7
3052
πυθόμενος δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Καμβύσης , δείσας τὴν ἀλληλοφαγίην , ἀπεὶς τὸν ἐπ’ Αἰθίοπας στόλον ὀπίσω ἐπορεύετο καὶ ἀπικνέεται ἐς Θήβας πολλοὺς ἀπολέσας τοῦ στρατοῦ ·
Hearing this, Cambyses feared their becoming cannibals, and so gave up his expedition against the Ethiopians and marched back to Thebes, with the loss of many of his army;


3.25.7
3053
ἐκ Θηβέων δὲ καταβὰς ἐς Μέμφιν τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἀπῆκε ἀποπλέειν .
from Thebes he came down to Memphis, and sent the Greeks to sail away.


3.26.1
3054
ὁ μὲν ἐπ’ Αἰθίοπας στόλος οὕτω ἔπρηξε ·
So fared the expedition against Ethiopia.


3.26.1
3055
οἱ δ’ αὐτῶν ἐπ’ Ἀμμωνίους ἀποσταλέντες στρατεύεσθαι , ἐπείτε ὁρμηθέντες ἐκ τῶν Θηβέων ἐπορεύοντο ἔχοντες ἀγωγούς , ἀπικόμενοι μὲν φανεροί εἰσι ἐς Ὄασιν πόλιν , τὴν ἔχουσι μὲν Σάμιοι τῆς Αἰσχριωνίης φυλῆς λεγόμενοι εἶναι , ἀπέχουσι δὲ ἑπτὰ ἡμερέων ὁδὸν ἀπὸ Θηβέων διὰ ψάμμου ·
As for those who were sent to march against the Ammonians, they set out and journeyed from Thebes with guides; and it is known that they came to the city of Oasis, inhabited by Samians said to be of the Aeschrionian tribe, seven days' march from Thebes across sandy desert;


3.26.1
3056
ὀνομάζεται δὲ ὁ χῶρος οὗτος κατὰ Ἑλλήνων γλῶσσαν Μακάρων νῆσος .
this place is called, in the Greek language, Islands of the Blest.


3.26.2
3057
ἐς μὲν δὴ τοῦτον τὸν χῶρον λέγεται ἀπικέσθαι τὸν στρατόν , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν δέ , ὅτι μὴ αὐτοὶ Ἀμμώνιοι καὶ οἱ τούτων ἀκούσαντες , ἄλλοι οὐδένες οὐδὲν ἔχουσι εἰπεῖν περὶ αὐτῶν ·
Thus far, it is said, the army came; after that, except for the Ammonians themselves and those who heard from them, no man can say anything of them;


3.26.2
3058
οὔτε γὰρ ἐς τοὺς Ἀμμωνίους ἀπίκοντο οὔτε ὀπίσω ἐνόστησαν .
for they neither reached the Ammonians nor returned back.


3.26.3
3059
λέγεται δὲ κατὰ τάδε ὑπ’ αὐτῶν Ἀμμωνίων ·
But this is what the Ammonians themselves say:


3.26.3
3060
ἐπειδὴ ἐκ τῆς Ὀάσιος ταύτης ἰέναι διὰ τῆς ψάμμου ἐπὶ σφέας , γενέσθαι τε αὐτοὺς μεταξύ κου μάλιστα αὐτῶν τε καὶ τῆς Ὀάσιος , ἄριστον αἱρεομένοισι αὐτοῖσι ἐπιπνεῦσαι νότον μέγαν τε καὶ ἐξαίσιον , φορέοντα δὲ θῖνας τῆς ψάμμου καταχῶσαι σφέας , καὶ τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ ἀφανισθῆναι .
when the Persians were crossing the sand from Oasis to attack them, and were about midway between their country and Oasis, while they were breakfasting a great and violent south wind arose, which buried them in the masses of sand which it bore; and so they disappeared from sight.


3.26.3
3061
Ἀμμώνιοι μὲν οὕτω λέγουσι γενέσθαι περὶ τῆς στρατιῆς ταύτης .
Such is the Ammonian tale about this army.


3.27.1
3062
ἀπιγμένου δὲ Καμβύσεω ἐς Μέμφιν ἐφάνη Αἰγυπτίοισι ὁ Ἆπις , τὸν Ἕλληνες Ἔπαφον καλέουσι ·
When Cambyses was back at Memphis, there appeared in Egypt that Apis whom the Greeks call Epaphus;


3.27.1
3063
ἐπιφανέος δὲ τούτου γενομένου αὐτίκα οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι εἵματα ἐφόρεον τὰ κάλλιστα καὶ ἦσαν ἐν θαλίῃσι .
at whose epiphany the Egyptians put on their best clothing and held a festival.


3.27.2
3064
ἰδὼν δὲ ταῦτα τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους ποιεῦντας ὁ Καμβύσης , πάγχυ σφέας καταδόξας ἑωυτοῦ κακῶς πρήξαντος χαρμόσυνα ταῦτα ποιέειν , ἐκάλεε τοὺς ἐπιτρόπους τῆς Μέμφιος , ἀπικομένους δὲ ἐς ὄψιν εἴρετο ὅ τι πρότερον μὲν ἐόντος αὐτοῦ ἐν Μέμφι ἐποίευν τοιοῦτον οὐδὲν Αἰγύπτιοι , τότε δὲ ἐπεὶ αὐτὸς παρείη τῆς στρατιῆς πλῆθός τι ἀποβαλών .
Seeing the Egyptians so doing, Cambyses was fully persuaded that these signs of joy were for his misfortunes, and summoned the rulers of    Memphis   ; when they came before him, he asked them why the Egyptians behaved so at the moment he returned with so many of his army lost, though they had done nothing like it when he was before at    Memphis   .


3.27.3
3065
οἳ δὲ ἔφραζον ὥς σφι θεὸς εἴη φανεὶς διὰ χρόνου πολλοῦ ἐωθὼς ἐπιφαίνεσθαι , καὶ ὡς ἐπεὰν φανῇ τότε πάντες Αἰγύπτιοι κεχαρηκότες ὁρτάζοιεν .
The rulers told him that a god, wont to appear after long intervals of time, had now appeared to them;


3.27.3
3066
ταῦτα ἀκούσας ὁ Καμβύσης ἔφη ψεύδεσθαι σφέας καὶ ὡς ψευδομένους θανάτῳ ἐζημίου .
and that all Egypt rejoiced and made holiday whenever he so appeared. At this Cambyses said that they lied, and he punished them with death for their lie.


3.28.1
3067
ἀποκτείνας δὲ τούτους δεύτερα τοὺς ἱρέας ἐκάλεε ἐς ὄψιν ·
Having put them to death, he next summoned the priests before him.


3.28.1
3068
λεγόντων δὲ κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ τῶν ἱρέων , οὐ λήσειν ἔφη αὐτὸν εἰ θεός τις χειροήθης ἀπιγμένος εἴη Αἰγυπτίοισι .
When they gave him the same account, he said that if a tame god had come to the Egyptians he would know it;


3.28.1
3069
τοσαῦτα δὲ εἴπας ἀπάγειν ἐκέλευε τὸν Ἆπιν τοὺς ἱρέας .
and with no more words he bade the priests bring Apis.


3.28.1
3070
οἳ μὲν δὴ μετήισαν ἄξοντες .
So they went to fetch and bring him.


3.28.2
3071
ὁ δὲ Ἆπις οὗτος ὁ Ἔπαφος γίνεται μόσχος ἐκ βοός , ἥτις οὐκέτι οἵη τε γίνεται ἐς γαστέρα ἄλλον βάλλεσθαι γόνον .
This Apis, or Epaphus, is a calf born of a cow that can never conceive again.


3.28.2
3072
Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ λέγουσι σέλας ἐπὶ τὴν βοῦν ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ κατίσχειν , καί μιν ἐκ τούτου τίκτειν τὸν Ἆπιν .
By what the Egyptians say, the cow is made pregnant by a light from heaven, and thereafter gives birth to Apis.


3.28.3
3073
ἔχει δὲ ὁ μόσχος οὗτος ὁ Ἆπις καλεόμενος σημήια τοιάδε ἐὼν μέλας , ἐπὶ μὲν τῷ μετώπῳ λευκόν τι τρίγωνον , ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ νώτου αἰετὸν εἰκασμένον , ἐν δὲ τῇ οὐρῇ τὰς τρίχας διπλᾶς , ὑπὸ δὲ τῇ γλώσσῃ κάνθαρον .
The marks of this calf called Apis are these: he is black, and has on his forehead a three-cornered white spot, and the likeness of an eagle on his back; the hairs of the tail are double, and there is a knot under the tongue.


3.29.1
3074
ὡς δὲ ἤγαγον τὸν Ἆπιν οἱ ἱρέες , ὁ Καμβύσης , οἷα ἐὼν ὑπομαργότερος , σπασάμενος τὸ ἐγχειρίδιον , θέλων τύψαι τὴν γαστέρα τοῦ Ἄπιος παίει τὸν μηρόν ·
When the priests led Apis in, Cambyses — for he was all but mad — drew his dagger and, meaning to stab the calf in the belly, stuck the thigh;


3.29.1
3075
γελάσας δὲ εἶπε πρὸς τοὺς ἱρέας " ὦ κακαὶ κεφαλαί , τοιοῦτοι θεοὶ γίνονται , ἔναιμοί τε καὶ σαρκώδεες καὶ ἐπαΐοντες σιδηρίων ;
then laughing he said to the priests:


3.29.2
3076
ἄξιος μέν γε Αἰγυπτίων οὗτός γε ὁ θεός , ἀτάρ τοι ὑμεῖς γε οὐ χαίροντες γέλωτα ἐμὲ θήσεσθε " .
“Simpletons, are these your gods, creatures of flesh and blood that can feel weapons of iron? That is a god worthy of the Egyptians.


3.29.2
3077
ταῦτα εἴπας ἐνετείλατο τοῖσι ταῦτα πρήσσουσι τοὺς μὲν ἱρέας ἀπομαστιγῶσαι , Αἰγυπτίων δὲ τῶν ἄλλων τὸν ἂν λάβωσι ὁρτάζοντα κτείνειν .
But for you, you shall suffer for making me your laughing-stock.” So saying he bade those, whose business it was, to scourge the priests well, and to kill any other Egyptian whom they found holiday-making.


3.29.3
3078
ὁρτὴ μὲν δὴ διελέλυτο Αἰγυπτίοισι , οἱ δὲ ἱρέες ἐδικαιεῦντο , ὁ δὲ Ἆπις πεπληγμένος τὸν μηρὸν ἔφθινε ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ κατακείμενος .
So the Egyptian festival ended, and the priests were punished, and Apis lay in the temple and died of the wound in the thigh.


3.29.3
3079
καὶ τὸν μὲν τελευτήσαντα ἐκ τοῦ τρώματος ἔθαψαν οἱ ἱρέες λάθρῃ Καμβύσεω .
When he was dead of the wound, the priests buried him without Cambyses' knowledge.


3.30.1
3080
Καμβύσης δέ , ὡς λέγουσι Αἰγύπτιοι , αὐτίκα διὰ τοῦτο τὸ ἀδίκημα ἐμάνη , ἐὼν οὐδὲ πρότερον φρενήρης .
But Cambyses, the Egyptians say, owing to this wrongful act immediately went mad, although even before he had not been sensible.


3.30.1
3081
καὶ πρῶτα μὲν τῶν κακῶν ἐξεργάσατο τὸν ἀδελφεὸν Σμέρδιν ἐόντα πατρὸς καὶ μητρὸς τῆς αὐτῆς , τὸν ἀπέπεμψε ἐς Πέρσας φθόνῳ ἐξ Αἰγύπτου , ὅτι τὸ τόξον μοῦνος Περσέων ὅσον τε ἐπὶ δύο δακτύλους εἴρυσε , τὸ παρὰ τοῦ Αἰθίοπος ἤνεικαν οἱ Ἰχθυοφάγοι , τῶν δὲ ἄλλων Περσέων οὐδεὶς οἷός τε ἐγένετο .
His first evil act was to destroy his full brother Smerdis, whom he had sent away from Egypt to Persia out of jealousy, because Smerdis alone could draw the bow brought from the Ethiopian by the Fish-eaters as far as two fingerbreadths, but no other Persian could draw it.


3.30.2
3082
ἀποιχομένου ὦν ἐς Πέρσας τοῦ Σμέρδιος ὄψιν εἶδε ὁ Καμβύσης ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ τοιήνδε ·
Smerdis having gone to Persia, Cambyses saw in a dream a vision like the following.


3.30.2
3083
ἔδοξέ οἱ ἄγγελον ἐλθόντα ἐκ Περσέων ἀγγέλλειν ὡς ἐν τῷ θρόνῳ τῷ βασιληίῳ ἱζόμενος Σμέρδις τῇ κεφαλῇ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ψαύσειε .
It seemed to him that a messenger came from Persia and told him that Smerdis sitting on the royal throne touched heaven with his head.


3.30.3
3084
πρὸς ὦν ταῦτα δείσας περὶ ἑωυτοῦ μή μιν ἀποκτείνας ὁ ἀδελφεὸς ἄρχῃ , πέμπει Πρηξάσπεα ἐς Πέρσας , ὃς ἦν οἱ ἀνὴρ Περσέων πιστότατος , ἀποκτενέοντά μιν .
Fearing therefore for himself, lest his brother might slay him and so be king, he sent Prexaspes, the most trusted of his Persians, to Persia to kill him.


3.30.3
3085
ὁ δὲ ἀναβὰς ἐς Σοῦσα ἀπέκτεινε Σμέρδιν , οἳ μὲν λέγουσι ἐπ’ ἄγρην ἐξαγαγόντα , οἳ δὲ ἐς τὴν Ἐρυθρὴν θάλασσαν προαγαγόντα καταποντῶσαι .
Prexaspes went up to Susa and killed Smerdis; some say that he took Smerdis out hunting, others that he brought him to the Red Sea and there drowned him.


3.31.1
3086
πρῶτον μὲν δὴ λέγουσι Καμβύσῃ τῶν κακῶν ἄρξαι τοῦτο ·
This, they say, was the first of Cambyses' evil acts;


3.31.1
3087
δεύτερα δὲ ἐξεργάσατο τὴν ἀδελφεὴν ἑσπομένην οἱ ἐς Αἴγυπτον , τῇ καὶ συνοίκεε καὶ ἦν οἱ ἀπ’ ἀμφοτέρων ἀδελφεή .
next, he destroyed his full sister, who had come with him to Egypt, and whom he had taken to wife.


3.31.2
3088
ἔγημε δὲ αὐτὴν ὧδε ·
He married her in this way (for before this, it had by no means been customary for Persians to marry their sisters):


3.31.2
3089
οὐδαμῶς γὰρ ἐώθεσαν πρότερον τῇσι ἀδελφεῇσι συνοικέειν Πέρσαι .
Cambyses was infatuated with one of his sisters and when he wanted to marry her, because his intention was contrary to usage,


3.31.2
3090
ἠράσθη μιῆς τῶν ἀδελφεῶν Καμβύσης , καὶ ἔπειτα βουλόμενος αὐτὴν γῆμαι , ὅτι οὐκ ἐωθότα ἐπενόεε ποιήσειν , εἴρετο καλέσας τοὺς βασιληίους δικαστὰς εἴ τις ἐστὶ κελεύων νόμος τὸν βουλόμενον ἀδελφεῇ συνοικέειν .
he summoned the royal judges and inquired whether there were any law enjoining one, that so desired, to marry his sister.


3.31.3
3091
οἱ δὲ βασιλήιοι δικασταὶ κεκριμένοι ἄνδρες γίνονται Περσέων , ἐς οὗ ἀποθάνωσι ἤ σφι παρευρεθῇ τι ἄδικον , μέχρι τούτου ·
These royal judges are men chosen out from the Persians to function until they die or are detected in some injustice;


3.31.3
3092
οὗτοι δὲ τοῖσι πέρσῃσι δίκας δικάζουσι καὶ ἐξηγηταὶ τῶν πατρίων θεσμῶν γίνονται , καὶ πάντα ἐς τούτους ἀνακέεται .
it is they who decide suits in Persia and interpret the laws of the land; all matters are referred to them.


3.31.4
3093
εἰρομένου ὦν τοῦ Καμβύσεω , ὑπεκρίνοντο αὐτῷ οὗτοι καὶ δίκαια καὶ ἀσφαλέα , φάμενοι νόμον οὐδένα ἐξευρίσκειν ὃς κελεύει ἀδελφεῇ συνοικέειν ἀδελφεόν , ἄλλον μέντοι ἐξευρηκέναι νόμον , τῷ βασιλεύοντι Περσέων ἐξεῖναι ποιέειν τὸ ἂν βούληται .
These then replied to Cambyses with an answer which was both just and prudent, namely, that they could find no law enjoining a brother to marry his sister; but that they had found a law permitting the King of    Persia    to do whatever he liked.


3.31.5
3094
οὕτω οὔτε τὸν νόμον ἔλυσαν δείσαντες Καμβύσεα , ἵνα τε μὴ αὐτοὶ ἀπόλωνται τὸν νόμον περιστέλλοντες , παρεξεῦρον ἄλλον νόμον σύμμαχον τῷ θέλοντι γαμέειν ἀδελφεάς .
Thus, although they feared Cambyses they did not break the law, and, to save themselves from death for keeping it, they found another law abetting one who wished to marry sisters.


3.31.6
3095
τότε μὲν δὴ ὁ Καμβύσης ἔγημε τὴν ἐρωμένην , μετὰ μέντοι οὐ πολλὸν χρόνον ἔσχε ἄλλην ἀδελφεήν .
So Cambyses married the object of his desire; yet not long afterwards he took another sister as well.


3.31.6
3096
τουτέων δῆτα τὴν νεωτέρην ἐπισπομένην οἱ ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον κτείνει .
It was the younger of these who had come with him to Egypt, and whom he now killed.


3.32.1
3097
ἀμφὶ δὲ τῷ θανάτῳ αὐτῆς διξὸς ὥσπερ περὶ Σμέρδιος λέγεται λόγος .
There are two tales of her death, as there are of the death of Smerdis.


3.32.1
3098
Ἕλληνες μὲν λέγουσι Καμβύσεα συμβαλεῖν σκύμνον λέοντος σκύλακι κυνός , θεωρέειν δὲ καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα ταύτην , νικωμένου δὲ τοῦ σκύλακος ἀδελφεὸν αὐτοῦ ἄλλον σκύλακα ἀπορρήξαντα τὸν δεσμὸν παραγενέσθαι οἱ , δύο δὲ γενομένους οὕτω δὴ τοὺς σκύλακας ἐπικρατῆσαι τοῦ σκύμνου .
The Greeks say that Cambyses had set a lion cub to fight a puppy, and that this woman was watching too;


3.32.2
3099
καὶ τὸν μὲν Καμβύσεα ἥδεσθαι θεώμενον , τὴν δὲ παρημένην δακρύειν .
Cambyses, they say, was pleased with the sight, but the woman wept as she sat by.


3.32.2
3100
Καμβύσεα δὲ μαθόντα τοῦτο ἐπειρέσθαι δι’ ὅ τι δακρύει , τὴν δὲ εἰπεῖν ὡς ἰδοῦσα τὸν σκύλακα τῷ ἀδελφεῷ τιμωρήσαντα δακρύσειε , μνησθεῖσά τε Σμέρδιος καὶ μαθοῦσα ὡς ἐκείνῳ οὐκ εἴη ὁ τιμωρήσων .
Cambyses perceiving it asked why she wept, and she said that when she saw the puppy help its brother she had wept, recalling Smerdis and knowing that there would be no avenger for him.


3.32.3
3101
Ἕλληνες μὲν δὴ διὰ τοῦτο τὸ ἔπος φασὶ αὐτὴν ἀπολέσθαι ὑπὸ Καμβύσεω , Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ ὡς τραπέζῃ παρακατημένων λαβοῦσαν θρίδακα τὴν γυναῖκα περιτῖλαι καὶ ἐπανειρέσθαι τὸν ἄνδρα κότερον περιτετιλμένη ἡ θρίδαξ ἢ δασέα εἴη καλλίων , καὶ τὸν φάναι δασέαν , τὴν δ’ εἰπεῖν " ταύτην μέντοι κοτὲ σὺ τὴν θρίδακα ἐμιμήσαο τὸν Κύρου οἶκον ἀποψιλώσας " .
For saying this, according to the Greek story, she was killed by Cambyses. But the Egyptian tale is that as the two sat at table the woman took a lettuce and plucked off the leaves, then asked her husband whether he preferred the look of it with or without leaves. “With the leaves,” he said; whereupon she answered:


3.32.4
3102
τὸν δὲ θυμωθέντα ἐμπηδῆσαι αὐτῇ ἐχούσῃ ἐν γαστρί , καί μιν ἐκτρώσασαν ἀποθανεῖν .
“Yet you have stripped Cyrus' house as bare as this lettuce.” Angered at this, they say, he sprang upon her, who was great with child, and she miscarried and died of the hurt he gave her.


3.33.1
3103
ταῦτα μὲν ἐς τοὺς οἰκηίους ὁ Καμβύσης ἐξεμάνη , εἴτε δὴ διὰ τὸν Ἆπιν εἴτε καὶ ἄλλως , οἷα πολλὰ ἔωθε ἀνθρώπους κακὰ καταλαμβάνειν ·
Such were Cambyses' mad acts to his own household, whether they were done because of Apis or grew from some of the many troubles that are wont to beset men;


3.33.1
3104
καὶ γὰρ τινὰ ἐκ γενεῆς νοῦσον μεγάλην λέγεται ἔχειν ὁ Καμβύσης , τὴν ἱρὴν ὀνομάζουσι τινές .
for indeed he is said to have been afflicted from his birth with that grievous disease which some call “sacred.”


3.33.1
3105
οὔ νύν τοι ἀεικὲς οὐδὲν ἦν τοῦ σώματος νοῦσον μεγάλην νοσέοντος μηδὲ τὰς φρένας ὑγιαίνειν .
It is not unlikely then that when his body was grievously afflicted his mind too should be diseased.


3.34.1
3106
τάδε δ’ ἐς τοὺς ἄλλους Πέρσας ἐξεμάνη .
I will now relate his mad dealings with the rest of Persia.


3.34.1
3107
λέγεται γὰρ εἰπεῖν αὐτὸν πρὸς Πρηξάσπεα , τὸν ἐτίμα τε μάλιστα καί οἱ τὰς ἀγγελίας ἐφόρεε οὗτος , τούτου τε ὁ παῖς οἰνοχόος ἦν τῷ Καμβύσῃ , τιμὴ δὲ καὶ αὕτη οὐ σμικρή ·
He said, as they report, to Prexaspes — whom he held in particular honor, who brought him all his messages, whose son held the very honorable office of Cambyses' cup-bearer —


3.34.1
3108
εἰπεῖν δὲ λέγεται τάδε .
thus, I say, he spoke to Prexaspes:


3.34.2
3109
" Πρήξασπες , κοῖόν με τινὰ νομίζουσι Πέρσαι εἶναι ἄνδρα τίνας τε λόγους περὶ ἐμέο ποιεῦνται " ;
“What manner of man, Prexaspes, do the Persians think me to be, and how do they speak of me?”


3.34.2
3110
τὸν δὲ εἰπεῖν " ὦ δέσποτα , τὰ μὲν ἄλλα πάντα μεγάλως ἐπαινέαι , τῇ δὲ φιλοινίῃ σε φασὶ πλεόνως προσκεῖσθαι " .
“Sire,” said Prexaspes, “for all else they greatly praise you, but they say that you love wine too well.”


3.34.3
3111
τὸν μὲν δὴ λέγειν ταῦτα περὶ Περσέων , τὸν δὲ θυμωθέντα τοιάδε ἀμείβεσθαι .
So he reported of the Persians.


3.34.3
3112
" νῦν ἄρα με φασὶ Πέρσαι οἴνῳ προσκείμενον παραφρονέειν καὶ οὐκ εἶναι νοήμονα ·
The king angrily replied: “If the Persians now say that it is my fondness for wine that drives me to frenzy and madness,


3.34.3
3113
οὐδ’ ἄρα σφέων οἱ πρότεροι λόγοι ἦσαν ἀληθέες " .
then it would seem that their former saying also was a lie.”


3.34.4
3114
πρότερον γὰρ δὴ ἄρα , Περσέων οἱ συνέδρων ἐόντων καὶ Κροίσου , εἴρετο Καμβύσης κοῖός τις δοκέοι ἀνὴρ εἶναι πρὸς τὸν πατέρα τελέσαι Κῦρον , οἳ δὲ ἀμείβοντο ὡς εἴη ἀμείνων τοῦ πατρός ·
For it is said that before this, while some Persians and Croesus were sitting with him, Cambyses asked what manner of man they thought him to be in comparison with Cyrus his father; and they answered, “Cambyses was the better man;


3.34.4
3115
τά τε γὰρ ἐκείνου πάντα ἔχειν αὐτὸν καὶ προσεκτῆσθαι Αἴγυπτόν τε καὶ τὴν θάλασσαν .
for he had all of Cyrus' possessions and had won Egypt and the sea besides.”


3.34.5
3116
Πέρσαι μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεγον , Κροῖσος δὲ παρεών τε καὶ οὐκ ἀρεσκόμενος τῇ κρίσι εἶπε πρὸς τὸν Καμβύσεα τάδε .
So said the Persians; but Croesus, who was present, and was dissatisfied with their judgment, spoke thus to Cambyses:


3.34.5
3117
" ἐμοὶ μέν νυν , ὦ παῖ Κύρου , οὐ δοκέεις ὅμοιος εἶναι τῷ πατρί ·
“To me, son of Cyrus, you do not seem to be the equal of your father;


3.34.5
3118
οὐ γάρ κώ τοι ἐστὶ υἱὸς οἷον σε ἐκεῖνος κατελίπετο " .
for you have as yet no son such as he left after him in you.”


3.34.5
3119
ἥσθη τε ταῦτα ἀκούσας ὁ Καμβύσης καὶ ἐπαίνεε τὴν Κροίσου κρίσιν .
This pleased Cambyses, and he praised Croesus' judgment.


3.35.1
3120
τούτων δὴ ὦν ἐπιμνησθέντα ὀργῇ λέγειν πρὸς τὸν Πρηξάσπεα " σύ νυν μάθε εἰ λέγουσι Πέρσαι ἀληθέα εἴτε αὐτοὶ λέγοντες ταῦτα παραφρονέουσι ·
Remembering this, then, he said to Prexaspes in his anger: “Judge then if the Persians speak the truth, or rather are themselves out of their minds when they speak of me so.


3.35.2
3121
εἰ μὲν γὰρ τοῦ παιδὸς τοῦ σοῦ τοῦδε ἑστεῶτος ἐν τοῖσι προθύροισι βαλὼν τύχοιμι μέσης τῆς καρδίης , Πέρσαι φανέονται λέγοντες οὐδέν ·
“Yonder stands your son in the porch; now if I shoot and pierce his heart, that will prove the Persians to be wrong;


3.35.2
3122
ἢν δὲ ἁμάρτω , φάναι Πέρσας τε λέγειν ἀληθέα καί με μὴ σωφρονέειν " .
if I miss, then say that they are right and that I am out of my senses.”


3.35.3
3123
ταῦτα δὲ εἰπόντα καὶ διατείναντα τὸ τόξον βαλεῖν τὸν παῖδα , πεσόντος δὲ τοῦ παιδὸς ἀνασχίζειν αὐτὸν κελεύειν καὶ σκέψασθαι τὸ βλῆμα ·
So saying, he strung his bow and hit the boy, and gave orders to open the fallen body and examine the wound:


3.35.3
3124
ὡς δὲ ἐν τῇ καρδίῃ εὑρεθῆναι ἐνεόντα τὸν ὀιστόν , εἰπεῖν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα τοῦ παιδὸς γελάσαντα καὶ περιχαρέα γενόμενον " Πρήξασπες , ὡς μὲν ἐγὼ τε οὐ μαίνομαι Πέρσαι τε παραφρονέουσι , δῆλά τοι γέγονε .
and the arrow being found in the heart, Cambyses laughed in great glee and said to the boy's father:


3.35.4
3125
νῦν δέ μοι εἰπέ , τίνα εἶδες ἤδη πάντων ἀνθρώπων οὕτω ἐπίσκοπα τοξεύοντα " ;
“It is plain, Prexaspes, that I am in my right mind and the Persians mad; now tell me: what man in the world did you ever see that shot so true to the mark?”


3.35.4
3126
Πρηξάσπεα δὲ ὁρῶντα ἄνδρα οὐ φρενήρεα καὶ περὶ ἑωυτῷ δειμαίνοντα εἰπεῖν " δέσποτα , οὐδ’ ἂν αὐτὸν ἔγωγε δοκέω τὸν θεὸν οὕτω ἂν καλῶς βαλεῖν " .
Prexaspes, it is said, replied (for he saw that Cambyses was mad, and he feared for his own life), “Master, I think that not even the god himself could shoot so true.”


3.35.5
3127
τότε μὲν ταῦτα ἐξεργάσατο , ἑτέρωθι δὲ Περσέων ὁμοίους τοῖσι πρώτοισι δυώδεκα ἐπ’ οὐδεμιῇ αἰτίῃ ἀξιοχρέῳ ἑλὼν ζώοντας ἐπὶ κεφαλὴν κατώρυξε .
Thus did Cambyses then; at another time he took twelve Persians, equal to the noblest in the land, convicted them of some minor offense, and buried them alive up to the neck.


3.36.1
3128
ταῦτα δέ μιν ποιεῦντα ἐδικαίωσε Κροῖσος ὁ Λυδὸς νουθετῆσαι τοῖσιδε τοῖσι ἔπεσι .
For these acts Croesus the Lydian thought fit to take him to task, and addressed him thus:


3.36.1
3129
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , μὴ πάντα ἡλικίῃ καὶ θυμῷ ἐπίτραπε , ἀλλ’ ἴσχε καὶ καταλάμβανε σεωυτόν ·
“Sire, do not sacrifice everything to youth and temper, but restrain and control yourself;


3.36.1
3130
ἀγαθόν τι πρόνοον εἶναι , σοφὸν δὲ ἡ προμηθίη .
prudence is a good thing, forethought is wise.


3.36.1
3131
σὺ δὲ κτείνεις μὲν ἄνδρας σεωυτοῦ πολιήτας ἐπ’ οὐδεμιῇ αἰτίῃ ἀξιοχρέῳ ἑλών , κτείνεις δὲ παῖδας .
But you kill men of your own country whom you have convicted of some minor offense, and you kill boys.


3.36.2
3132
ἢν δὲ πολλὰ τοιαῦτα ποιέῃς , ὅρα ὅκως μή σευ ἀποστήσονται Πέρσαι .
If you do so often, beware lest the Persians revolt from you.


3.36.2
3133
ἐμοὶ δὲ πατὴρ σὸς Κῦρος ἐνετέλλετο πολλὰ κελεύων σε νουθετέειν καὶ ὑποτίθεσθαι ὅ τι ἂν εὑρίσκω ἀγαθόν " .
As for me, your father Cyrus earnestly begged me to counsel you and to give you such advice as I think to be good.”


3.36.2
3134
ὃ μὲν δὴ εὐνοίην φαίνων συνεβούλευέ οἱ ταῦτα ·
Croesus gave him this counsel out of goodwill;


3.36.2
3135
ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
but Cambyses answered:


3.36.3
3136
" σὺ καὶ ἐμοὶ τολμᾷς συμβουλεύειν , ὃς χρηστῶς μὲν τὴν σεωυτοῦ πατρίδα ἐπετρόπευσας , εὖ δὲ τῷ πατρὶ τῷ ἐμῷ συνεβούλευσας , κελεύων αὐτὸν Ἀράξεα ποταμὸν διαβάντα ἰέναι ἐπὶ Μασσαγέτας , βουλομένων ἐκείνων διαβαίνειν ἐς τὴν ἡμετέρην , καὶ ἀπὸ μὲν σεωυτὸν ὤλεσας τῆς σεωυτοῦ πατρίδος κακῶς προστάς , ἀπὸ δὲ ὤλεσας Κῦρον πειθόμενον σοί , ἀλλ’ οὔτι χαίρων , ἐπεί τοι καὶ πάλαι ἐς σὲ προφάσιός τευ ἐδεόμην ἐπιλαβέσθαι " .
“It is very well that you should even dare to counsel me; you, who governed your own country so well, and gave fine advice to my father — telling him, when the Massagetae were willing to cross over into our lands, to pass the Araxes and attack them; thus you worked your own ruin by misgoverning your country and Cyrus', who trusted you. But you shall regret it; I have long waited for an occasion to deal with you.”


3.36.4
3137
ταῦτα δὲ εἴπας ἐλάμβανε τὸ τόξον ὡς κατατοξεύσων αὐτόν , Κροῖσος δὲ ἀναδραμὼν ἔθεε ἔξω .
With that Cambyses took his bow to shoot him dead; but Croesus leapt up and ran out;


3.36.4
3138
ὁ δὲ ἐπείτε τοξεῦσαι οὐκ εἶχε , ἐνετείλατο τοῖσι θεράπουσι λαβόντας μιν ἀποκτεῖναι .
and Cambyses, being unable to shoot him, ordered his attendants to catch and kill him.


3.36.5
3139
οἱ δὲ θεράποντες ἐπιστάμενοι τὸν τρόπον αὐτοῦ κατακρύπτουσι τὸν Κροῖσον ἐπὶ τῷδε τῷ λόγῳ ὥστε , εἰ μὲν μεταμελήσῃ τῷ Καμβύσῃ καὶ ἐπιζητέῃ τὸν Κροῖσον , οἳ δὲ ἐκφήναντες αὐτὸν δῶρα λάμψονται ζωάγρια Κροίσου , ἢν δὲ μὴ μεταμέληται μηδὲ ποθέῃ μιν , τότε καταχρᾶσθαι .
They, knowing Cambyses' mood, hid Croesus; intending to reveal him and receive gifts for saving his life, if Cambyses should repent and ask for Croesus, but if he should not repent nor wish Croesus back, then to kill the Lydian.


3.36.6
3140
ἐπόθησέ τε δὴ ὁ Καμβύσης τὸν Κροῖσον οὐ πολλῷ μετέπειτα χρόνῳ ὕστερον , καὶ οἱ θεράποντες μαθόντες τοῦτο ἐπηγγέλλοντο αὐτῷ ὡς περιείη .
Not long after this Cambyses did wish Croesus back, and the attendants, understanding this, told him that Croesus was alive still.


3.36.6
3141
Καμβύσης δὲ Κροίσῳ μὲν συνήδεσθαι ἔφη περιεόντι , ἐκείνους μέντοι τοὺς περιποιήσαντας οὐ καταπροΐξεσθαι ἀλλ’ ἀποκτενέειν ·
Cambyses said that he was glad of it; but that they, who had saved Croesus, should not escape with impunity, but be killed;


3.36.6
3142
καὶ ἐποίησε ταῦτα .
and this was done.


3.37.1
3143
ὃ μὲν δὴ τοιαῦτα πολλὰ ἐς Πέρσας τε καὶ τοὺς συμμάχους ἐξεμαίνετο , μένων ἐν Μέμφι καὶ θήκας τε παλαιὰς ἀνοίγων καὶ σκεπτόμενος τοὺς νεκρούς .
Cambyses committed many such mad acts against the Persians and his allies; he stayed at    Memphis   , and there opened ancient coffins and examined the dead bodies.


3.37.2
3144
ὣς δὲ δὴ καὶ ἐς τοῦ Ἡφαίστου τὸ ἱρὸν ἦλθε καὶ πολλὰ τῷ ἀγάλματι κατεγέλασε .
Thus too he entered the temple of Hephaestus and jeered at the image there.


3.37.2
3145
ἔστι γὰρ τοῦ Ἡφαίστου τ- ἄγαλμα τοῖσι Φοινικηίοισι Παταΐκοισι ἐμφερέστατον , τοὺς οἱ Φοίνικες ἐν τῇσι πρῴρῃσι τῶν τριηρέων περιάγουσι .
This image of Hephaestus is most like the Phoenician Pataici, which the Phoenicians carry on the prows of their triremes.


3.37.2
3146
ὃς δὲ τούτους μὴ ὄπωπε , ὧδε σημανέω ·
I will describe it for anyone who has not seen these figures:


3.37.2
3147
πυγμαίου ἀνδρὸς μίμησις ἐστί .
it is the likeness of a dwarf.


3.37.3
3148
ἐσῆλθε δὲ καὶ ἐς τῶν Καβείρων τὸ ἱρόν , ἐς τὸ οὐ θεμιτόν ἐστι ἐσιέναι ἄλλον γε ἢ τὸν ἱρέα ·
Also he entered the temple of the Cabeiri, into which no one may enter save the priest;


3.37.3
3149
ταῦτα δὲ τὰ ἀγάλματα καὶ ἐνέπρησε πολλὰ κατασκώψας .
the images here he even burnt, with bitter mockery.


3.37.3
3150
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ταῦτα ὅμοια τοῖσι τοῦ Ἡφαίστου ·
These also are like the images of Hephaestus,


3.37.3
3151
τούτου δὲ σφέας παῖδας λέγουσι εἶναι .
and are said to be his sons.


3.38.1
3152
πανταχῇ ὦν μοι δῆλα ἐστὶ ὅτι ἐμάνη μεγάλως ὁ Καμβύσης ·
I hold it then in every way proved that Cambyses was quite insane;


3.38.1
3153
οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἱροῖσί τε καὶ νομαίοισι ἐπεχείρησε καταγελᾶν .
or he would never have set himself to deride religion and custom.


3.38.1
3154
εἰ γάρ τις προθείη πᾶσι ἀνθρώποισι ἐκλέξασθαι κελεύων νόμους τοὺς καλλίστους ἐκ τῶν πάντων νόμων , διασκεψάμενοι ἂν ἑλοίατο ἕκαστοι τοὺς ἑωυτῶν ·
For if it were proposed to all nations to choose which seemed best of all customs, each, after examination, would place its own first;


3.38.1
3155
οὕτω νομίζουσι πολλόν τι καλλίστους τοὺς ἑωυτῶν νόμους ἕκαστοι εἶναι .
so well is each convinced that its own are by far the best.


3.38.2
3156
οὔκων οἰκός ἐστι ἄλλον γε ἢ μαινόμενον ἄνδρα γέλωτα τὰ τοιαῦτα τίθεσθαι ·
It is not therefore to be supposed that anyone, except a madman, would turn such things to ridicule.


3.38.2
3157
ὡς δὲ οὕτω νενομίκασι τὰ περὶ τοὺς νόμους πάντες ἄνθρωποι , πολλοῖσί τε καὶ ἄλλοισι τεκμηρίοισι πάρεστι σταθμώσασθαι , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ τῷδε .
I will give this one proof among many from which it may be inferred that all men hold this belief about their customs.


3.38.3
3158
Δαρεῖος ἐπὶ τῆς ἑωυτοῦ ἀρχῆς καλέσας Ἑλλήνων τοὺς παρεόντας εἴρετο ἐπὶ κόσῳ ἂν χρήματι βουλοίατο τοὺς πατέρας ἀποθνήσκοντας κατασιτέεσθαι ·
When Darius was king, he summoned the Greeks who were with him and asked them for what price they would eat their fathers' dead bodies.


3.38.3
3159
οἳ δὲ ἐπ’ οὐδενὶ ἔφασαν ἔρδειν ἂν τοῦτο .
They answered that there was no price for which they would do it.


3.38.4
3160
Δαρεῖος δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα καλέσας Ἰνδῶν τοὺς καλεομένους Καλλατίας , οἳ τοὺς γονέας κατεσθίουσι , εἴρετο , παρεόντων τῶν Ἑλλήνων καὶ δι’ ἑρμηνέος μανθανόντων τὰ λεγόμενα , ἐπὶ τίνι χρήματι δεξαίατ’ ἂν τελευτῶντας τοὺς πατέρας κατακαίειν πυρί ·
Then Darius summoned those Indians who are called Callatiae, who eat their parents, and asked them (the Greeks being present and understanding through interpreters what was said) what would make them willing to burn their fathers at death.


3.38.4
3161
οἳ δὲ ἀμβώσαντες μέγα εὐφημέειν μιν ἐκέλευον .
The Indians cried aloud, that he should not speak of so horrid an act.


3.38.4
3162
οὕτω μέν νυν ταῦτα νενόμισται , καὶ ὀρθῶς μοι δοκέει Πίνδαρος ποιῆσαι νόμον πάντων βασιλέα φήσας εἶναι .
So firmly rooted are these beliefs; and it is, I think, rightly said in Pindar's poem that custom is lord of all.


3.39.1
3163
Καμβύσεω δὲ ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον στρατευομένου ἐποιήσαντο καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι στρατηίην ἐπὶ Σάμον τε καὶ Πολυκράτεα τὸν Αἰάκεος ·
While Cambyses was attacking Egypt, the Lacedaemonians too were making war upon Samos and upon Aeaces' son Polycrates,


3.39.1
3164
ὃς ἔσχε Σάμον ἐπαναστάς , καὶ τὰ μὲν πρῶτα τριχῇ δασάμενος τὴν πόλιν G? τοῖσι ἀδελφεοῖσι Πανταγνώτῳ καὶ Συλοσῶντι ἔνειμε , μετὰ δὲ τὸν μὲν αὐτῶν ἀποκτείνας τὸν δὲ νεώτερον Συλοσῶντα ἐξελάσας ἔσχε πᾶσαν Σάμον , σχὼν δὲ ξεινίην Ἀμάσι τῷ Αἰγύπτου βασιλέι συνεθήκατο , πέμπων τε δῶρα καὶ δεκόμενος ἄλλα παρ’ ἐκείνου .
who had revolted and won Samos. At first he divided the city into three parts and gave them to his brothers Pantagnotus and Syloson, but afterwards, having killed one brother and driven out the younger Syloson, he held all Samos, and made a treaty of friendship with Amasis, the king of Egypt, sending him gifts and receiving others from him.


3.39.3
3165
ἐν χρόνῳ δὲ ὀλίγῳ αὐτίκα τοῦ Πολυκράτεος τὰ πρήγματα ηὔξετο καὶ ἦν βεβωμένα ἀνά τε τὴν Ἰωνίην καὶ τὴν ἄλλην Ἑλλάδα ·
Very soon after this, Polycrates grew to such power that he was famous in Ionia and all other Greek lands;


3.39.3
3166
ὅκου γὰρ ἰθύσειε στρατεύεσθαι , πάντα οἱ ἐχώρεε εὐτυχέως .
for all his military affairs succeeded.


3.39.3
3167
ἔκτητο δὲ πεντηκοντέρους τε ἑκατὸν καὶ χιλίους τοξότας , ἔφερε δὲ καὶ ἦγε πάντας διακρίνων οὐδένα ·
He had a hundred fifty-oared ships, and a thousand archers, and he pillaged every place, indiscriminately; for he said that he would get more thanks if he gave a friend back what he had taken than if he never took it at all.


3.39.4
3168
τῷ γὰρ φίλῳ ἔφη χαριεῖσθαι μᾶλλον ἀποδιδοὺς τὰ ἔλαβε ἢ ἀρχὴν μηδὲ λαβών .
He had taken many of the islands, and many of the mainland cities.


3.39.4
3169
συχνὰς μὲν δὴ τῶν νήσων ἀραιρήκεε , πολλὰ δὲ καὶ τῆς ἠπείρου ἄστεα ·
Among others, he conquered the Lesbians;


3.39.4
3170
ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ Λεσβίους πανστρατιῇ βοηθέοντας Μιλησίοισι ναυμαχίῃ κρατήσας εἷλε , οἳ τὴν τάφρον περὶ τὸ τεῖχος τὸ ἐν Σάμῳ πᾶσαν δεδεμένοι ὤρυξαν .
they had brought all their force to aid the Milesians, and Polycrates defeated them in a sea-fight; it was they who, being his captives, dug all the trench around the acropolis of Samos.


3.40.1
3171
καί κως τὸν Ἄμασιν εὐτυχέων μεγάλως ὁ Πολυκράτης οὐκ ἐλάνθανε , ἀλλά οἱ τοῦτ’ ἦν ἐπιμελές .
Now Amasis was somehow aware of Polycrates' great good fortune;


3.40.1
3172
πολλῷ δὲ ἔτι πλεῦνός οἱ εὐτυχίης γινομένης γράψας ἐς βυβλίον τάδε ἐπέστειλε ἐς Σάμον .
and as this continued to increase greatly, he wrote this letter and sent it to Samos:


3.40.1
3173
" Ἄμασις Πολυκράτεϊ ὧδε λέγει .
“Amasis addresses Polycrates as follows.


3.40.2
3174
ἡδὺ μὲν πυνθάνεσθαι ἄνδρα φίλον καὶ ξεῖνον εὖ πρήσσοντα ·
It is pleasant to learn that a friend and ally is doing well.


3.40.2
3175
ἐμοὶ δὲ αἱ σαὶ μεγάλαι εὐτυχίαι οὐκ ἀρέσκουσι , τὸ θεῖον ἐπισταμένῳ ὡς ἔστι φθονερόν ·
But I do not like these great successes of yours; for I know the gods, how jealous they are,


3.40.2
3176
καί κως βούλομαι καὶ αὐτὸς καὶ τῶν ἂν κήδωμαι τὸ μέν τι εὐτυχέειν τῶν πρηγμάτων τὸ δὲ προσπταίειν , καὶ οὕτω διαφέρειν τὸν αἰῶνα ἐναλλὰξ πρήσσων ἢ εὐτυχέειν τὰ πάντα .
and I desire somehow that both I and those for whom I care succeed in some affairs, fail in others, and thus pass life faring differently by turns, rather than succeed at everything.


3.40.3
3177
οὐδένα γάρ κω λόγῳ οἶδα ἀκούσας ὅστις ἐς τέλος οὐ κακῶς ἐτελεύτησε πρόρριζος , εὐτυχέων τὰ πάντα .
For from all I have heard I know of no man whom continual good fortune did not bring in the end to evil, and utter destruction.


3.40.3
3178
σύ νυν ἐμοὶ πειθόμενος ποίησον πρὸς τὰς εὐτυχίας τοιάδε ·
Therefore if you will be ruled by me do this regarding your successes:


3.40.4
3179
φροντίσας τὸ ἂν εὕρῃς ἐόν τοι πλείστου ἄξιον καὶ ἐπ’ ᾧ σὺ ἀπολομένῳ μάλιστα τὴν ψυχὴν ἀλγήσεις , τοῦτο ἀπόβαλε οὕτω ὅκως μηκέτι ἥξει ἐς ἀνθρώπους ·
consider what you hold most precious and what you will be sorriest to lose, and cast it away so that it shall never again be seen among men;


3.40.4
3180
ἤν τε μὴ ἐναλλὰξ ἤδη τ- ἀπὸ τούτου αἱ εὐτυχίαι τοι τῇσι πάθῃσι προσπίπτωσι , τρόπῳ τῷ ἐξ ἐμεῦ ὑποκειμένῳ ἀκέο " .
then, if after this the successes that come to you are not mixed with mischances, strive to mend the matter as I have counselled you.”


3.41.1
3181
ταῦτα ἐπιλεξάμενος ὁ Πολυκράτης καὶ νόῳ λαβὼν ὥς οἱ εὖ ὑπετίθετο Ἄμασις , ἐδίζητο ἐπ’ ᾧ ἂν μάλιστα τὴν ψυχὴν ἀσηθείη ἀπολομένῳ τῶν κειμηλίων , διζήμενος δὲ εὕρισκε τόδε .
Reading this, and perceiving that Amasis' advice was good, Polycrates considered which of his treasures it would most grieve his soul to lose, and came to this conclusion:


3.41.1
3182
ἦν οἱ σφρηγὶς τὴν ἐφόρεε χρυσόδετος , σμαράγδου μὲν λίθου ἐοῦσα , ἔργον δὲ ἦν Θεοδώρου τοῦ Τηλεκλέος Σαμίου .
he wore a seal set in gold, an emerald, crafted by Theodorus son of Telecles of Samos;


3.41.2
3183
ἐπεὶ ὦν ταύτην οἱ ἐδόκεε ἀποβαλεῖν , ἐποίεε τοιάδε ·
being resolved to cast this away, he embarked in a fifty-oared ship with its crew, and told them to put out to sea;


3.41.2
3184
πεντηκόντερον πληρώσας ἀνδρῶν ἐσέβη ἐς αὐτήν , μετὰ δὲ ἀναγαγεῖν ἐκέλευε ἐς τὸ πέλαγος ·
and when he was far from the island,


3.41.2
3185
ὡς δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς νήσου ἑκὰς ἐγένετο , περιελόμενος τὴν σφρηγῖδα πάντων ὁρώντων τῶν συμπλόων ῥίπτει ἐς τὸ πέλαγος .
he took off the seal-ring in sight of all that were on the ship and cast it into the sea.


3.41.2
3186
τοῦτο δὲ ποιήσας ἀπέπλεε , ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐς τὰ οἰκία συμφορῇ ἐχρᾶτο .
This done, he sailed back and went to his house, where he grieved for the loss.


3.42.1
3187
πέμπτῃ δὲ ἢ ἕκτῃ ἡμέρῃ ἀπὸ τούτων τάδε οἱ συνήνεικε γενέσθαι .
But on the fifth or sixth day from this it happened that a fisherman, who had taken a fine and great fish, and desired to make a gift of it to Polycrates, brought it to the door and said that he wished to see Polycrates.


3.42.1
3188
ἀνὴρ ἁλιεὺς λαβὼν ἰχθὺν μέγαν τε καὶ καλὸν ἠξίου μιν Πολυκράτεϊ δῶρον δοθῆναι ·
This being granted, he gave the fish, saying:


3.42.1
3189
φέρων δὴ ἐπὶ τὰς θύρας Πολυκράτεϊ ἔφη ἐθέλειν ἐλθεῖν ἐς ὄψιν , χωρήσαντος δέ οἱ τούτου ἔλεγε διδοὺς τὸν ἰχθύν " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἐγὼ τόνδε ἑλὼν οὐκ ἐδικαίωσα φέρειν ἐς ἀγορήν , καίπερ ἐὼν ἀποχειροβίοτος , ἀλλά μοι ἐδόκεε σεῦ τε εἶναι ἄξιος καὶ τῆς σῆς ἀρχῆς ·
“O King, when I caught this fish, I thought best not to take it to market, although I am a man who lives by his hands, but it seemed to me worthy of you and your greatness;


3.42.2
3190
σοὶ δή μιν φέρων δίδωμι " .
and so I bring and offer it to you.”


3.42.2
3191
ὁ δὲ ἡσθεὶς τοῖσι ἔπεσι ἀμείβεται τοῖσιδε .
Polycrates was pleased with what the fisherman said; “You have done very well,” he answered,


3.42.2
3192
" κάρτα τε εὖ ἐποίησας καὶ χάρις διπλῆ τῶν τε λόγων καὶ τοῦ δώρου , καί σε ἐπὶ δεῖπνον καλέομεν " .
“and I give you double thanks, for your words and for the gift; and I invite you to dine with me.”


3.42.3
3193
ὃ μὲν δὴ ἁλιεὺς μέγα ποιεύμενος ταῦτα ἤιε ἐς τὰ οἰκία , τὸν δὲ ἰχθὺν τάμνοντες οἱ θεράποντες εὑρίσκουσι ἐν τῇ νηδύι αὐτοῦ ἐνεοῦσαν τὴν Πολυκράτεος σφρηγῖδα .
Proud of this honor, the fisherman went home; but the servants, cutting up the fish, found in its belly Polycrates' seal-ring.


3.42.4
3194
ὡς δὲ εἶδόν τε καὶ ἔλαβον τάχιστα , ἔφερον κεχαρηκότες παρὰ τὸν Πολυκράτεα , διδόντες δέ οἱ τὴν σφρηγῖδα ἔλεγον ὅτεῳ τρόπῳ εὑρέθη .
As soon as they saw and seized it, they brought it with joy to Polycrates, and giving the ring to him told him how it had been found.


3.42.4
3195
τὸν δὲ ὡς ἐσῆλθε θεῖον εἶναι τὸ πρῆγμα , γράφει ἐς βυβλίον πάντα τὰ ποιήσαντά μιν οἷα καταλελάβηκε , γράψας δὲ ἐς Αἴγυπτον ἐπέθηκε .
Polycrates saw the hand of heaven in this matter; he wrote a letter and sent it to Egypt, telling all that he had done, and what had happened to him.


3.43.1
3196
ἐπιλεξάμενος δὲ ὁ Ἄμασις τὸ βυβλίον τὸ παρὰ τοῦ Πολυκράτεος ἧκον , ἔμαθε ὅτι ἐκκομίσαι τε ἀδύνατον εἴη ἀνθρώπῳ ἄνθρωπον ἐκ τοῦ μέλλοντος γίνεσθαι πρήγματος , καὶ ὅτι οὐκ εὖ τελευτήσειν μέλλοι Πολυκράτης εὐτυχέων τὰ πάντα , ὃς καὶ τὰ ἀποβάλλει εὑρίσκει .
When Amasis had read Polycrates' letter, he perceived that no man could save another from his destiny, and that Polycrates, being so continually fortunate that he even found what he cast away, must come to an evil end.


3.43.2
3197
πέμψας δέ οἱ κήρυκα ἐς Σάμον διαλύεσθαι ἔφη τὴν ξεινίην .
So he sent a herald to Samos to renounce his friendship,


3.43.2
3198
τοῦδε δὲ εἵνεκεν ταῦτα ἐποίεε , ἵνα μὴ συντυχίης δεινῆς τε καὶ μεγάλης Πολυκράτεα καταλαβούσης αὐτὸς ἀλγήσειε τὴν ψυχὴν ὡς περὶ ξείνου ἀνδρός .
determined that when some great and terrible mischance overtook Polycrates he himself might not have to sadden his heart for a friend.


3.44.1
3199
ἐπὶ τοῦτον δὴ ὦν τὸν Πολυκράτεα εὐτυχέοντα τὰ πάντα ἐστρατεύοντο Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ἐπικαλεσαμένων τῶν μετὰ ταῦτα Κυδωνίην τὴν ἐν Κρήτῃ κτισάντων Σαμίων .
It was against this ever-victorious Polycrates that the Lacedaemonians now made war, invited by the Samians who afterwards founded Cydonia in Crete.


3.44.1
3200
πέμψας δὲ κήρυκα λάθρῃ Σαμίων Πολυκράτης παρὰ Καμβύσεα τὸν Κύρου συλλέγοντα στρατὸν ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον , ἐδεήθη ὅκως ἂν καὶ παρ’ ἑωυτὸν πέμψας ἐς Σάμον δέοιτο στρατοῦ .
Polycrates had without the knowledge of his subjects sent a herald to Cambyses, son of Cyrus, then raising an army against Egypt, inviting Cambyses to send to Samos too and request men from him.


3.44.2
3201
Καμβύσης δὲ ἀκούσας τούτων προθύμως ἔπεμψε ἐς Σάμον δεόμενος Πολυκράτεος στρατὸν ναυτικὸν ἅμα πέμψαι ἑωυτῷ ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον .
At this message Cambyses very readily sent to Samos, asking Polycrates to send a fleet to aid him against Egypt.


3.44.2
3202
ὁ δὲ ἐπιλέξας τῶν ἀστῶν τοὺς ὑπώπτευε μάλιστα ἐς ἐπανάστασιν ἀπέπεμπε τεσσεράκοντα τριήρεσι , ἐντειλάμενος Καμβύσῃ ὀπίσω τούτους μὴ ἀποπέμπειν .
Polycrates chose those men whom he most suspected of planning a rebellion against him, and sent them in forty triremes, directing Cambyses not to send the men back.


3.45.1
3203
οἳ μὲν δὴ λέγουσι τοὺς ἀποπεμφθέντας Σαμίων ὑπὸ Πολυκράτεος οὐκ ἀπικέσθαι ἐς Αἴγυπτον , ἀλλ’ ἐπείτε ἐγένοντο ἐν Καρπάθῳ πλέοντες , δοῦναι σφίσι λόγον , καί σφι ἁδεῖν τὸ προσωτέρω μηκέτι πλέειν ·
Some say that these Samians who were sent never came to Egypt, but that when they had sailed as far as Carpathus discussed the matter among themselves and decided to sail no further;


3.45.1
3204
οἳ δὲ λέγουσι ἀπικομένους τε ἐς Αἴγυπτον καὶ φυλασσομένους ἐνθεῦτεν αὐτοὺς ἀποδρῆναι .
others say that they did come to Egypt and there escaped from the guard that was set over them.


3.45.2
3205
καταπλέουσι δὲ ἐς τὴν Σάμον Πολυκράτης νηυσὶ ἀντιάσας ἐς μάχην κατέστη ·
But as they sailed back to Samos, Polycrates' ships met and engaged them;


3.45.2
3206
νικήσαντες δὲ οἱ κατιόντες ἀπέβησαν ἐς τὴν νῆσον , πεζομαχήσαντες δὲ ἐν αὐτῇ ἑσσώθησαν , καὶ οὕτω δὴ ἔπλεον ἐς Λακεδαίμονα .
and the returning Samians were victorious and landed on the island, but were there beaten in a land battle, and so sailed to Lacedaemon.


3.45.3
3207
εἰσὶ δὲ οἳ λέγουσι τοὺς ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου νικῆσαι Πολυκράτεα , λέγοντες ἐμοὶ δοκέειν οὐκ ὀρθῶς ·
There are those who say that the Samians from Egypt defeated Polycrates;


3.45.3
3208
οὐδὲν γὰρ ἔδει σφέας Λακεδαιμονίους ἐπικαλέεσθαι , εἴ περ αὐτοὶ ἦσαν ἱκανοὶ Πολυκράτεα παραστήσασθαι .
but to my thinking this is untrue; for they need not have invited the Lacedaemonians if in fact they had been able to master Polycrates by themselves.


3.45.3
3209
πρὸς δὲ τούτοισι οὐδὲ λόγος αἱρέει , τῷ ἐπίκουροί τε μισθωτοὶ καὶ τοξόται οἰκήιοι ἦσαν πλήθεϊ πολλοί , τοῦτον ὑπὸ τῶν κατιόντων Σαμίων ἐόντων ὀλίγων ἑσσωθῆναι .
Besides, it is not even reasonable to suppose that he, who had a great army of hired soldiers and bowmen of his own, was beaten by a few men like the returning Samians.


3.45.4
3210
τῶν δ’ ὑπ’ ἑωυτῷ ἐόντων πολιητέων τὰ τέκνα καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας ὁ Πολυκράτης ἐς τοὺς νεωσοίκους συνειλήσας εἶχε ἑτοίμους , ἢν ἄρα προδιδῶσι οὗτοι πρὸς τοὺς κατιόντας , ὑποπρῆσαι αὐτοῖσι τοῖσι νεωσοίκοισι .
Polycrates took the children and wives of the townsmen who were subject to him and shut them up in the boathouses, with intent to burn them and the boathouses too if their men should desert to the returned Samians.


3.46.1
3211
ἐπείτε δὲ οἱ ἐξελασθέντες Σαμίων ὑπὸ Πολυκράτεος ἀπίκοντο ἐς τὴν Σπάρτην , καταστάντες ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄρχοντας ἔλεγον πολλὰ οἷα κάρτα δεόμενοι ·
When the Samians who were expelled by Polycrates came to Sparta, they came before the ruling men and made a long speech to show the greatness of their need.


3.46.1
3212
οἳ δέ σφι τῇ πρώτῃ καταστάσι ὑπεκρίναντο τὰ μὲν πρῶτα λεχθέντα ἐπιλελῆσθαι , τὰ δὲ ὕστατα οὐ συνιέναι .
But the Spartans at their first sitting answered that they had forgotten the beginning of the speech and could not understand its end.


3.46.2
3213
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα δεύτερα καταστάντες ἄλλο μὲν εἶπον οὐδέν , θύλακον δὲ φέροντες ἔφασαν τὸν θύλακον ἀλφίτων δέεσθαι .
After this the Samians came a second time with a sack, and said nothing but this: “The sack wants flour.”


3.46.2
3214
οἳ δέ σφι ὑπεκρίναντο τῷ θυλάκῳ περιεργάσθαι ·
To this the Spartans replied that they were over-wordy with “the sack”;


3.46.2
3215
βοηθέειν δ’ ὦν ἔδοξε αὐτοῖσι .
but they did resolve to help them.


3.47.1
3216
καὶ ἔπειτα παρασκευασάμενοι ἐστρατεύοντο Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐπὶ Σάμον , ὡς μὲν Σάμιοι λέγουσι , εὐεργεσίας ἐκτίνοντες , ὅτι σφι πρότεροι αὐτοὶ νηυσὶ ἐβοήθησαν ἐπὶ Μεσσηνίους ·
The Lacedaemonians then equipped and sent an army to Samos, returning a favor, as the Samians say, because they first sent a fleet to help the Lacedaemonians against Messenia;


3.47.1
3217
ὡς δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι λέγουσι , οὐκ οὕτω τιμωρῆσαι δεομένοισι Σαμίοισι ἐστρατεύοντο ὡς τίσασθαι βουλόμενοι τοῦ κρητῆρος τῆς ἁρπαγῆς , τὸν ἦγον Κροίσῳ , καὶ τοῦ θώρηκος , τὸν αὐτοῖσι Ἄμασις ὁ Αἰγύπτου βασιλεὺς ἔπεμψε δῶρον .
but the Lacedaemonians say that they sent this army less to aid the Samians in their need than to avenge the robbery of the bowl which they had been carrying to Croesus and the breastplate which Amasis King of Egypt had sent them as a gift.


3.47.2
3218
καὶ γὰρ θώρηκα ἐληίσαντο τῷ προτέρῳ ἔτεϊ ἢ τὸν κρητῆρα οἱ Σάμιοι , ἐόντα μὲν λίνεον καὶ ζῴων ἐνυφασμένων συχνῶν , κεκοσμημένον δὲ χρυσῷ καὶ εἰρίοισι ἀπὸ ξύλου ·
This breastplate had been stolen by the Samians in the year before they took the bowl; it was of linen, decked with gold and cotton embroidery, and embroidered with many figures;


3.47.3
3219
τῶν δὲ εἵνεκα θωμάσαι ἄξιον , ἁρπεδόνη ἑκάστη τοῦ θώρηκος ποιέει ·
but what makes it worthy of wonder is that each thread of the breastplate.


3.47.3
3220
ἐοῦσα γὰρ λεπτὴ ἔχει ἁρπεδόνας ἐν ἑωυτῇ τριηκοσίας καὶ ἑξήκοντα , πάσας φανεράς .
Fine as each is, is made up of three hundred and sixty strands, each plainly seen.


3.47.3
3221
τοιοῦτος ἕτερος ἐστὶ καὶ τὸν ἐν Λίνδῳ ἀνέθηκε τῇ Ἀθηναίῃ Ἄμασις .
It is the exact counterpart of that one which Amasis dedicated to Athena in Lindus.


3.48.1
3222
συνεπελάβοντο δὲ τοῦ στρατεύματος τοῦ ἐπὶ Σάμον ὥστε γενέσθαι καὶ Κορίνθιοι προθύμως ·
The Corinthians also enthusiastically helped to further the expedition against Samos.


3.48.1
3223
ὕβρισμα γὰρ καὶ ἐς τούτους εἶχε ἐκ τῶν Σαμίων γενόμενον γενεῇ πρότερον τοῦ στρατεύματος τούτου , κατὰ δὲ τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον τοῦ κρητῆρος τῇ ἁρπαγῇ γεγονός .
For an outrage had been done them by the Samians a generation before this expedition, about the time of the robbery of the bowl.


3.48.2
3224
Κερκυραίων γὰρ παῖδας τριηκοσίους ἀνδρῶν τῶν πρώτων Περίανδρος ὁ Κυψέλου ἐς Σάρδις ἀπέπεμψε παρὰ Ἀλυάττεα ἐπ’ ἐκτομῇ ·
Periander son of Cypselus sent to Alyattes at Sardis three hundred boys, sons of notable men in Corcyra, to be made eunuchs.


3.48.2
3225
προσσχόντων δὲ ἐς τὴν Σάμον τῶν ἀγόντων τοὺς παῖδας Κορινθίων , πυθόμενοι οἱ Σάμιοι τὸν λόγον , ἐπ’ οἷσι ἀγοίατο ἐς Σάρδις , πρῶτα μὲν τοὺς παῖδας ἐδίδαξαν ἱροῦ ἅψασθαι Ἀρτέμιδος ·
The Corinthians who brought the boys put in at Samos; and when the Samians heard why the boys were brought, first they instructed them to take sanctuary in the temple of Artemis,


3.48.3
3226
μετὰ δὲ οὐ περιορῶντες ἀπέλκειν τοὺς ἱκέτας ἐκ τοῦ ἱροῦ , σιτίων δὲ τοὺς παῖδας ἐργόντων Κορινθίων , ἐποιήσαντο οἱ Σάμιοι ὁρτήν , τῇ καὶ νῦν ἔτι χρέωνται κατὰ τ- αὐτά .
then they would not allow the suppliants to be dragged from the temple; and when the Corinthians tried to starve the boys out, the Samians held a festival which they still celebrate in the same fashion;


3.48.3
3227
νυκτὸς γὰρ ἐπιγενομένης , ὅσον χρόνον ἱκέτευον οἱ παῖδες , ἵστασαν χοροὺς παρθένων τε καὶ ἠιθέων , ἱστάντες δὲ τοὺς χοροὺς τρωκτὰ σησάμου τε καὶ μέλιτος ἐποιήσαντο νόμον φέρεσθαι , ἵνα ἁρπάζοντες οἱ τῶν Κερκυραίων παῖδες ἔχοιεν τροφήν .
throughout the time that the boys were seeking asylum, they held nightly dances of young men and women to which it was made a custom to bring cakes of sesame and honey, so that the Corcyraean boys might snatch these and have food.


3.48.4
3228
ἐς τοῦτο δὲ τόδε ἐγίνετο , ἐς ὃ οἱ Κορίνθιοι τῶν παίδων οἱ φύλακοι οἴχοντο ἀπολιπόντες ·
This continued to be done until the Corinthian guards left their charge and departed;


3.48.4
3229
τοὺς δὲ παῖδας ἀπήγαγον ἐς Κέρκυραν οἱ Σάμιοι .
then the Samians took the boys back to Corcyra.


3.49.1
3230
εἰ μέν νυν Περιάνδρου τελευτήσαντος τοῖσι Κορινθίοισι φίλα ἦν πρὸς τοὺς Κερκυραίους , οἳ δὲ οὐκ ἂν συνελάβοντο τοῦ στρατεύματος τοῦ ἐπὶ Σάμον ταύτης εἵνεκεν τῆς αἰτίης .
If after the death of Periander, the Corinthians had been friendly towards the Corcyraeans, they would not have taken part in the expedition against Samos for this reason.


3.49.1
3231
νῦν δὲ αἰεὶ ἐπείτε ἔκτισαν τὴν νῆσον εἰσὶ ἀλλήλοισι διάφοροι , ἐόντες ἑωυτοῖσι G? τούτων ὦν εἵνεκεν ἀπεμνησικάκεον τοῖσι Σαμίοισι οἱ Κορίνθιοι .
But as it was, ever since the island was colonized, they have been at odds with each other, despite their kinship.


3.49.2
3232
ἀπέπεμπε δὲ ἐς Σάρδις ἐπ’ ἐκτομῇ Περίανδρος τῶν πρώτων Κερκυραίων ἐπιλέξας τοὺς παῖδας τιμωρεύμενος ·
For these reasons then the Corinthians bore a grudge against the Samians.


3.49.2
3233
πρότεροι γὰρ οἱ Κερκυραῖοι ἦρξαν ἐς αὐτὸν πρῆγμα ἀτάσθαλον ποιήσαντες .
Periander chose the sons of the notable Corcyraeans and sent them to Sardis to be made eunuchs as an act of vengeance; for the Corcyraeans had first begun the quarrel by committing a terrible crime against him.


3.50.1
3234
ἐπείτε γὰρ τὴν ἑωυτοῦ γυναῖκα Μέλισσαν Περίανδρος ἀπέκτεινε , συμφορὴν τοιήνδε οἱ ἄλλην συνέβη πρὸς τῇ γεγονυίῃ γενέσθαι .
For after killing his own wife Melissa, Periander suffered yet another calamity on top of what he had already suffered.


3.50.1
3235
ἦσάν οἱ ἐκ Μελίσσης δύο παῖδες , ἡλικίην ὃ μὲν ἑπτακαίδεκα ὁ δὲ ὀκτωκαίδεκα ἔτεα γεγονώς .
He had two sons by Melissa, one seventeen and one eighteen years old.


3.50.2
3236
τούτους ὁ μητροπάτωρ Προκλέης ἐὼν Ἐπιδαύρου τύραννος μεταπεμψάμενος παρ’ ἑωυτὸν ἐφιλοφρονέετο , ὡς οἰκὸς ἦν θυγατρὸς ἐόντας τῆς ἑωυτοῦ παῖδας .
Their mother's father, Procles, the sovereign of Epidaurus, sent for the boys and treated them affectionately, as was natural, seeing that they were his own daughter's sons.


3.50.2
3237
ἐπείτε δὲ σφέας ἀπεπέμπετο , εἶπε προπέμπων αὐτούς " ἆρα ἴστε , ὦ παῖδες , ὃς ὑμέων τὴν μητέρα ἀπέκτεινε " ;
When they left him, he said as he sent them forth: “Do you know, boys, who killed your mother?”


3.50.3
3238
τοῦτο τὸ ἔπος ὁ μὲν πρεσβύτερος αὐτῶν ἐν οὐδενὶ λόγῳ ἐποιήσατο ·
The elder of them paid no attention to these words;


3.50.3
3239
ὁ δὲ νεώτερος , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Λυκόφρων , ἤλγησε ἀκούσας οὕτω ὥστε ἀπικόμενος ἐς τὴν Κόρινθον ἅτε φονέα τῆς μητρὸς τὸν πατέρα οὔτε προσεῖπε , διαλεγομένῳ τε οὔτε προσδιελέγετο ἱστορέοντί τε λόγον οὐδένα ἐδίδου .
but the younger, whose name was Lycophron, was struck with such horror when he heard them that when he came to Corinth he would not speak to his father, his mother's murderer, nor would he answer him when addressed nor reply to his questions.


3.50.3
3240
τέλος δέ μιν περιθύμως ἔχων ὁ Περίανδρος ἐξελαύνει ἐκ τῶν οἰκίων .
At last Periander was so angry that he drove the boy from his house.


3.51.1
3241
ἐξελάσας δὲ τοῦτον ἱστόρεε τὸν πρεσβύτερον τά σφι ὁ μητροπάτωρ διελέχθη .
Having driven this one away, he asked the elder son what their grandfather had said to them.


3.51.1
3242
ὁ δέ οἱ ἀπηγέετο ὡς σφέας φιλοφρόνως ἐδέξατο ·
The boy told him that Procles had treated them kindly,


3.51.1
3243
ἐκείνου δὲ τοῦ ἔπεος τό σφι ὁ Προκλέης ἀποστέλλων εἶπε , ἅτε οὐ νόῳ λαβών , οὐκ ἐμέμνητο .
but did not mention what he had said at parting; for he had paid no attention.


3.51.1
3244
Περίανδρος δὲ οὐδεμίαν μηχανὴν ἔφη εἶναι μὴ οὔ σφι ἐκεῖνον ὑποθέσθαι τι , ἐλιπάρεέ τε ἱστορέων ·
Periander said that by no means could Procles not have dropped some hint, and interrogated him persistently;


3.51.1
3245
ὁ δὲ ἀναμνησθεὶς εἶπε καὶ τοῦτο .
the boy remembered and told him this.


3.51.2
3246
Περίανδρος δὲ νόῳ λαβὼν καὶ τοῦτο καὶ μαλακὸν ἐνδιδόναι βουλόμενος οὐδέν , τῇ ὁ ἐξελασθεὶς ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ παῖς δίαιταν ἐποιέετο , ἐς τούτους πέμπων ἄγγελον ἀπηγόρευε μή μιν δέκεσθαι οἰκίοισι .
until the boy remembered, and told him. And Periander, comprehending, and wishing to show no weakness, sent a message to those with whom his banished son was living and forbade them to keep him.


3.51.3
3247
ὁ δὲ ὅκως ἀπελαυνόμενος ἔλθοι ἐς ἄλλην οἰκίην , ἀπηλαύνετ’ ἂν καὶ ἀπὸ ταύτης , ἀπειλέοντός τε τοῦ Περίανδρου τοῖσι δεξαμένοισι καὶ ἐξέργειν κελεύοντος ·
So when the boy, driven out, would go to another house, he would be driven from this also, since Periander threatened all who received him and ordered them to shut him out;


3.51.3
3248
ἀπελαυνόμενος δ’ ἂν ἤιε ἐπ’ ἑτέρην τῶν ἑταίρων ·
so when driven forth, he would go to some other house of his friends,


3.51.3
3249
οἳ δὲ ἅτε Περιάνδρου ἐόντα παῖδα καίπερ δειμαίνοντες ὅμως ἐδέκοντο .
and they, although he was the son of Periander, and although they were afraid, nonetheless took him in.


3.52.1
3250
τέλος δὲ ὁ Περίανδρος κήρυγμα ἐποιήσατο , ὃς ἂν ἢ οἰκίοισι ὑποδέξηταί μιν ἢ προσδιαλεχθῇ , ἱρὴν ζημίην τοῦτον τῷ Ἀπόλλωνι ὀφείλειν , ὅσην δὴ εἴπας .
In the end Periander made a proclamation, that whoever sheltered the boy in his house or spoke to him, would owe a fine to Apollo, and he set the amount.


3.52.2
3251
πρὸς ὦν δὴ τοῦτο τὸ κήρυγμα οὔτε τίς οἱ διαλέγεσθαι οὔτε οἰκίοισι δέκεσθαι ἤθελε ·
In view of this proclamation no one wished to address or receive the boy into his house;


3.52.2
3252
πρὸς δὲ οὐδὲ αὐτὸς ἐκεῖνος ἐδικαίου πειρᾶσθαι ἀπειρημένου , ἀλλὰ διακαρτερέων ἐν τῇσι στοῇσι ἐκαλινδέετο .
and besides, the boy himself did not think it right to attempt what was forbidden, but accepting it slept in the open.


3.52.3
3253
τετάρτῃ δὲ ἡμέρῃ ἰδών μιν ὁ Περίανδρος ἀλουσίῃσί τε καὶ ἀσιτίῃσι συμπεπτωκότα οἴκτειρε ·
On the fourth day, when Periander saw him starved and unwashed, he took pity on him,


3.52.3
3254
ὑπεὶς δὲ τῆς ὀργῆς ἤιε ἆσσον καὶ ἔλεγε " ὦ παῖ , κότερα τούτων αἱρετώτερα ἐστί , ταῦτα τὸ νῦν ἔχων πρήσσεις , ἢ τὴν τυραννίδα καὶ τὰ ἀγαθὰ τὰ νῦν ἐγὼ ἔχω , ταῦτα ἐόντα τῷ πατρὶ ἐπιτήδεον παραλαμβάνειν , ὃς ἐὼν ἐμός τε παῖς καὶ Κορίνθου τῆς εὐδαίμονος βασιλεὺς ἀλήτην βίον εἵλευ , ἀντιστατέων τε καὶ ὀργῇ χρεώμενος ἐς τόν σε ἥκιστα ἐχρῆν .
and his anger being softened, he came near and said: “My son, which is preferable — to follow your present way of life, or by being well-disposed toward your father to inherit my power and the goods which I now possess?


3.52.4
3255
εἰ γάρ τις συμφορὴ ἐν αὐτοῖσι γέγονε , ἐξ ἧς ὑποψίην ἐς ἐμὲ ἔχεις , ἐμοί τε αὕτη γέγονε καὶ ἐγὼ αὐτῆς τὸ πλεῦν μέτοχος εἰμί , ὅσῳ αὐτός σφεα ἐξεργασάμην .
Though my son and a prince of prosperous    Corinth   , you prefer the life of a vagrant, by opposing and being angry with me with whom you least ought to be. For if something has happened as a result of which you have a suspicion about me, it has happened to my disadvantage and I bear the brunt of it, inasmuch as I am the cause.


3.52.5
3256
σὺ δὲ μαθὼν ὅσῳ φθονέεσθαι κρέσσον ἐστὶ ἢ οἰκτείρεσθαι , ἅμα τε ὁκοῖόν τι ἐς τοὺς τοκέας καὶ ἐς τοὺς κρέσσονας τεθυμῶσθαι , ἄπιθι ἐς τὰ οἰκία " .
But bearing in mind how much better it is to be envied than to be pitied, and at the same time what sort of thing it is to be angry with your parents and with those that are stronger than you, come back to the house.”


3.52.6
3257
Περίανδρος μὲν τούτοισι αὐτὸν κατελάμβανε ·
With these words Periander tried to move his son,


3.52.6
3258
ὁ δὲ ἄλλο μὲν οὐδὲν ἀμείβεται τὸν πατέρα , ἔφη δέ μιν ἱρὴν ζημίην ὀφείλειν τῷ θεῷ ἑωυτῷ ἐς λόγους ἀπικόμενον .
but he said nothing else to his father, only told him that because he had conversed with him he owed the fine to Apollo.


3.52.6
3259
μαθὼν δὲ ὁ Περίανδρος ὡς ἄπορόν τι τὸ κακὸν εἴη τοῦ παιδὸς καὶ ἀνίκητον , ἐξ ὀφθαλμῶν μιν ἀποπέμπεται στείλας πλοῖον ἐς Κέρκυραν ·
When Periander saw that his son's stubbornness could not be got around or overcome, he sent him away out of his sight in a ship to Corcyra;


3.52.6
3260
ἐπεκράτεε γὰρ καὶ ταύτης ·
for Corcyra too was subject to him.


3.52.7
3261
ἀποστείλας δὲ τοῦτον ὁ Περίανδρος ἐστρατεύετο ἐπὶ τὸν πενθερὸν Προκλέα ὡς τῶν παρεόντων οἱ πρηγμάτων ἐόντα αἰτιώτατον , καὶ εἷλε μὲν τὴν Ἐπίδαυρον , εἷλε δὲ αὐτὸν Προκλέα καὶ ἐζώγρησε .
And when he had sent him away, he sent an army against Procles his father-in-law, since he was most to blame for his present troubles; and he took    Epidaurus   , captured Procles, and imprisoned him.


3.53.1
3262
ἐπεὶ δὲ τοῦ χρόνου προβαίνοντος ὅ τε Περίανδρος παρηβήκεε καὶ συνεγινώσκετο ἑωυτῷ οὐκέτι εἶναι δυνατὸς τὰ πρήγματα ἐπορᾶν τε καὶ διέπειν , πέμψας ἐς τὴν Κέρκυραν ἀπεκάλεε τὸν Λυκόφρονα ἐπὶ τὴν τυραννίδα ·
As time went on, Periander, now grown past his prime and aware that he could no longer oversee and direct all his affairs, sent to Corcyra inviting Lycophron to be sovereign;


3.53.1
3263
ἐν γὰρ δὴ τῷ πρεσβυτέρῳ τῶν παίδων οὔκων ἐνώρα , ἀλλά οἱ κατεφαίνετο εἶναι νωθέστερος .
for he saw no hope in his eldest son, who seemed to him to be slow-witted.


3.53.2
3264
ὁ δὲ Λυκόφρων οὐδὲ ἀνακρίσιος ἠξίωσε τὸν φέροντα τὴν ἀγγελίην .
Lycophron did not dignify the invitation with a reply.


3.53.2
3265
Περίανδρος δὲ περιεχόμενος τοῦ νεηνίεω δεύτερα ἀπέστειλε ἐπ’ αὐτὸν τὴν ἀδελφεήν , ἑωυτοῦ δὲ θυγατέρα , δοκέων μιν μάλιστα ταύτῃ ἂν πείθεσθαι .
Then Periander, pressing the young man, sent to him (as the next best way) his daughter, the boy's sister, thinking that he would listen to her.


3.53.3
3266
ἀπικομένης δὲ ταύτης καὶ λεγούσης , " ὦ παῖ , βούλεαι τήν τε τυραννίδα ἐς ἄλλους πεσεῖν καὶ τὸν οἶκον τοῦ πατρὸς διαφορηθέντα μᾶλλον ἢ αὐτός σφεα ἀπελθὼν ἔχειν ;
She came and said, “Child, would you want the power to fall to others, and our father's house destroyed, rather than to return and have it yourself?


3.53.3
3267
ἄπιθι ἐς τὰ οἰκία , παῦσαι σεωυτὸν ζημιῶν .
Come home and stop punishing yourself.


3.53.4
3268
φιλοτιμίη κτῆμα σκαιόν .
Pride is an unhappy possession.


3.53.4
3269
μὴ τῷ κακῷ τὸ κακὸν ἰῶ .
Do not cure evil by evil.


3.53.4
3270
πολλοὶ τῶν δικαίων τὰ ἐπιεικέστερα προτιθεῖσι , πολλοὶ δὲ ἤδη τὰ μητρώια διζήμενοι τὰ πατρώια ἀπέβαλον .
Many place the more becoming thing before the just; and many pursuing their mother's business have lost their father's.


3.53.4
3271
τυραννὶς χρῆμα σφαλερόν , πολλοὶ δὲ αὐτῆς ἐρασταί εἰσι , ὁ δὲ γέρων τε ἤδη καὶ παρηβηκώς ·
Power is a slippery thing; many want it, and our father is now old and past his prime;


3.53.4
3272
μὴ δῷς τὰ σεωυτοῦ ἀγαθὰ ἄλλοισι " .
do not lose what is yours to others.”


3.53.5
3273
ἣ μὲν δὴ τὰ ἐπαγωγότατα διδαχθεῖσα ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς ἔλεγε πρὸς αὐτόν ·
So she spoke communicating their father's inducements.


3.53.5
3274
ὁ δὲ ὑποκρινάμενος ἔφη οὐδαμὰ ἥξειν ἐς Κόρινθον , ἔστ’ ἂν πυνθάνηται περιεόντα τὸν πατέρα .
But he answered that he would never come to Corinth as long as he knew his father was alive.


3.53.6
3275
ἀπαγγειλάσης δὲ ταύτης ταῦτα , τὸ τρίτον Περίανδρος κήρυκα πέμπει βουλόμενος αὐτὸς μὲν ἐς Κέρκυραν ἥκειν , ἐκεῖνον δὲ ἐκέλευε ἐς Κόρινθον ἀπικόμενον διάδοχον γίνεσθαι τῆς τυραννίδος .
When she brought this answer back, Periander sent a third messenger, through whom he proposed that he should go to    Corcyra   , and that the boy should return to    Corinth    and be the heir of his power.


3.53.7
3276
καταινέσαντος δὲ ἐπὶ τούτοισι τοῦ παιδός , ὁ μὲν Περίανδρος ἐστέλλετο ἐς τὴν Κέρκυραν , ὁ δὲ παῖς οἱ ἐς τὴν Κόρινθον .
The son consented to this; Periander got ready to go to Corcyra and Lycophron to go to Corinth;


3.53.7
3277
μαθόντες δὲ οἱ Κερκυραῖοι τούτων ἕκαστα , ἵνα μή σφι Περίανδρος ἐς τὴν χώρην ἀπίκηται , κτείνουσι τὸν νεηνίσκον .
but when the Corcyraeans learned of all these matters, they put the young man to death so that Periander would not come to their country.


3.53.7
3278
ἀντὶ τούτων μὲν Περίανδρος Κερκυραίους ἐτιμωρέετο .
It was for this that Periander desired vengeance on the Corcyraeans.


3.54.1
3279
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ στόλῳ μεγάλῳ ὡς ἀπίκοντο , ἐπολιόρκεον Σάμον ·
The Lacedaemonians then came with a great army, and besieged Samos.


3.54.1
3280
προσβαλόντες δὲ πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος τοῦ μὲν πρὸς θαλάσσῃ ἑστεῶτος πύργου κατὰ τὸ προάστειον τῆς πόλιος ἐπέβησαν , μετὰ δὲ αὐτοῦ βοηθήσαντος Πολυκράτεος χειρὶ πολλῇ ἀπηλάσθησαν .
They advanced to the wall and entered the tower that stands by the seaside in the outer part of the city; but then Polycrates himself attacked them with a great force and drove them out.


3.54.2
3281
κατὰ δὲ τὸν ἐπάνω πύργον τὸν ἐπὶ τῆς ῥάχιος τοῦ ὄρεος ἐπεόντα ἐπεξῆλθον οἵ τε ἐπίκουροι καὶ αὐτῶν Σαμίων συχνοί , δεξάμενοι δὲ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἐπ’ ὀλίγον χρόνον ἔφευγον ὀπίσω , οἳ δὲ ἐπισπόμενοι ἔκτεινον .
The mercenaries and many of the Samians themselves sallied out near the upper tower on the ridge of the hill and withstood the Lacedaemonian advance for a little while; then they fled back, with the Lacedaemonians pursuing and destroying them.


3.55.1
3282
εἰ μέν νυν οἱ παρεόντες Λακεδαιμονίων ὅμοιοι ἐγένοντο ταύτην τὴν ἡμέρην Ἀρχίῃ τε καὶ Λυκώπῃ , αἱρέθη ἂν Σάμος ·
Had all the Lacedaemonians there that day been like Archias and Lycopas, Samos would have been taken.


3.55.1
3283
Ἀρχίης γὰρ καὶ Λυκώπης μοῦνοι συνεσπεσόντες φεύγουσι ἐς τὸ τεῖχος τοῖσι Σαμίοισι καὶ ἀποκληισθέντες τῆς ὀπίσω ὁδοῦ ἀπέθανον ἐν τῇ πόλι τῇ Σαμίων .
These two alone entered the fortress along with the fleeing crowd of Samians, and were cut off and killed in the city of Samos.


3.55.2
3284
τρίτῳ δέ ἀπ’ Ἀρχίεω τούτου γεγονότι ἄλλῳ Ἀρχίῃ τῷ Σαμίου τοῦ Ἀρχίεω αὐτὸς ἐν Πιτάνῃ συνεγενόμην ( δήμου γὰρ τούτου ἦν ) , ὃς ξείνων πάντων μάλιστα ἐτίμα τε Σαμίους καί οἱ τῷ πατρὶ ἔφη Σάμιον τ- ὄνομα τεθῆναι , ὅτι οἱ ὁ πατὴρ Ἀρχίης ἐν Σάμῳ ἀριστεύσας ἐτελεύτησε ·
I myself have met in his native town of Pitana another Archias son of Samius, and grandson of the Archias mentioned above,


3.55.2
3285
τιμᾶν δὲ Σαμίους ἔφη , διότι ταφῆναί οἱ τὸν πάππον δημοσίῃ ὑπὸ Σαμίων .
who honored the Samians more than any other of his guest-friends, and told me that his father had borne the name Samius because he was the son of that Archias who was killed fighting bravely at Samos. The reason that he honored the Samians, he said, was that they had given his grandfather a public funeral.


3.56.1
3286
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δέ , ὥς σφι τεσσεράκοντα ἐγεγόνεσαν ἡμέραι πολιορκέουσι Σάμον ἐς τὸ πρόσω τε οὐδὲν προεκόπτετο τῶν πρηγμάτων , ἀπαλλάσσοντο ἐς Πελοπόννησον .
So when the Lacedaemonians had besieged    Samos    for forty days with no success, they went away to the    Peloponnesus   .


3.56.2
3287
ὡς δὲ ὁ ματαιότερος λόγος ὅρμηται , λέγεται Πολυκράτεα ἐπιχώριον νόμισμα κόψαντα πολλὸν μολύβδου καταχρυσώσαντα δοῦναί σφι , τοὺς δὲ δεξαμένους οὕτω δὴ ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι .
There is a foolish tale abroad that Polycrates bribed them to depart by making and giving them a great number of gilded lead coins, as a native currency.


3.56.2
3288
ταύτην πρώτην στρατηίην ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην Λακεδαιμόνιοι Δωριέες ἐποιήσαντο .
This was the first expedition to Asia made by Dorians of Lacedaemon.


3.57.1
3289
οἱ δ’ ἐπὶ τὸν Πολυκράτεα στρατευσάμενοι Σαμίων , ἐπεὶ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι αὐτοὺς ἀπολιπεῖν ἔμελλον , καὶ αὐτοὶ ἀπέπλεον ἐς Σίφνον , χρημάτων γὰρ ἐδέοντο , τὰ δὲ τῶν Σιφνίων πρήγματα ἤκμαζε τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον , καὶ νησιωτέων μάλιστα ἐπλούτεον , ἅτε ἐόντων αὐτοῖσι ἐν τῇ νήσῳ χρυσέων καὶ ἀργυρέων μετάλλων , οὕτω ὥστε ἀπὸ τῆς δεκάτης τῶν γινομένων αὐτόθεν χρημάτων θησαυρὸς ἐν Δελφοῖσι ἀνάκειται ὅμοια τοῖσι πλουσιωτάτοισι ·
When the Lacedaemonians were about to abandon them, the Samians who had brought an army against Polycrates sailed away too, and went to Siphnus;


3.57.2
3290
αὐτοὶ δὲ τὰ γινόμενα τῷ ἐνιαυτῷ ἑκάστῳ χρήματα διενέμοντο .
for they were in need of money; and the Siphnians were at this time very prosperous and the richest of the islanders, because of the gold and silver mines on the island. They were so wealthy that the treasure dedicated by them at    Delphi   , which is as rich as any there, was made from a tenth of their income; and they divided among themselves each year's income.


3.57.3
3291
ὅτε ὦν ἐποιεῦντο τὸν θησαυρόν , ἐχρέωντο τῷ χρηστηρίῳ εἰ αὐτοῖσι τὰ παρεόντα ἀγαθὰ οἷά τε ἐστὶ πολλὸν χρόνον παραμένειν ·
Now when they were putting together the treasure they inquired of the oracle if their present prosperity was likely to last long;


3.57.3
3292
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη ἔχρησέ σφι τάδε .
whereupon the priestess gave them this answer:


3.57.4
3293
ἀλλ’ ὅταν ἐν Σίφνῳ πρυτανήια λευκὰ γένηται λεύκοφρύς τ’ ἀγορή , τότε δὴ δεῖ φράδμονος ἀνδρός φράσσασθαι ξύλινόν τε λόχον κήρυκά τ’ ἐρυθρόν .
“When the prytaneum on Siphnus becomes white And white-browed the market, then indeed a shrewd man is wanted Beware a wooden force and a red herald.”


3.57.4
3294
τοῖσι δὲ Σιφνίοισι ἦν τότε ἡ ἀγορὴ καὶ τὸ πρυτανήιον Παρίῳ λίθῳ ἠσκημένα .
At this time the market-place and town-hall of Siphnus were adorned with Parian marble.


3.58.1
3295
τοῦτον τὸν χρησμὸν οὐκ οἷοί τε ἦσαν γνῶναι οὔτε τότε εὐθὺς οὔτε τῶν Σαμίων ἀπιγμένων .
They could not understand this oracle either when it was spoken or at the time of the Samians' coming.


3.58.1
3296
ἐπείτε γὰρ τάχιστα πρὸς τὴν Σίφνον προσῖσχον οἱ Σάμιοι , ἔπεμπον τῶν νεῶν μίαν πρέσβεας ἄγουσαν ἐς τὴν πόλιν .
As soon as the Samians put in at Siphnus, they sent ambassadors to the town in one of their ships;


3.58.2
3297
τὸ δὲ παλαιὸν ἅπασαι αἱ νέες ἦσαν μιλτηλιφέες , καὶ ἦν τοῦτο τὸ ἡ Πυθίη προηγόρευε τοῖσι Σιφνίοισι , φυλάξασθαι τὸν ξύλινον λόχον κελεύουσα καὶ κήρυκα ἐρυθρόν .
now in ancient times all ships were painted with vermilion; and this was what was meant by the warning given by the priestess to the Siphnians, to beware a wooden force and a red herald.


3.58.3
3298
ἀπικόμενοι ὦν οἱ ἄγγελοι ἐδέοντο τῶν Σιφνίων δέκα τάλαντά σφι χρῆσαι ·
The messengers, then, demanded from the Siphnians a loan of ten talents;


3.58.3
3299
οὐ φασκόντων δὲ χρήσειν τῶν Σιφνίων αὐτοῖσι , οἱ Σάμιοι τοὺς χώρους αὐτῶν ἐπόρθεον .
when the Siphnians refused them, the Samians set about ravaging their lands.


3.58.4
3300
πυθόμενοι δὲ εὐθὺς ἧκον οἱ Σίφνιοι βοηθέοντες καὶ συμβαλόντες αὐτοῖσι ἑσσώθησαν , καὶ αὐτῶν πολλοὶ ἀπεκληίσθησαν τοῦ ἄστεος ὑπὸ τῶν Σαμίων , καὶ αὐτοὺς μετὰ ταῦτα ἑκατὸν τάλαντα ἔπρηξαν .
Hearing this the Siphnians came out at once to drive them off, but they were defeated in battle, and many of them were cut off from their town by the Samians; who presently exacted from them a hundred talents.


3.59.1
3301
παρὰ δὲ Ἑρμιονέων νῆσον ἀντὶ χρημάτων παρέλαβον Ὑδρέην τὴν ἐπὶ Πελοποννήσῳ καὶ αὐτὴν Τροιζηνίοισι παρακατέθεντο ·
Then the Samians took from the men of Hermione, instead of money, the island Hydrea which is near to the Peloponnesus, and gave it to men of Troezen for safekeeping;


3.59.1
3302
αὐτοὶ δὲ Κυδωνίην τὴν ἐν Κρήτῃ ἔκτισαν , οὐκ ἐπὶ τοῦτο πλέοντες ἀλλὰ Ζακυνθίους ἐξελῶντες ἐκ τῆς νήσου .
they themselves settled at Cydonia in Crete, though their voyage had been made with no such intent, but rather to drive Zacynthians out of the island.


3.59.2
3303
ἔμειναν δ’ ἐν ταύτῃ καὶ εὐδαιμόνησαν ἐπ’ ἔτεα πέντε , ὥστε τὰ ἱρὰ τὰ ἐν Κυδωνίῃ ἐόντα νῦν οὗτοι εἰσὶ οἱ ποιήσαντες καὶ τὸν τῆς Δικτύνης νηόν .
Here they stayed and prospered for five years; indeed, the temples now at    Cydonia    and the shrine of Dictyna are the Samians' work;


3.59.3
3304
ἕκτῳ δὲ ἔτεϊ Αἰγινῆται αὐτοὺς ναυμαχίῃ νικήσαντες ἠνδραποδίσαντο μετὰ Κρητῶν , καὶ τῶν νεῶν καπρίους ἐχουσέων τὰς πρῴρας ἠκρωτηρίασαν καὶ ἀνέθεσαν ἐς τὸ ἱρὸν τῆς Ἀθηναίης ἐν Αἰγίνῃ .
but in the sixth year Aeginetans and Cretans came and defeated them in a sea-fight and made slaves of them; moreover they cut off the ships' prows, that were shaped like boars' heads, and dedicated them in the temple of Athena in    Aegina   .


3.59.4
3305
ταῦτα δὲ ἐποίησαν ἔγκοτον ἔχοντες Σαμίοισι Αἰγινῆται ·
The Aeginetans did this out of a grudge against the Samians;


3.59.4
3306
πρότεροι γὰρ Σάμιοι ἐπ’ Ἀμφικράτεος βασιλεύοντος ἐν Σάμῳ στρατευσάμενοι ἐπ’ Αἴγιναν μεγάλα κακὰ ἐποίησαν Αἰγινήτας καὶ ἔπαθον ὑπ’ ἐκείνων .
for previously the Samians, in the days when Amphicrates was king of Samos, sailing in force against Aegina, had hurt the Aeginetans and been hurt by them.


3.59.4
3307
ἡ μὲν αἰτίη αὕτη .
This was the cause.


3.60.1
3308
ἐμήκυνα δὲ περὶ Σαμίων μᾶλλον , ὅτι σφι τρία ἐστὶ μέγιστα ἁπάντων Ἑλλήνων ἐξεργασμένα , ὄρεός τε ὑψηλοῦ ἐς πεντήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν ὀργυιάς , τούτου ὄρυγμα κάτωθεν ἀρξάμενον , ἀμφίστομον .
I have written at such length of the Samians, because the three greatest works of all the Greeks were engineered by them. The first of these is the tunnel with a mouth at either end driven through the base of a hill nine hundred feet high;


3.60.2
3309
τὸ μὲν μῆκος τοῦ ὀρύγματος ἑπτὰ στάδιοι εἰσί , τὸ δὲ ὕψος καὶ εὖρος ὀκτὼ ἑκάτερον πόδες .
the whole tunnel is forty-two hundred feet long, eight feet high and eight feet wide;


3.60.2
3310
διὰ παντὸς δὲ αὐτοῦ ἄλλο ὄρυγμα εἰκοσίπηχυ βάθος ὀρώρυκται , τρίπουν δὲ τὸ εὖρος , δι’ οὗ τὸ ὕδωρ ὀχετευόμενον διὰ τῶν σωλήνων παραγίνεται ἐς τὴν πόλιν ἀγόμενον ἀπὸ μεγάλης πηγῆς .
and throughout the whole of its length there runs a channel thirty feet deep and three feet wide, through which the water coming from an abundant spring is carried by pipes to the city of Samos.


3.60.3
3311
ἀρχιτέκτων δὲ τοῦ ὀρύγματος τούτου ἐγένετο Μεγαρεὺς Εὐπαλῖνος Ναυστρόφου .
The designer of this work was Eupalinus son of Naustrophus, a Megarian.


3.60.3
3312
τοῦτο μὲν δὴ ἓν τῶν τριῶν ἐστι , δεύτερον δὲ περὶ λιμένα χῶμα ἐν θαλάσσῃ , βάθος καὶ εἴκοσι ὀργυιέων ·
This is one of the three works;


3.60.3
3313
μῆκος δὲ τοῦ χώματος μέζον δύο σταδίων .
the second is a breakwater in the sea enclosing the harbor, sunk one hundred and twenty feet, and more than twelve hundred feet in length.


3.60.4
3314
τρίτον δέ σφι ἐξέργασται νηὸς μέγιστος πάντων νηῶν τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν ·
The third Samian work is the temple, which is the greatest of all the temples of which we know;


3.60.4
3315
τοῦ ἀρχιτέκτων πρῶτος ἐγένετο Ῥοῖκος Φιλέω ἐπιχώριος .
its first builder was Rhoecus son of Philes, a Samian.


3.60.4
3316
τούτων εἵνεκεν μᾶλλόν τι περὶ Σαμίων ἐμήκυνα .
It is for this cause that I have expounded at more than ordinary length of Samos.


3.61.1
3317
Καμβύσῃ δὲ τῷ Κύρου χρονίζοντι περὶ Αἴγυπτον καὶ παραφρονήσαντι ἐπανιστέαται ἄνδρες Μάγοι δύο ἀδελφεοί , τῶν τὸν ἕτερον καταλελοίπεε τῶν οἰκίων μελεδωνὸν ὁ Καμβύσης .
Now after Cambyses, son of Cyrus, had lost his mind, while he was still in Egypt, two Magus brothers rebelled against him.


3.61.1
3318
οὗτος δὴ ὦν οἱ ἐπανέστη μαθών τε τὸν Σμέρδιος θάνατον ὡς κρύπτοιτο γενόμενος , καὶ ὡς ὀλίγοι εἴησαν οἱ ἐπιστάμενοι αὐτὸν Περσέων , οἱ δὲ πολλοὶ περιεόντα μιν εἰδείησαν .
One of them had been left by Cambyses as steward of his house; this man now revolted from him, perceiving that the death of Smerdis was kept secret, and that few knew of it, most believing him to be still alive.


3.61.2
3319
πρὸς ταῦτα βουλεύσας τάδε ἐπεχείρησε τοῖσι βασιληίοισι .
Therefore he plotted to gain the royal power:


3.61.2
3320
ἦν οἱ ἀδελφεός , τὸν εἶπά οἱ συνεπαναστῆναι , οἰκὼς μάλιστα τὸ εἶδος Σμέρδι τῷ Κύρου , τὸν ὁ Καμβύσης ἐόντα ἑωυτοῦ ἀδελφεὸν ἀπέκτεινε ·
he had a brother, his partner, as I said, in rebellion; this brother was in appearance very like Cyrus' son Smerdis, whom Cambyses, his brother, had killed;


3.61.2
3321
ἦν τε δὴ ὅμοιος εἶδος τῷ Σμέρδι καὶ δὴ καὶ οὔνομα τ- αὐτὸ εἶχε Σμέρδιν .
nor was he like him in appearance only, but he bore the same name too, Smerdis.


3.61.3
3322
τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα ἀναγνώσας ὁ Μάγος Πατιζείθης ὥς οἱ αὐτὸς πάντα διαπρήξει , εἷσε ἄγων ἐς τὸν βασιλήιον θρόνον .
Patizeithes the Magus persuaded this man that he would manage everything for him;


3.61.3
3323
ποιήσας δὲ τοῦτο κήρυκας τῇ τε ἄλλῃ διέπεμπε καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐς Αἴγυπτον προερέοντα τῷ στρατῷ ὡς Σμέρδιος τοῦ Κύρου ἀκουστέα εἴη τοῦ λοιποῦ ἀλλ’ οὐ Καμβύσεω .
he brought his brother and set him on the royal throne; then he sent heralds to all parts, one of whom was to go to Egypt and proclaim to the army that henceforth they must obey not Cambyses but Smerdis, the son of Cyrus.


3.62.1
3324
οἵ τε δὴ ὦν ἄλλοι κήρυκες προηγόρευον ταῦτα καὶ δὴ καὶ ὁ ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον ταχθείς , εὕρισκε γὰρ Καμβύσεα καὶ τὸν στρατὸν ἐόντα τῆς Συρίης ἐν Ἀγβατάνοισι , προηγόρευε στὰς ἐς μέσον τὰ ἐντεταλμένα ἐκ τοῦ Μάγου .
So this proclamation was made everywhere. The herald appointed to go to    Egypt   , finding Cambyses and his army at    Ecbatana    in    Syria   , came out before them all and proclaimed the message given him by the Magus.


3.62.2
3325
Καμβύσης δὲ ἀκούσας ταῦτα ἐκ τοῦ κήρυκος καὶ ἐλπίσας μιν λέγειν ἀληθέα αὐτός τε προδεδόσθαι ἐκ Πρηξάσπεος ( πεμφθέντα γὰρ αὐτὸν ὡς ἀποκτενέοντα Σμέρδιν οὐ ποιῆσαι ταῦτα ) , βλέψας ἐς τὸν Πρηξάσπεα εἶπε " Πρήξασπες , οὕτω μοι διεπρήξαο τό τοι προσέθηκα πρῆγμα " ;
When Cambyses heard what the herald said, he supposed that it was the truth, and that Prexaspes, when sent to kill Smerdis, had not done it but had played Cambyses false; and he said, fixing his eyes on Prexaspes, “Is it thus, Prexaspes, that you carried out my instructions?”


3.62.3
3326
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ὦ δέσποτα , οὐκ ἔστι ταῦτα ἀληθέα , ὅκως κοτὲ σοὶ Σμέρδις ἀδελφεὸς σὸς ἐπανέστηκε , οὐδὲ ὅκως τι ἐξ ἐκείνου τοῦ ἀνδρὸς νεῖκός τοι ἔσται ἢ μέγα ἢ σμικρόν ·
“No,” said Prexaspes, “this is not true, sire, that your brother Smerdis has rebelled against you; he cannot have any quarrel with you, small or great;


3.62.3
3327
ἐγὼ γὰρ αὐτός , ποιήσας τὰ σύ με ἐκέλευες , ἔθαψά μιν χερσὶ τῇσι ἐμεωυτοῦ .
I myself did as you instructed, and I buried him with my own hands.


3.62.4
3328
εἰ μέν νυν οἱ τεθνεῶτες ἀνεστᾶσι , προσδέκεό τοι καὶ Ἀστυάγεα τὸν Μῆδον ἐπαναστήσεσθαι ·
If then the dead can rise, you may expect to see Astyages the Mede rise up against you;


3.62.4
3329
εἰ δ’ ἔστι ὥσπερ πρὸ τοῦ , οὐ μή τί τοι ἔκ γε ἐκείνου νεώτερον ἀναβλάστῃ .
but if things are as usual, assuredly no harm to you will arise from Smerdis.


3.62.4
3330
νῦν ὦν μοι δοκέει μεταδιώξαντας τὸν κήρυκα ἐξετάζειν εἰρωτεῦντας παρ’ ὅτευ ἥκων προαγορεύει ἡμῖν Σμέρδιος βασιλέος ἀκούειν " .
Now then this is my opinion, that we pursue this herald and interrogate him, to learn from whom he comes with his proclamation that we must obey Smerdis as our king.”


3.63.1
3331
ταῦτα εἴπαντος Πρηξάσπεος , ἤρεσε γὰρ Καμβύσῃ , αὐτίκα μεταδίωκτος γενόμενος ὁ κῆρυξ ἧκε ·
Cambyses liked Prexaspes' advice; the herald was pursued at once and brought;


3.63.1
3332
ἀπιγμένον δέ μιν εἴρετο ὁ Πρηξάσπης τάδε .
and when he came, Prexaspes put this question to him:


3.63.1
3333
" ὤνθρωπε , φὴς γὰρ ἥκειν παρὰ Σμέρδιος τοῦ Κύρου ἄγγελος ·
“Fellow, you say that your message is from Cyrus' son Smerdis;


3.63.1
3334
νῦν ὦν εἴπας τὴν ἀληθείην ἄπιθι χαίρων , κότερα αὐτός τοι Σμέρδις φαινόμενος ἐς ὄψιν ἐνετέλλετο ταῦτα ἢ τῶν τις ἐκείνου ὑπηρετέων " .
tell me this now, and you may go away unpunished: was it Smerdis who appeared to you and gave you this charge, or was it one of his servants?”


3.63.2
3335
ὅδὲ εἶπε " ἐγὼ Σμέρδιν μὲν τὸν Κύρου , ἐξ ὅτευ βασιλεὺς Καμβύσης ἤλασε ἐς Αἴγυπτον , οὔκω ὄπωπα ·
“Since King Cambyses marched to Egypt,” answered the herald, “I have never seen Smerdis the son of Cyrus;


3.63.2
3336
ὁ δέ μοι Μάγος τὸν Καμβύσης ἐπίτροπον τῶν οἰκίων ἀπέδεξε , οὗτος ταῦτα ἐνετείλατο , φὰς Σμέρδιν τὸν Κύρου εἶναι τὸν ταῦτα ἐπιθέμενον εἶπαι πρὸς ὑμέας " .
the Magus whom Cambyses made overseer of his house gave me the message, saying that it was the will of Smerdis, son of Cyrus, that I should make it known to you.”


3.63.3
3337
ὃ μὲν δή σφι ἔλεγε οὐδὲν ἐπικατεψευσμένος , Καμβύσης δὲ εἶπε " Πρήξασπες , σὺ μὲν οἷα ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς ποιήσας τὸ κελευόμενον αἰτίην ἐκπέφευγας ·
So spoke the herald, telling the whole truth; and Cambyses said,


3.63.3
3338
ἐμοὶ δὲ τίς ἂν εἴη Περσέων ὁ ἐπανεστεὼς ἐπιβατεύων τοῦ Σμέρδιος οὐνόματος " ;
“Prexaspes, having done what you were told like a good man you are free of blame; but who can this Persian be who rebels against me and usurps the name of Smerdis?”


3.63.3
3339
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ἐγώ μοι δοκέω συνιέναι τὸ γεγονὸς τοῦτο , ὦ βασιλεῦ ·
Prexaspes answered, “I think I understand what has happened, sire.


3.63.4
3340
οἱ Μάγοι εἰσί τοι οἱ ἐπανεστεῶτες , τόν τε ἔλιπες μελεδωνὸν τῶν οἰκίων , Πατιζείθης , καὶ ὁ τούτου ἀδελφεὸς Σμέρδις " .
Prexaspes replied, “I think, sire, that I understand what has been done here; the rebels are the Magi, Patizeithes whom you left steward of your house, and his brother Smerdis.”


3.64.1
3341
ἐνθαῦτα ἀκούσαντα Καμβύσεα τὸ Σμέρδιος οὔνομα ἔτυψε ἡ ἀληθείη τῶν τε λόγων καὶ τοῦ ἐνυπνίου ·
The truth of the words and of a dream struck Cambyses the moment he heard the name Smerdis;


3.64.1
3342
ὃς ἐδόκεε ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ ἀπαγγεῖλαι τινά οἱ ὡς Σμέρδις ἱζόμενος ἐς τὸν βασιλήιον θρόνον ψαύσειε τῇ κεφαλῇ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ .
for he had dreamt that a message had come to him that Smerdis sitting on the royal throne touched heaven with his head;


3.64.2
3343
μαθὼν δὲ ὡς μάτην ἀπολωλεκὼς εἴη τὸν ἀδελφεόν , ἀπέκλαιε Σμέρδιν ·
and perceiving that he had killed his brother without cause, he wept bitterly for Smerdis.


3.64.2
3344
ἀποκλαύσας δὲ καὶ περιημεκτήσας τῇ ἁπάσῃ συμφορῇ ἀναθρώσκει ἐπὶ τὸν ἵππον , ἐν νόῳ ἔχων τὴν ταχίστην ἐς Σοῦσα στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὸν Μάγον .
Having wept, and grieved by all his misfortune, he sprang upon his horse, with intent to march at once to Susa against the Magus.


3.64.3
3345
καί οἱ ἀναθρώσκοντι ἐπὶ τὸν ἵππον τοῦ κολεοῦ τοῦ ξίφεος ὁ μύκης ἀποπίπτει , γυμνωθὲν δὲ τὸ ξίφος παίει τὸν μηρόν ·
As he sprang upon his horse, the cap fell off the sheath of his sword, and the naked blade pierced his thigh,


3.64.3
3346
τρωματισθεὶς δὲ κατὰ τοῦτο τῇ αὐτὸς πρότερον τὸν τῶν Αἰγυπτίων θεὸν Ἆπιν ἔπληξε , ὥς οἱ καιρίῃ ἔδοξε τετύφθαι , εἴρετο ὁ Καμβύσης ὅ τι τῇ πόλι οὔνομα εἴη ·
wounding him in the same place where he had once wounded the Egyptian god Apis; and believing the wound to be mortal, Cambyses asked what was the name of the town where he was.


3.64.3
3347
οἳ δὲ εἶπαν ὅτι Ἀγβάτανα .
They told him it was Ecbatana.


3.64.4
3348
τῷ δὲ ἔτι πρότερον ἐκέχρηστο ἐκ Βουτοῦς πόλιος ἐν Ἀγβατάνοισι τελευτήσειν τὸν βίον .
Now a prophecy had before this come to him from Buto, that he would end his life at Ecbatana;


3.64.4
3349
ὃ μὲν δὴ ἐν τοῖσι Μηδικοῖσι Ἀγβατάνοισι ἐδόκεε τελευτήσειν γηραιός , ἐν τοῖσί οἱ ἦν τὰ πάντα πρήγματα ·
Cambyses supposed this to signify that he would die in old age at the Median Ecbatana, his capital city;


3.64.4
3350
τὸ δὲ χρηστήριον ἐν τοῖσι ἐν Συρίῃ Ἀγβατάνοισι ἔλεγε ἄρα .
but as the event proved, the oracle prophesied his death at Ecbatana of Syria.


3.64.5
3351
καὶ δὴ ὡς τότε ἐπειρόμενος ἐπύθετο τῆς πόλιος τὸ οὔνομα , ὑπὸ τῆς συμφορῆς τῆς τε ἐκ τοῦ Μάγου ἐκπεπληγμένος καὶ τοῦ τρώματος ἐσωφρόνησε , συλλαβὼν δὲ τὸ θεοπρόπιον εἶπε " ἐνθαῦτα Καμβύσεα τὸν Κύρου ἐστὶ πεπρωμένον τελευτᾶν " .
So when he now inquired and learned the name of the town, the shock of his wound, and of the misfortune that came to him from the Magus, brought him to his senses; he understood the prophecy and said: “Here Cambyses son of Cyrus is to die.”


3.65.1
3352
τότε μὲν τοσαῦτα .
At this time he said no more.


3.65.1
3353
ἡμέρῃσι δὲ ὕστερον ὡς εἴκοσι μεταπεμψάμενος Περσέων τῶν παρεόντων τοὺς λογιμωτάτους ἔλεγέ σφι τάδε .
But about twenty days later, he sent for the most prominent of the Persians that were about him, and thus addressed them:


3.65.1
3354
" ὦ Πέρσαι , καταλελάβηκέ με , τὸ πάντων μάλιστα ἔκρυπτον πρηγμάτων , τοῦτο ἐς ὑμέας ἐκφῆναι .
“Persians, I have to make known to you something which I kept most strictly concealed.


3.65.2
3355
ἐγὼ γὰρ ἐὼν ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ εἶδον ὄψιν ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ , τὴν μηδαμὰ ὄφελον ἰδεῖν ·
When I was in Egypt I had a dream, which I wish I had not had;


3.65.2
3356
ἐδόκεον δέ μοι ἄγγελον ἐλθόντα ἐξ οἴκου ἀγγέλλειν ὡς Σμέρδις ἱζόμενος ἐς τὸν βασιλήιον θρόνον ψαύσειε τῇ κεφαλῇ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ .
it seemed to me that a messenger came from home to tell me that Smerdis sitting on the royal throne touched heaven with his head.


3.65.3
3357
δείσας δὲ μὴ ἀπαιρεθέω τὴν ἀρχὴν πρὸς τοῦ ἀδελφεοῦ , ἐποίησα ταχύτερα ἢ σοφώτερα ·
Then I feared that my brother would take away my sovereignty from me, and I acted with more haste than wisdom;


3.65.3
3358
ἐν τῇ γὰρ ἀνθρωπηίῃ φύσι οὐκ ἐνῆν ἄρα τὸ μέλλον γίνεσθαι ἀποτρέπειν .
for it is not in the power of human nature to run away from what is to be;


3.65.3
3359
ἐγὼ δὲ ὁ μάταιος Πρηξάσπεα ἀποπέμπω ἐς Σοῦσα ἀποκτενέοντα Σμέρδιν .
but I, blind as I was, sent Prexaspes to Susa to kill Smerdis.


3.65.3
3360
ἐξεργασθέντος δὲ κακοῦ τοσούτου ἀδεῶς διαιτώμην , οὐδαμὰ ἐπιλεξάμενος μή κοτέ τίς μοι Σμέρδιος ὑπαραιρημένου ἄλλος ἐπανασταίη ἀνθρώπων .
When that great wrong was done I lived without fear, for I never thought that when Smerdis was removed another man might rise against me.


3.65.4
3361
παντὸς δὲ τοῦ μέλλοντος ἔσεσθαι ἁμαρτὼν ἀδελφεοκτόνος τε οὐδὲν δέον γέγονα καὶ τῆς βασιληίης οὐδὲν ἧσσον ἐστέρημαι ·
But I mistook altogether what was to be; I have killed my brother when there was no need, and I have lost my kingdom none the less;


3.65.4
3362
Σμέρδις γὰρ δὴ ἦν ὁ Μάγος τόν μοι ὁ δαίμων προέφαινε ἐν τῇ ὄψι ἐπαναστήσεσθαι .
for it was the Magus Smerdis that the divinity forewarned in the dream would revolt.


3.65.5
3363
τὸ μὲν δὴ ἔργον ἐξέργασταί μοι , καὶ Σμέρδιν τὸν Κύρου μηκέτι ὑμῖν ἐόντα λογίζεσθε ·
Now he has been done for by me, and I would have you believe that Smerdis Cyrus' son no longer lives;


3.65.5
3364
οἱ δὲ ὑμῖν Μάγοι κρατέουσι τῶν βασιληίων , τόν τε ἔλιπον ἐπίτροπον τῶν οἰκίων καὶ ὁ ἐκείνου ἀδελφεὸς Σμέρδις .
the Magi rule the kingdom, the one that I left caretaker of my house, and his brother Smerdis.


3.65.5
3365
τὸν μέν νυν μάλιστα χρῆν ἐμεῦ αἰσχρὰ πρὸς τῶν Μάγων πεπονθότος τιμωρέειν ἐμοί , οὗτος μὲν ἀνοσίῳ μόρῳ τετελεύτηκε ὑπὸ τῶν ἑωυτοῦ οἰκηιοτάτων ·
So then, the man is dead of an unholy destiny at the hands of his relations who ought to have been my avenger for the disgrace I have suffered from the Magi;


3.65.6
3366
τούτου δὲ μηκέτι ἐόντος , δεύτερα τῶν λοιπῶν ὑμῖν ὦ Πέρσαι γίνεταί μοι ἀναγκαιότατον ἐντέλλεσθαι τὰ θέλω μοι γενέσθαι τελευτῶν τὸν βίον ·
and as he is no longer alive, necessity constrains me to charge you, men of Persia, in his place, with the last desire of my life.


3.65.6
3367
καὶ δὴ ὑμῖν τάδε ἐπισκήπτω θεοὺς τοὺς βασιληίους ἐπικαλέων καὶ πᾶσι ὑμῖν καὶ μάλιστα Ἀχαιμενιδέων τοῖσι παρεοῦσι , μὴ περιιδεῖν τὴν ἡγεμονίην αὖτις ἐς Μήδους περιελθοῦσαν , ἀλλ’ εἴτε δόλῳ ἔχουσι αὐτὴν κτησάμενοι , δόλῳ ἀπαιρεθῆναι ὑπὸ ὑμέων , εἴτε καὶ σθένεϊ τεῷ κατεργασάμενοι , σθένεϊ κατὰ τὸ καρτερὸν ἀνασώσασθαι .
In the name of the gods of my royal house I charge all of you, but chiefly those Achaemenids that are here, not to let the sovereignty fall again into Median hands; if they have it after getting it by trickery, take it back through trickery of your own; if they have got it away by force, then by force all the stronger get it back.


3.65.7
3368
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ποιεῦσι ὑμῖν γῆ τε καρπὸν ἐκφέροι καὶ γυναῖκές τε καὶ ποῖμναι τίκτοιεν , ἐοῦσι ἐς τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον ἐλευθέροισι ·
And if you do this, may your land bring forth fruit, and your women and your flocks and herds be blessed with offspring, remaining free for all time;


3.65.7
3369
μὴ δὲ ἀνασωσαμένοισι τὴν ἀρχὴν μηδ’ ἐπιχειρήσασι ἀνασώζειν τὰ ἐναντία τούτοισι ἀρῶμαι ὑμῖν γενέσθαι , καὶ πρὸς ἔτι τούτοισι τὸ τέλος Περσέων ἑκάστῳ ἐπιγενέσθαι οἷον ἐμοὶ ἐπιγέγονε " .
but if you do not get the kingdom back or attempt to get it back, then I pray things turn out the opposite for you, and on top of this, that every Persian meet an end such as mine.”


3.65.7
3370
ἅμα τε εἴπας ταῦτα ὁ Καμβύσης ἀπέκλαιε πᾶσαν τὴν ἑωυτοῦ πρῆξιν .
With that Cambyses wept bitterly for all that had happened to him.


3.66.1
3371
πέρσαι δὲ ὡς τὸν βασιλέα εἶδον ἀνακλαύσαντα πάντες τά τε ἐσθῆτος ἐχόμενα εἶχον , ταῦτα κατηρείκοντο καὶ οἰμωγῇ ἀφθόνῳ διεχρέωντο .
When the Persians saw their king weep, they all tore the clothing which they wore and wailed loud and long.


3.66.2
3372
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὡς ἐσφακέλισέ τε τὸ ὀστέον καὶ ὁ μηρὸς τάχιστα ἐσάπη , ἀπήνεικε Καμβύσεα τὸν Κύρου , βασιλεύσαντα μὲν τὰ πάντα ἑπτὰ ἔτεα καὶ πέντε μῆνας , ἄπαιδα δὲ τὸ παράπαν ἐόντα ἔρσενος καὶ θήλεος γόνου .
But when after this the bone rotted and the thigh rapidly putrefied, it carried off Cambyses son of Cyrus, who had reigned in all seven years and five months, but was altogether childless, without male or female issue.


3.66.3
3373
Περσέων δὲ τοῖσι παρεοῦσι ἀπιστίη πολλὴ ὑπεκέχυτο τοὺς Μάγους ἔχειν τὰ πρήγματα , ἀλλ’ ἠπιστέατο ἐπὶ διαβολῇ εἰπεῖν Καμβύσεα τὰ εἶπε περὶ τοῦ Σμέρδιος θανάτου , ἵνα οἱ ἐκπολεμωθῇ πᾶν τὸ Περσικόν .
To the Persians who were present it was quite incredible that the Magi were masters of the kingdom; they believed that Cambyses' intent was to deceive them with his story of Smerdis' death, so that all    Persia    might be embroiled in a war against him.


3.67.1
3374
οὗτοι μέν νυν ἠπιστέατο Σμέρδιν τὸν Κύρου βασιλέα ἐνεστεῶτα ·
So they believed that it was Cyrus' son Smerdis who had been made king.


3.67.1
3375
δεινῶς γὰρ καὶ ὁ Πρηξάσπης ἔξαρνος ἦν μὴ μὲν ἀποκτεῖναι Σμέρδιν ·
For Prexaspes stoutly denied that he had killed Smerdis,


3.67.1
3376
οὐ γὰρ ἦν οἱ ἀσφαλὲς Καμβύσεω τετελευτηκότος φάναι τὸν Κύρου υἱὸν ἀπολωλεκέναι αὐτοχειρίῃ .
since now that Cambyses was dead, it was not safe for him to say that he had slain the son of Cyrus with his own hands.


3.67.2
3377
ὁ δὲ δὴ Μάγος τελευτήσαντος Καμβύσεω ἀδεῶς ἐβασίλευσε , ἐπιβατεύων τοῦ ὁμωνύμου Σμέρδιος τοῦ Κύρου , μῆνας ἑπτὰ τοὺς ἐπιλοίπους Καμβύσῃ ἐς τὰ ὀκτὼ ἔτεα τῆς πληρώσιος ·
Cambyses being dead, the Magus, pretending to be the Smerdis of like name, Cyrus' son, reigned without fear for the seven months by which Cambyses had fallen short of reigning eight years.


3.67.3
3378
ἐν τοῖσι ἀπεδέξατο ἐς τοὺς ὑπηκόους πάντας εὐεργεσίας μεγάλας , ὥστε ἀποθανόντος αὐτοῦ πόθον ἔχειν πάντας τοὺς ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ πάρεξ αὐτῶν Περσέων .
In this time he benefitted all his subjects to such an extent that after his death all the Asiatics except the Persians wished him back;


3.67.3
3379
διαπέμψας γὰρ ὁ Μάγος ἐς πᾶν ἔθνος τῶν ἦρχε προεῖπε ἀτελείην εἶναι στρατηίης καὶ φόρου ἐπ’ ἔτεα τρία .
for he sent to every nation he ruled and proclaimed an exemption for three years from military service and from tribute.


3.68.1
3380
προεῖπε μὲν δὴ ταῦτα αὐτίκα ἐνιστάμενος ἐς τὴν ἀρχήν , ὀγδόῳ δὲ μηνὶ ἐγένετο κατάδηλος τρόπῳ τοιῷδε .
Such was his proclamation at the beginning of his reign; but in the eighth month he was exposed in the following manner.


3.68.1
3381
Ὀτάνης ἦν Φαρνάσπεω μὲν παῖς , γένεϊ δὲ καὶ χρήμασι ὅμοιος τῷ πρώτῳ Περσέων .
There was one Otanes, son of Pharnaspes, as well-born and rich a man as any Persian.


3.68.2
3382
οὗτος ὁ Ὀτάνης πρῶτος ὑπώπτευσε τὸν Μάγον ὡς οὐκ εἴη ὁ Κύρου Σμέρδις ἀλλ’ ὅς περ ἦν , τῇδε συμβαλόμενος , ὅτι τε οὐκ ἐξεφοίτα ἐκ τῆς ἀκροπόλιος καὶ ὅτι οὐκ ἐκάλεε ἐς ὄψιν ἑωυτῷ οὐδένα τῶν λογίμων Περσέων ·
This Otanes was the first to guess that the Magus was not Cyrus' son Smerdis and who, in fact, he was; the reason was, that he never left the acropolis nor summoned any notable Persian into his presence. And having formed this suspicion Otanes did as follows:


3.68.3
3383
ὑποπτεύσας δέ μιν ἐποίεε τάδε .
Suspecting him, Otanes did as follows.


3.68.3
3384
ἔσχε αὐτοῦ Καμβύσης θυγατέρα , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Φαιδύμη ·
Cambyses had taken his daughter, whose name was Phaedyme;


3.68.3
3385
τὴν αὐτὴν δὴ ταύτην εἶχε τότε ὁ Μάγος καὶ ταύτῃ τε συνοίκεε καὶ τῇσι ἄλλῃσι πάσῃσι τῇσι τοῦ Καμβύσεω γυναιξί .
this same girl the Magus had now and he lived with her and with all Cambyses' other wives.


3.68.3
3386
πέμπων δὴ ὦν ὁ Ὀτάνης παρὰ ταύτην τὴν θυγατέρα ἐπυνθάνετο παρ’ ὅτεῳ ἀνθρώπων κοιμῷτο , εἴτε μετὰ Σμέρδιος τοῦ Κύρου εἴτε μετὰ ἄλλου τευ .
Otanes sent to this daughter, asking at what man's side she lay, with Smerdis, Cyrus' son, or with some other?


3.68.4
3387
ἣ δέ οἱ ἀντέπεμπε φαμένη οὐ γινώσκειν ·
She sent back a message that she did not know;


3.68.4
3388
οὔτε γὰρ τὸν Κύρου Σμέρδιν ἰδέσθαι οὐδαμὰ οὔτε ὅστις εἴη ὁ συνοικέων αὐτῇ εἰδέναι .
for (she said) she had never seen Cyrus' son Smerdis, nor did she know who her bedfellow was.


3.68.4
3389
ἔπεμπε δεύτερα ὁ Ὀτάνης λέγων " εἰ μὴ αὐτὴ Σμέρδιν τὸν Κύρου γινώσκεις , σὺ δὲ παρὰ Ἀτόσσης πύθευ ὅτεῳ τούτῳ συνοικέει αὐτή τε ἐκείνη καὶ σύ ·
Then Otanes sent a second message, to this effect: “If you do not know Cyrus' son Smerdis yourself, then find out from Atossa who it is that she and you are living with;


3.68.4
3390
πάντως γὰρ δή κου τόν γε ἑωυτῆς ἀδελφεὸν γινώσκει " .
for surely she knows her own brother.”


3.68.4
3391
ἀντιπέμπει πρὸς ταῦτα ἡ θυγάτηρ " οὔτε Ἀτόσσῃ δύναμαι ἐς λόγους ἐλθεῖν οὔτε ἄλλην οὐδεμίαν ἰδέσθαι τῶν συγκατημενέων γυναικῶν .
She answered by messenger, “I can neither speak to Atossa nor see any other of the women who live here.


3.68.5
3392
ἐπείτε γὰρ τάχιστα οὗτος ὥνθρωπος , ὅστις κοτὲ ἐστί , παρέλαβε τὴν βασιληίην , διέσπειρε ἡμέας ἄλλην ἄλλῃ τάξας " .
To this his daughter replied: “I cannot communicate with Atossa, nor can I see any other of the women of the household; for no sooner had this man, whoever he is, made himself king, than he sent us to live apart, each in her own appointed place.”


3.69.1
3393
ἀκούοντι δὲ ταῦτα τῷ Ὀτάνῃ μᾶλλον κατεφαίνετο τὸ πρῆγμα .
When Otanes heard that, he saw more clearly how the matter stood;


3.69.1
3394
τρίτην δὲ ἀγγελίην ἐσπέμπει παρ’ αὐτὴν λέγουσαν ταῦτα .
and he sent her this third message:


3.69.2
3395
" ὦ θύγατερ , δεῖ σε γεγονυῖαν εὖ κίνδυνον ἀναλαβέσθαι τὸν ἂν ὁ πατὴρ ὑποδύνειν κελεύῃ .
“Daughter, your noble birth obliges you to run any risk that your father commands you to face.


3.69.2
3396
εἰ γὰρ δὴ μή ἐστι ὁ Κύρου Σμέρδις ἀλλὰ τὸν καταδοκέω ἐγώ , οὔτοι μιν σοί τε συγκοιμώμενον καὶ τὸ Περσέων κράτος ἔχοντα δεῖ χαίροντα ἀπαλλάσσειν , ἀλλὰ δοῦναι δίκην .
If this man is not Smerdis son of Cyrus but who I think he is, then he must not get away with sleeping with you and sitting on the throne of Persia, but be punished.


3.69.3
3397
νῦν ὦν ποίησον τάδε ·
Now, then, when he lies with you and you see that he is sleeping, feel his ears;


3.69.3
3398
ἐπεὰν σοὶ συνεύδῃ καὶ μάθῃς αὐτὸν κατυπνωμένον , ἄφασον αὐτοῦ τὰ ὦτα ·
if he has ears, rest assured that you are living with Smerdis son of Cyrus;


3.69.3
3399
καὶ ἢν μὲν φαίνηται ἔχων ὦτα , νόμιζε σεωυτὴν Σμέρδι τῷ Κύρου συνοικέειν , ἢν δὲ μὴ ἔχων , σὺ δὲ τῷ Μάγῳ Σμέρδι " .
but if he has none, it is Smerdis the Magus.”


3.69.4
3400
ἀντιπέμπει πρὸς ταῦτα ἡ Φαιδύμη φαμένη κινδυνεύσειν μεγάλως , ἢν ποιέῃ ταῦτα ·
Phaedyme answered by messenger that she would run a very great risk by so doing;


3.69.4
3401
εἰ γὰρ δὴ μὴ τυγχάνει τὰ ὦτα ἔχων , ἐπίλαμπτος δὲ ἀφάσσουσα ἔσται , εὖ εἰδέναι ὡς ἀιστώσει μιν ·
for if it should turn out that he had no ears, and she were caught feeling for them, he would surely kill her;


3.69.4
3402
ὅμως μέντοι ποιήσειν ταῦτα .
nevertheless she would do it.


3.69.5
3403
ἣ μὲν δὴ ὑπεδέξατο ταῦτα τῷ πατρὶ κατεργάσεσθαι .
So she promised to do this for her father.


3.69.5
3404
τοῦ δὲ Μάγου τούτου τοῦ Σμέρδιος Κῦρος ὁ Καμβύσεω ἄρχων τὰ ὦτα ἀπέταμε ἐπ’ αἰτίῃ δή τινι οὐ σμικρῇ .
Cyrus son of Cambyses during his reign cut off the ears of this Magus Smerdis for some grave reason.


3.69.6
3405
ἡ ὦν δὴ Φαιδύμη αὕτη , ἡ τοῦ Ὀτάνεω θυγάτηρ , πάντα ἐπιτελέουσα τὰ ὑπεδέξατο τῷ πατρί , ἐπείτε αὐτῆς μέρος ἐγίνετο τῆς ἀπίξιος παρὰ τὸν Μάγον ( ἐν περιτροπῇ γὰρ δὴ αἱ γυναῖκες φοιτέουσι τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι ) , ἐλθοῦσα παρ’ αὐτὸν ηὗδε , ὑπνωμένου δὲ καρτερῶς τοῦ Μάγου ἤφασε τὰ ὦτα .
So Phaedyme, daughter of Otanes, performed her promise to her father.


3.69.6
3406
μαθοῦσα δὲ οὐ χαλεπῶς ἀλλ’ εὐπετέως οὐκ ἔχοντα τὸν ἄνδρα ὦτα , ὡς ἡμέρη τάχιστα ἐγεγόνεε , πέμψασα ἐσήμηνε τῷ πατρὶ τὰ γενόμενα .
When it was her turn to go to the Magus (for their wives go in sequence to the Persians), she came to his bed and felt for the Magus' ears while he slumbered deeply; and having with no great difficulty assured herself that he had no ears, she sent and told this to her father as soon as it was morning.


3.70.1
3407
ὁ δὲ Ὀτάνης παραλαβὼν Ἀσπαθίνην καὶ Γοβρύην , Περσέων τε πρώτους ἐόντας καὶ ἑωυτῷ ἐπιτηδεοτάτους ἐς πίστιν , ἀπηγήσατο πᾶν τὸ πρῆγμα ·
Otanes then took aside two Persians of the highest rank whom he thought worthiest of trust, Aspathines and Gobryas, and told them the whole story.


3.70.1
3408
οἳ δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ ἄρα ὑπώπτευον οὕτω τοῦτο ἔχειν , ἀνενείκαντος δὲ τοῦ Ὀτάνεω τοὺς λόγους ἐδέξαντο , καὶ ἔδοξέ σφι ἕκαστον ἄνδρα Περσέων προσεταιρίσασθαι τοῦτον ὅτεῳ πιστεύει μάλιστα .
These, it would seem, had themselves suspected that it was so; and now they readily believed what Otanes revealed to them.


3.70.2
3409
Ὀτάνης μέν νυν ἐσάγεται Ἰνταφρένεα , Γοβρύης δὲ Μεγάβυζον , Ἀσπαθίνης δὲ Ὑδάρνεα .
They resolved that each should take into his confidence that Persian whom he most trusted; Otanes brought in Intaphrenes, Gobryas brought Megabyzus, and Aspathines Hydarnes.


3.70.3
3410
γεγονότων δὲ τούτων ἓξ παραγίνεται ἐς τὰ Σοῦσα Δαρεῖος ὁ Ὑστάσπεος ἐκ Περσέων ἥκων ·
When they were six, Darius arrived at Susa.


3.70.3
3411
τούτων γὰρ δὴ ἦν οἱ ὁ πατὴρ ὕπαρχος .
His father, Hystaspes, was a subordinate governor of the Persians,


3.70.3
3412
ἐπεὶ ὦν οὗτος ἀπίκετο , τοῖσι ἓξ τῶν Περσέων ἔδοξε καὶ Δαρεῖον προσεταιρίσασθαι .
When he came, then, the six Persians resolved to include Darius too.


3.71.1
3413
συνελθόντες δὲ οὗτοι ἐόντες ἑπτὰ ἐδίδοσαν σφίσι πίστις καὶ λόγους .
The seven then met and gave each other tokens of good faith and spoke together;


3.71.1
3414
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐς Δαρεῖον ἀπίκετο γνώμην ἀποφαίνεσθαι , ἔλεγέ σφι τάδε .
and when it was Darius' turn to declare his mind, he spoke as follows:


3.71.2
3415
" ἐγὼ ταῦτα ἐδόκεον μὲν αὐτὸς μοῦνος ἐπίστασθαι , ὅτι τε ὁ Μάγος εἴη ὁ βασιλεύων καὶ Σμέρδις ὁ Κύρου τετελεύτηκε ·
“I thought that I alone knew that it was the Magus who was king and that Smerdis son of Cyrus was dead;


3.71.2
3416
καὶ αὐτοῦ τούτου εἵνεκεν ἥκω σπουδῇ ὡς συστήσων ἐπὶ τῷ Μάγῳ θάνατον .
and it was for this reason that I made haste to come, that I might effect the Magus' death;


3.71.2
3417
ἐπείτε δὲ συνήνεικε ὥστε καὶ ὑμέας εἰδέναι καὶ μὴ μοῦνον ἐμέ , ποιέειν αὐτίκα μοι δοκέει καὶ μὴ ὑπερβάλλεσθαι ·
but since it turns out that you know too and not only I, I think that we should act at once and not put it off;


3.71.2
3418
οὐ γὰρ ἄμεινον " .
there is no better way.”


3.71.3
3419
εἶπε πρὸς ταῦτα ὁ Ὀτάνης " ὦ παῖ Ὑστάσπεος , εἶς τε πατρὸς ἀγαθοῦ καὶ ἐκφαίνειν ἔοικας σεωυτὸν ἐόντα τοῦ πατρὸς οὐδὲν ἥσσω ·
Otanes replied, “son of Hystaspes, you have a good father and seem likely yourself to be in no way inferior to your father;


3.71.3
3420
τὴν μέντοι ἐπιχείρησιν ταύτην μὴ οὕτω συντάχυνε ἀβούλως , ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τὸ σωφρονέστερον αὐτὴν λάμβανε ·
do not hurry this undertaking without thinking, but take it up more prudently;


3.71.3
3421
δεῖ γὰρ πλεῦνας γενομένους οὕτω ἐπιχειρέειν " .
there must be more of us to try it.”


3.71.4
3422
λέγει πρὸς ταῦτα Δαρεῖος " ἄνδρες οἱ παρεόντες , τρόπῳ τῷ εἰρημένῳ ἐξ Ὀτάνεω εἰ χρήσεσθε , ἐπίστασθε ὅτι ἀπολέεσθε κάκιστα ·
To this Darius answered: “You gentlemen who are here, if you do as Otanes says, know that you will die horribly;


3.71.4
3423
ἐξοίσει γάρ τις πρὸς τὸν Μάγον , ἰδίῃ περιβαλλόμενος ἑωυτῷ κέρδεα .
for someone will inform the Magus, looking to enrich himself alone.


3.71.5
3424
μάλιστα μέν νυν ὠφείλετε ἐπ’ ὑμέων αὐτῶν βαλλόμενοι ποιέειν ταῦτα ·
You ought to have done it by yourselves;


3.71.5
3425
ἐπείτε δὲ ὑμῖν ἀναφέρειν ἐς πλεῦνας ἐδόκεε καὶ ἐμοὶ ὑπερέθεσθε , ἢ ποιέωμεν σήμερον ἢ ἴστε ὑμῖν ὅτι ἢν ὑπερπέσῃ ἡ νῦν ἡμέρη , ὡς οὐκ ἄλλος φθὰς ἐμεῦ κατήγορος ἔσται , ἀλλά σφεα αὐτὸς ἐγὼ κατερέω πρὸς τὸν Μάγον " .
but since you decided to confide in others and have included me, let us either act today or else understand that if the present day passes, nobody else will betray you before I do, for I shall myself betray you to the Magus.”


3.72.1
3426
λέγει πρὸς ταῦτα Ὀτάνης , ἐπειδὴ ὥρα σπερχόμενον Δαρεῖον , " ἐπείτε ἡμέας συνταχύνειν ἀναγκάζεις καὶ ὑπερβάλλεσθαι οὐκ ἐᾷς , ἴθι ἐξηγέο αὐτὸς ὅτεῳ τρόπῳ πάριμεν ἐς τὰ βασιλήια καὶ ἐπιχειρήσομεν αὐτοῖσι .
To this Otanes replied, seeing Darius' vehemence, “Since you force us to hurry and will tolerate no delay, tell us now yourself how we shall pass into the palace and attack them.


3.72.1
3427
φυλακὰς γὰρ δὴ διεστεώσας οἶδάς κου καὶ αὐτός , εἰ μὴ ἰδών , ἀλλ’ ἀκούσας ·
For you know yourself, I suppose, if not because you have seen them then you have heard, that guards are stationed all around;


3.72.1
3428
τὰς τέῳ τρόπῳ περήσομεν " ;
how shall we go past the guards?”


3.72.1
3429
ἀμείβεται Δαρεῖος τοῖσιδε .
Darius answered:


3.72.2
3430
" Ὀτάνη , ἦ πολλά ἐστι τὰ λόγῳ μὲν οὐκ οἷά τε δηλῶσαι , ἔργῳ δέ ·
“Otanes, there are many things that cannot be described in words, but in deed;


3.72.2
3431
ἄλλα δ’ ἐστὶ τὰ λόγῳ μὲν οἷά τε , ἔργον δὲ οὐδὲν ἀπ’ αὐτῶν λαμπρὸν γίνεται .
and there are other things that can be described in words, but nothing illustrious comes of them.


3.72.2
3432
ὑμεῖς δὲ ἴστε φυλακὰς τὰς κατεστεώσας ἐούσας οὐδὲν χαλεπὰς παρελθεῖν .
You know well that the guards who are set are easy to go by.


3.72.3
3433
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ ἡμέων ἐόντων τοιῶνδε οὐδεὶς ὅστις οὐ παρήσει , τὰ μέν κου καταιδεόμενος ἡμέας , τὰ δέ κου καὶ δειμαίνων ·
There is no one who will not allow us to pass, from respect or from fear, because of who we are;


3.72.3
3434
τοῦτο δὲ ἔχω αὐτὸς σκῆψιν εὐπρεπεστάτην τῇ πάριμεν , φὰς ἄρτι τε ἥκειν ἐκ Περσέων καὶ βούλεσθαί τι ἔπος παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς σημῆναι τῷ βασιλέι .
and further, I have myself the best pretext for entering, for I shall say that I have just arrived from Persia and have a message for the king from my father.


3.72.4
3435
ἔνθα γάρ τι δεῖ ψεῦδος λέγεσθαι , λεγέσθω .
When it is necessary to lie, lie.


3.72.4
3436
τοῦ γὰρ αὐτοῦ γλιχόμεθα οἵ τε ψευδόμενοι καὶ οἱ τῇ ἀληθείῃ διαχρεώμενοι .
For we want the same thing, liars and those who tell the truth;


3.72.4
3437
οἳ μέν γε ψεύδονται τότε ἐπεάν τι μέλλωσι τοῖσι ψεύδεσι πείσαντες κερδήσεσθαι , οἳ δ’ ἀληθίζονται ἵνα τῇ ἀληθείῃ ἐπισπάσωνται κέρδος καί τι μᾶλλόν σφι ἐπιτράπηται .
some lie to win credence and advantage by lies, while others tell the truth in order to obtain some advantage by the truth and to be more trusted;


3.72.4
3438
οὕτω οὐ τ- αὐτὰ ἀσκέοντες τ- αὐτοῦ περιεχόμεθα .
thus we approach the same ends by different means.


3.72.5
3439
εἰ δὲ μηδὲν κερδήσεσθαι μέλλοιεν , ὁμοίως ἂν ὅ τε ἀληθιζόμενος ψευδὴς εἴη καὶ ὁ ψευδόμενος ἀληθής .
If the hope of advantage were taken away, the truth-teller would be as ready to lie as the liar to tell the truth.


3.72.5
3440
ὃς ἂν μέν νυν τῶν πυλουρῶν ἑκὼν παριῇ , αὐτῷ οἱ ἄμεινον ἐς χρόνον ἔσται ·
Now if any of the watchmen willingly let us pass, it will be better for him later.


3.72.5
3441
ὃς δ’ ἂν ἀντιβαίνειν πειρᾶται , δεικνύσθω ἐνθαῦτα ἐὼν πολέμιος , καὶ ἔπειτα ὠσάμενοι ἔσω ἔργου ἐχώμεθα " .
But if any tries to withstand us, let us note him as an enemy, and so thrust ourselves in and begin our work.”


3.73.1
3442
λέγει Γοβρύης μετὰ ταῦτα " ἄνδρες φίλοι , ἡμῖν κότε κάλλιον παρέξει ἀνασώσασθαι τὴν ἀρχήν , ἢ εἴ γε μὴ οἷοί τε ἐσόμεθα αὐτὴν ἀναλαβεῖν , ἀποθανεῖν ;
Then Gobryas said, “Friends, when shall we have a better chance to win back the kingship, or, if we cannot, to die, since we who are Persians are ruled by a Mede, a Magus, and he a man that has no ears?


3.73.1
3443
ὅτε γε ἀρχόμεθα μὲν ἐόντες Πέρσαι ὑπὸ Μήδου ἀνδρὸς Μάγου , καὶ τούτου ὦτα οὐκ ἔχοντος .
Those of you that were with Cambyses at his death-bed of course remember the curse which he pronounced as he died on the Persians if they should not try to get back the kingship,


3.73.2
3444
ὅσοι τε ὑμέων Καμβύσῃ νοσέοντι παρεγένοντο , πάντως κου μέμνησθε τὰ ἐπέσκηψε Πέρσῃσι τελευτῶν τὸν βίον μὴ πειρωμένοισι ἀνακτᾶσθαι τὴν ἀρχήν ·
although we did not believe Cambyses then, but thought that he spoke to deceive us.


3.73.2
3445
τὰ τότε οὐκ ἐνεδεκόμεθα , ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ διαβολῇ ἐδοκέομεν εἰπεῖν Καμβύσεα .
Now therefore my vote is that we follow Darius' plan, and not quit this council to do anything else but attack the Magus at once.”


3.73.3
3446
νῦν ὦν τίθεμαι ψῆφον πείθεσθαι Δαρείῳ καὶ μὴ διαλύεσθαι ἐκ τοῦ συλλόγου τοῦδε ἀλλ’ ἢ ἐπὶ τὸν Μάγον ἰθέως " .
So spoke Gobryas; and they all consented to what he said.


3.73.3
3447
ταῦτα εἶπε Γοβρύης , καὶ πάντες ταύτῃ αἴνεον .
While they were making these plans, by coincidence the following happened.


3.74.1
3448
ἐν ᾧ δὲ οὗτοι ταῦτα ἐβουλεύοντο , ἐγίνετο κατὰ συντυχίην τάδε .
The Magi had resolved after consideration to make a friend of Prexaspes, because he had been wronged by Cambyses (who had killed his son with an arrow)


3.74.1
3449
τοῖσι Μάγοισι ἔδοξε βουλευομένοισι Πρηξάσπεα φίλον προσθέσθαι , ὅτι τε ἐπεπόνθεε πρὸς Καμβύσεω ἀνάρσια , ὅς οἱ τὸν παῖδα τοξεύσας ἀπολωλέκεε , καὶ διότι μοῦνος ἠπίστατο τὸν Σμέρδιος τοῦ Κύρου θάνατον αὐτοχειρίῃ μιν ἀπολέσας , πρὸς δ’ ἔτι ἐόντα ἐν αἴνῃ μεγίστῃ τὸν Πρηξάσπεα ἐν Πέρσῃσι .
and because he alone knew of the death of Cyrus' son Smerdis, having himself been the slayer; but besides this, because he was in great repute among the Persians.


3.74.2
3450
τούτων δή μιν εἵνεκεν καλέσαντες φίλον προσεκτῶντο πίστι τε λαβόντες καὶ ὁρκίοισι , ἦ μὲν ἕξειν παρ’ ἑωυτῷ μηδ’ ἐξοίσειν μηδενὶ ἀνθρώπων τὴν ἀπὸ σφέων ἀπάτην ἐς Πέρσας γεγονυῖαν , ὑπισχνεύμενοι τὰ πάντα οἱ μυρία δώσειν .
For these reasons they summoned him and tried to make him a friend, having bound him by tokens of good faith and oaths to keep to himself and betray to no one their deception of the Persians, and promising to give him all things in great abundance.


3.74.3
3451
ὑποσχομένου δὲ τοῦ Πρηξάσπεος ποιήσειν ταῦτα , ὡς ἀνέπεισάν μιν οἱ Μάγοι , δεύτερα προσέφερον , αὐτοὶ μὲν φάμενοι Πέρσας πάντας συγκαλέειν ὑπὸ τὸ βασιλήιον τεῖχος , κεῖνον δ’ ἐκέλευον ἀναβάντα ἐπὶ πύργον ἀγορεῦσαι ὡς ὑπὸ τοῦ Κύρου Σμέρδιος ἄρχονται καὶ ὑπ’ οὐδενὸς ἄλλου .
When Prexaspes agreed to do this, since the Magi importuned him, the Magi made this second proposal to him, that they should call an assembly of all the Persians before the palace wall, and he should go up on to a tower and declare that it was Smerdis son of Cyrus and no other who was king of    Persia   .


3.74.4
3452
ταῦτα δὲ οὕτω ἐνετέλλοντο ὡς πιστοτάτου δῆθεν ἐόντος αὐτοῦ ἐν Πέρσῃσι καὶ πολλάκις ἀποδεξαμένου γνώμην ὡς περιείη ὁ Κύρου Σμέρδις , καὶ ἐξαρνησαμένου τὸν φόνον αὐτοῦ .
They gave him this charge, because they thought him to be the man most trusted by the Persians, and because he had often asserted that Cyrus' son Smerdis was alive, and had denied the murder.


3.75.1
3453
φαμένου δὲ καὶ ταῦτα ἑτοίμου εἶναι ποιέειν τοῦ Πρηξάσπεος , συγκαλέσαντες Πέρσας οἱ Μάγοι ἀνεβίβασαν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ πύργον καὶ ἀγορεύειν ἐκέλευον .
When Prexaspes said that he was ready to do this too, the Magi summoned the Persians together, and brought him up on to a tower and bade him speak.


3.75.1
3454
ὁ δὲ τῶν μὲν ἐκεῖνοι προσεδέοντο αὐτοῦ , τούτων μὲν ἑκὼν ἐπελήθετο , ἀρξάμενος δὲ ἀπ’ Ἀχαιμένεος ἐγενεηλόγησε τὴν πατριὴν τὴν Κύρου , μετὰ δὲ ὡς ἐς τοῦτον κατέβη τελευτῶν ἔλεγε ὅσα ἀγαθὰ Κῦρος Πέρσας πεποιήκοι , διεξελθὼν δὲ ταῦτα ἐξέφαινε τὴν ἀληθείην , φάμενος πρότερον μὲν κρύπτειν ( οὐ γάρ οἱ εἶναι ἀσφαλὲς λέγειν τὰ γενόμενα ) , ἐν δὲ τῷ παρεόντι , ἀναγκαίην μιν καταλαμβάνειν φαίνειν .
Then, deliberately forgetting all the Magi's instructions, he traced the lineage of Cyrus from Achaemenes downwards; when he came at last to the name of Cyrus, he recounted all the good which that king had done to Persia,


3.75.2
3455
καὶ δὴ ἔλεγε τὸν μὲν Κύρου Σμέρδιν ὡς αὐτὸς ὑπὸ Καμβύσεω ἀναγκαζόμενος ἀποκτείνειε , τοὺς Μάγους δὲ βασιλεύειν .
and after he had narrated this, he revealed the truth, saying that he had concealed it before, as it had not been safe for him to tell what had happened, but at the present time necessity forced him to reveal it: and he said that he himself, forced by Cambyses, had killed Smerdis son of Cyrus, and that the Magi were in power.


3.75.3
3456
Πέρσῃσι δὲ πολλὰ ἐπαρησάμενος εἰ μὴ ἀνακτησαίατο ὀπίσω τὴν ἀρχὴν καὶ τοὺς Μάγους τισαίατο , ἀπῆκε ἑωυτὸν ἐπὶ κεφαλὴν φέρεσθαι ἀπὸ τοῦ πύργου κάτω .
Then, invoking a terrible curse on the Persians if they did not win back the throne and take vengeance on the Magi, he threw himself headlong down from the tower;


3.75.3
3457
Πρηξάσπης μέν νυν ἐὼν τὸν πάντα χρόνον ἀνὴρ δόκιμος οὕτω ἐτελεύτησε .
so Prexaspes, a man who was always well thought of, perished in this way.


3.76.1
3458
οἱ δὲ δὴ ἑπτὰ τῶν Περσέων ὡς ἐβουλεύσαντο αὐτίκα ἐπιχειρέειν τοῖσι Μάγοισι καὶ μὴ ὑπερβάλλεσθαι , ἤισαν εὐξάμενοι τοῖσι θεοῖσι , τῶν περὶ Πρηξάσπεα πρηχθέντων εἰδότες οὐδέν .
The seven Persians, when they had decided to attack the Magi at once and not delay, prayed to the gods and set forth, knowing nothing of what had happened to Prexaspes.


3.76.2
3459
ἔν τε δὴ τῇ ὁδῷ μέσῃ στείχοντες ἐγίνοντο καὶ τὰ περὶ Πρηξάσπεα γεγονότα ἐπυνθάνοντο .
But when they had gone half way they learned what had happened to Prexaspes.


3.76.2
3460
ἐνθαῦτα ἐκστάντες τῆς ὁδοῦ ἐδίδοσαν αὖτις σφίσι λόγους , οἳ μὲν ἀμφὶ τὸν Ὀτάνην πάγχυ κελεύοντες ὑπερβαλέσθαι μηδὲ οἰδεόντων τῶν πρηγμάτων ἐπιτίθεσθαι , οἳ δὲ ἀμφὶ τὸν Δαρεῖον αὐτίκα τε ἰέναι καὶ τὰ δεδογμένα ποιέειν μηδὲ ὑπερβάλλεσθαι .
Then they argued there, standing beside the road, Otanes' party demanding that they delay and not attack while events were in flux, and Darius' party that they go directly and do what they had decided and not put it off.


3.76.3
3461
ὠθιζομένων δ’ αὐτῶν ἐφάνη ἰρήκων ἑπτὰ ζεύγεα δύο αἰγυπιῶν ζεύγεα διώκοντα καὶ τίλλοντά τε καὶ ἀμύσσοντα .
While they were arguing, they saw seven pairs of hawks chase and slash and tear to bits two pairs of vultures.


3.76.3
3462
ἰδόντες δὲ ταῦτα οἱ ἑπτὰ τήν τε Δαρείου πάντες αἴνεον γνώμην καὶ ἔπειτα ἤισαν ἐπὶ τὰ βασιλήια τεθαρσηκότες τοῖσι ὄρνισι .
And seeing this all seven consented to Darius' opinion, and went on to the palace, encouraged by the birds.


3.77.1
3463
ἐπιστᾶσι δὲ ἐπὶ τὰς πύλας ἐγίνετο οἷόν τι Δαρείῳ ἡ γνώμη ἔφερε ·
When they came to the gate, it turned out as Darius had expected;


3.77.1
3464
καταιδεόμενοι γὰρ οἱ φύλακοι ἄνδρας τοὺς Περσέων πρώτους καὶ οὐδὲν τοιοῦτο ὑποπτεύοντες ἐξ αὐτῶν ἔσεσθαι , παρίεσαν θείῃ πομπῇ χρεωμένους , οὐδ’ ἐπειρώτα οὐδείς .
the guards, out of respect for the leading men in Persia and never suspecting that there would be trouble from them, allowed them to pass, who enjoyed divine guidance, and no one asked any questions.


3.77.2
3465
ἐπείτε δὲ καὶ παρῆλθον ἐς τὴν αὐλήν , ἐνέκυρσαν τοῖσι τὰς ἀγγελίας ἐσφέρουσι εὐνούχοισι ·
And when they came to the court, they met the eunuchs that carry messages,


3.77.2
3466
οἵ σφεας ἱστόρεον ὅ τι θέλοντες ἥκοιεν , καὶ ἅμα ἱστορέοντες τούτους τοῖσι πυλουροῖσι ἀπείλεον ὅτι σφέας παρῆκαν , ἶσχόν τε βουλομένους τοὺς ἑπτὰ ἐς τὸ πρόσω παριέναι .
who asked the seven why they had come; and while they were questioning these, they were threatening the watchmen for letting them pass, and restraining the seven who wanted to go on.


3.77.3
3467
οἳ δὲ διακελευσάμενοι καὶ σπασάμενοι τὰ ἐγχειρίδια τούτους μὲν τοὺς ἴσχοντας αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ συγκεντέουσι , αὐτοὶ δὲ ἤισαν δρόμῳ ἐς τὸν ἀνδρεῶνα .
These gave each other the word, drew their knives, and stabbing the eunuchs who barred their way, went forward at a run to the men's apartment.


3.78.1
3468
οἱ δὲ Μάγοι ἔτυχον ἀμφότεροι τηνικαῦτα ἐόντες τε ἔσω καὶ τὰ ἀπὸ Πρηξάσπεος γενόμενα ἐν βουλῇ ἔχοντες .
Both the Magi were within, deliberating about the consequences of Prexaspes' act.


3.78.1
3469
ἐπεὶ ὦν εἶδον τοὺς εὐνούχους τεθορυβημένους τε καὶ βοῶντας , ἀνά τε ἔδραμον πάλιν ἀμφότεροι καὶ ὡς ἔμαθον τὸ ποιεύμενον πρὸς ἀλκὴν ἐτράποντο .
Seeing the eunuchs in confusion and hearing their cries they both sprang up: and when they realized what was happening they turned to defending themselves.


3.78.2
3470
ὃ μὲν δὴ αὐτῶν φθάνει τὰ τόξα κατελόμενος , ὁ δὲ πρὸς τὴν αἰχμὴν ἐτράπετο .
One rushed to take down a bow, the other went for a spear.


3.78.2
3471
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ συνέμισγον ἀλλήλοισι .
Then the fighting started.


3.78.2
3472
τῷ μὲν δὴ τὰ τόξα ἀναλαβόντι αὐτῶν , ἐόντων τε ἀγχοῦ τῶν πολεμίων καὶ προσκειμένων , ἦν χρηστὰ οὐδέν ·
The one that had caught up the bow found it was no use to him, as the antagonists were close and jostling one another;


3.78.2
3473
ὁ δ’ ἕτερος τῇ αἰχμῇ ἠμύνετο καὶ τοῦτο μὲν Ἀσπαθίνην παίει ἐς τὸν μηρόν , τοῦτο δὲ Ἰνταφρένεα ἐς τὸν ὀφθαλμόν ·
but the other defended himself with his spear, wounding Aspathines in the thigh and Intaphrenes in the eye;


3.78.2
3474
καὶ ἐστερήθη μὲν τοῦ ὀφθαλμοῦ ἐκ τοῦ τρώματος ὁ Ἰνταφρένης , οὐ μέντοι ἀπέθανέ γε .
Intaphrenes lost his eye from the wound but was not killed.


3.78.3
3475
τῶν μὲν δὴ Μάγων οὕτερος τρωματίζει τούτους ·
So one of the Magi wounded these;


3.78.3
3476
ὁ δὲ ἕτερος , ἐπείτε οἱ τὰ τόξα οὐδὲν χρηστὰ ἐγίνετο , ἦν γὰρ δὴ θάλαμος ἐσέχων ἐς τὸν ἀνδρεῶνα , ἐς τοῦτον καταφεύγει , θέλων αὐτοῦ προσθεῖναι τὰς θύρας , καί οἱ συνεσπίπτουσι τῶν ἑπτὰ δύο , Δαρεῖός τε καὶ Γοβρύης .
the other, as the bow was no use to him, fled into a chamber adjoining the men's apartment and would have shut its door.


3.78.4
3477
συμπλακέντος δὲ Γοβρύεω τῷ Μάγῳ ὁ Δαρεῖος ἐπεστεὼς ἠπόρεε οἷα ἐν σκότεϊ , προμηθεόμενος μὴ πλήξῃ τὸν Γοβρύην .
Two of the seven flung into the room with him, Darius and Gobryas; as Gobryas and the Magus wrestled together, Darius stood helpless in the darkness, afraid of stabbing Gobryas.


3.78.5
3478
ὁρέων δέ μιν ἀργὸν ἐπεστεῶτα ὁ Γοβρύης εἴρετο ὅ τι οὐ χρᾶται τῇ χειρί ·
Gobryas, seeing Darius stand helpless, asked why he did not lend a hand;


3.78.5
3479
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " Προμηθεόμενος σέο , μὴ πλήξω " .
and he said, “Because I am afraid for you, that I might stab you.”


3.78.5
3480
Γοβρύης δὲ ἀμείβετο " ὤθεε τὸ ξίφος καὶ δι’ ἀμφοτέρων " .
And Gobryas answered, “Stick your sword even if it goes through us both.”


3.78.5
3481
Δαρεῖος δὲ πειθόμενος ὦσέ τε τὸ ἐγχειρίδιον καὶ ἔτυχέ κως τοῦ Μάγου .
So Darius complying stabbed with his knife and somehow stuck the Magus.


3.79.1
3482
ἀποκτείναντες δὲ τοὺς Μάγους καὶ ἀποταμόντες αὐτῶν τὰς κεφαλάς , τοὺς μὲν τρωματίας ἑωυτῶν αὐτοῦ λείπουσι καὶ ἀδυνασίης εἵνεκεν καὶ φυλακῆς τῆς ἀκροπόλιος , οἱ δὲ πέντε αὐτῶν ἔχοντες τῶν Μάγων τὰς κεφαλὰς ἔθεον βοῇ τε καὶ πατάγῳ χρεώμενοι , καὶ Πέρσας τοὺς ἄλλους ἐπεκαλέοντο ἐξηγεόμενοί τε τὸ πρῆγμα καὶ δεικνύοντες τὰς κεφαλάς , καὶ ἅμα ἔκτεινον πάντα τινὰ τῶν Μάγων τὸν ἐν ποσὶ γινόμενον .
When they had killed the Magi and cut off their heads, they left their wounded there because of their infirmity and for the sake of guarding the acropolis, while five of them carrying the Magi's heads ran outside with much shouting and commotion, calling all Persians to aid, telling what they had done and showing the heads; at the same time they killed every Magus that came in their way.


3.79.2
3483
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι μαθόντες τὸ γεγονὸς ἐκ τῶν ἑπτὰ καὶ τῶν Μάγων τὴν ἀπάτην , ἐδικαίευν καὶ αὐτοὶ ἕτερα τοιαῦτα ποιέειν , σπασάμενοι δὲ τὰ ἐγχειρίδια ἔκτεινον ὅκου τινὰ Μάγον εὕρισκον ·
The Persians, when they learned what had been done by the seven and how the Magi had tricked them, resolved to follow the example set, and drew their daggers and killed all the Magi they could find;


3.79.2
3484
εἰ δὲ μὴ νὺξ ἐπελθοῦσα ἔσχε , ἔλιπον ἂν οὐδένα Μάγον .
and if nightfall had not stopped them they would not have left one Magus alive.


3.79.3
3485
ταύτην τὴν ἡμέρην θεραπεύουσι Πέρσαι κοινῇ μάλιστα τῶν ἡμερέων , καὶ ἐν αὐτῇ ὁρτὴν μεγάλην ἀνάγουσι , ἣ κέκληται ὑπὸ Περσέων μαγοφόνια ·
This day is the greatest holy day that all Persians alike keep;


3.79.3
3486
ἐν τῇ Μάγον οὐδένα ἔξεστι φανῆναι ἐς τὸ φῶς , ἀλλὰ κατ’ οἴκους ἑωυτοὺς οἱ Μάγοι ἔχουσι τὴν ἡμέρην ταύτην .
they celebrate a great festival on it, which they call the Massacre of the Magi; while the festival lasts no Magus may go outdoors, but during this day the Magi remain in their houses.


3.80.1
3487
ἐπείτε δὲ κατέστη ὁ θόρυβος καὶ ἐκτὸς πέντε ἡμερέων ἐγένετο , ἐβουλεύοντο οἱ ἐπαναστάντες τοῖσι Μάγοισι περὶ τῶν πάντων πρηγμάτων καὶ ἐλέχθησαν λόγοι ἄπιστοι μὲν ἐνίοισι Ἑλλήνων , ἐλέχθησαν δ’ ὦν .
After the tumult quieted down, and five days passed, the rebels against the Magi held a council on the whole state of affairs, at which sentiments were uttered which to some Greeks seem incredible, but there is no doubt that they were spoken.


3.80.2
3488
Ὀτάνης μὲν ἐκέλευε ἐς μέσον Πέρσῃσι καταθεῖναι τὰ πρήγματα , λέγων τάδε .
Otanes was for turning the government over to the Persian people:


3.80.2
3489
" ἐμοὶ δοκέει ἕνα μὲν ἡμέων μούναρχον μηκέτι γενέσθαι .
“It seems to me,” he said, “that there can no longer be a single sovereign over us,


3.80.2
3490
οὔτε γὰρ ἡδὺ οὔτε ἀγαθόν .
for that is not pleasant or good.


3.80.2
3491
εἴδετε μὲν γὰρ τὴν Καμβύσεω ὕβριν ἐπ’ ὅσον ἐπεξῆλθε , μετεσχήκατε δὲ καὶ τῆς τοῦ Μάγου ὕβριος .
You saw the insolence of Cambyses, how far it went, and you had your share of the insolence of the Magus.


3.80.3
3492
κῶς δ’ ἂν εἴη χρῆμα κατηρτημένον μουναρχίη , τῇ ἔξεστι ἀνευθύνῳ ποιέειν τὰ βούλεται ;
How can monarchy be a fit thing, when the ruler can do what he wants with impunity?


3.80.3
3493
καὶ γὰρ ἂν τὸν ἄριστον ἀνδρῶν πάντων στάντα ἐς ταύτην ἐκτὸς τῶν ἐωθότων νοημάτων στήσειε .
Give this power to the best man on earth, and it would stir him to unaccustomed thoughts.


3.80.3
3494
ἐγγίνεται μὲν γάρ οἱ ὕβρις ὑπὸ τῶν παρεόντων ἀγαθῶν , φθόνος δὲ ἀρχῆθεν ἐμφύεται ἀνθρώπῳ .
Insolence is created in him by the good things to hand, while from birth envy is rooted in man.


3.80.4
3495
δύο δ’ ἔχων ταῦτα ἔχει πᾶσαν κακότητα ·
Acquiring the two he possesses complete evil;


3.80.4
3496
τὰ μὲν γὰρ ὕβρι κεκορημένος ἔρδει πολλὰ καὶ ἀτάσθαλα , τὰ δὲ φθόνῳ .
for being satiated he does many reckless things, some from insolence, some from envy.


3.80.4
3497
καίτοι ἄνδρα γε τύραννον ἄφθονον ἔδει εἶναι , ἔχοντά γε πάντα τὰ ἀγαθά .
And yet an absolute ruler ought to be free of envy, having all good things;


3.80.4
3498
τὸ δὲ ὑπεναντίον τούτου ἐς τοὺς πολιήτας πέφυκε ·
but he becomes the opposite of this towards his citizens;


3.80.4
3499
φθονέει γὰρ τοῖσι ἀρίστοισι περιεοῦσί τε καὶ ζώουσι , χαίρει δὲ τοῖσι κακίστοισι τῶν ἀστῶν , διαβολὰς δὲ ἄριστος ἐνδέκεσθαι .
he envies the best who thrive and live, and is pleased by the worst of his fellows; and he is the best confidant of slander.


3.80.5
3500
ἀναρμοστότατον δὲ πάντων ·
Of all men he is the most inconsistent;


3.80.5
3501
ἤν τε γὰρ αὐτὸν μετρίως θωμάζῃς , ἄχθεται ὅτι οὐ κάρτα θεραπεύεται , ἤν τε θεραπεύῃ τις κάρτα , ἄχθεται ἅτε θωπί .
for if you admire him modestly he is angry that you do not give him excessive attention, but if one gives him excessive attention he is angry because one is a flatterer.


3.80.5
3502
τὰ δὲ δὴ μέγιστα ἔρχομαι ἐρέων ·
But I have yet worse to say of him than that;


3.80.5
3503
νόμαιά τε κινέει πάτρια καὶ βιᾶται γυναῖκας κτείνει τε ἀκρίτους .
he upsets the ancestral ways and rapes women and kills indiscriminately.


3.80.6
3504
πλῆθος δὲ ἄρχον πρῶτα μὲν οὔνομα πάντων κάλλιστον ἔχει , ἰσονομίην , δεύτερα δὲ τούτων τῶν ὁ μούναρχος ποιέει οὐδέν ·
But the rule of the multitude has in the first place the loveliest name of all, equality,


3.80.6
3505
πάλῳ μὲν ἀρχὰς ἄρχει , ὑπεύθυνον δὲ ἀρχὴν ἔχει , βουλεύματα δὲ πάντα ἐς τὸ κοινὸν ἀναφέρει .
and does in the second place none of the things that a monarch does. It determines offices by lot, and holds power accountable, and conducts all deliberating publicly.


3.80.6
3506
τίθεμαι ὦν γνώμην μετέντας ἡμέας μουναρχίην τὸ πλῆθος ἀέξειν ·
Therefore I give my opinion that we make an end of monarchy and exalt the multitude,


3.80.6
3507
ἐν γὰρ τῷ πολλῷ ἔνι τὰ πάντα " .
for all things are possible for the majority.”


3.81.1
3508
Ὀτάνης μὲν δὴ ταύτην γνώμην ἐσέφερε ·
Such was the judgment of Otanes:


3.81.1
3509
Μεγάβυζος δὲ ὀλιγαρχίῃ ἐκέλευε ἐπιτρέπειν , λέγων τάδε .
but Megabyzus urged that they resort to an oligarchy.


3.81.1
3510
" τὰ μὲν Ὀτάνης εἶπε τυραννίδα παύων , λελέχθω κ- ἐμοὶ ταῦτα , τὰ δ’ ἐς τὸ πλῆθος ἄνωγε φέρειν τὸ κράτος , γνώμης τῆς ἀρίστης ἡμάρτηκε ·
“I agree,” said he, “with all that Otanes says against the rule of one; but when he tells you to give the power to the multitude, his judgment strays from the best.


3.81.1
3511
ὁμίλου γὰρ ἀχρηίου οὐδέν ἐστι ἀξυνετώτερον οὐδὲ ὑβριστότερον .
Nothing is more foolish and violent than a useless mob;


3.81.2
3512
καίτοι τυράννου ὕβριν φεύγοντας ἄνδρας ἐς δήμου ἀκολάστου ὕβριν πεσεῖν ἐστὶ οὐδαμῶς ἀνασχετόν .
for men fleeing the insolence of a tyrant to fall victim to the insolence of the unguided populace is by no means to be tolerated.


3.81.2
3513
ὃ μὲν γὰρ εἴ τι ποιέει , γινώσκων ποιέει , τῷ δὲ οὐδὲ γινώσκειν ἔνι ·
Whatever the one does, he does with knowledge, but for the other knowledge is impossible;


3.81.2
3514
κῶς γὰρ ἂν γινώσκοι ὃς οὔτ’ ἐδιδάχθη οὔτε εἶδε καλὸν οὐδὲν οἰκήιον ,ὠθέει τε ἐμπεσὼν τὰ πρήγματα ἄνευ νόου , χειμάρρῳ ποταμῷ εἴκελος ;
how can they have knowledge who have not learned or seen for themselves what is best, but always rush headlong and drive blindly onward, like a river in flood?


3.81.3
3515
δήμῳ μέν νυν , οἳ Πέρσῃσι κακὸν νοέουσι , οὗτοι χράσθων , ἡμεῖς δὲ ἀνδρῶν τῶν ἀρίστων ἐπιλέξαντες ὁμιλίην τούτοισι περιθέωμεν τὸ κράτος ·
Let those like democracy who wish ill to Persia; but let us choose a group of the best men and invest these with the power.


3.81.3
3516
ἐν γὰρ δὴ τούτοισι καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐνεσόμεθα ·
For we ourselves shall be among them,


3.81.3
3517
ἀρίστων δὲ ἀνδρῶν οἰκὸς ἄριστα βουλεύματα γίνεσθαι " .
and among the best men it is likely that there will be the best counsels.”


3.82.1
3518
Μεγάβυζος μὲν δὴ ταύτην γνώμην ἐσέφερε ·
Such was the judgment of Megabyzus.


3.82.1
3519
τρίτος δὲ Δαρεῖος ἀπεδείκνυτο γνώμην , λέγων " ἐμοὶ δὲ τὰ μὲν εἶπε Μεγάβυζος ἐς τὸ πλῆθος ἔχοντα δοκέει ὀρθῶς λέξαι , τὰ δὲ ἐς ὀλιγαρχίην οὐκ ὀρθῶς .
Darius was the third to express his opinion. “It seems to me,” he said, “that Megabyzus speaks well concerning democracy but not concerning oligarchy.


3.82.1
3520
τριῶν γὰρ προκειμένων καὶ πάντων τῷ λόγῳ ἀρίστων ἐόντων , δήμου τε ἀρίστου καὶ ὀλιγαρχίης καὶ μουνάρχου , πολλῷ τοῦτο προέχειν λέγω .
For if the three are proposed and all are at their best for the sake of argument, the best democracy and oligarchy and monarchy, I hold that monarchy is by far the most excellent.


3.82.2
3521
ἀνδρὸς γὰρ ἑνὸς τοῦ ἀρίστου οὐδὲν ἄμεινον ἂν φανείη ·
One could describe nothing better than the rule of the one best man;


3.82.2
3522
γνώμῃ γὰρ τοιαύτῃ χρεώμενος ἐπιτροπεύοι ἂν ἀμωμήτως τοῦ πλήθεος , σιγῷτό τε ἂν βουλεύματα ἐπὶ δυσμενέας ἄνδρας οὕτω μάλιστα .
using the best judgment, he will govern the multitude with perfect wisdom, and best conceal plans made for the defeat of enemies.


3.82.3
3523
ἐν δὲ ὀλιγαρχίῃ πολλοῖσι ἀρετὴν ἐπασκέουσι ἐς τὸ κοινὸν ἔχθεα ἴδια ἰσχυρὰ φιλέει ἐγγίνεσθαι ·
But in an oligarchy, the desire of many to do the state good service often produces bitter hate among them;


3.82.3
3524
αὐτὸς γὰρ ἕκαστος βουλόμενος κορυφαῖος εἶναι γνώμῃσί τε νικᾶν ἐς ἔχθεα μεγάλα ἀλλήλοισι ἀπικνέονται , ἐξ ὧν στάσιες ἐγγίνονται , ἐκ δὲ τῶν στασίων φόνος ·
for because each one wishes to be first and to make his opinions prevail, violent hate is the outcome.


3.82.3
3525
ἐκ δὲ τοῦ φόνου ἀπέβη ἐς μουναρχίην , καὶ ἐν τούτῳ διέδεξε ὅσῳ ἐστὶ τοῦτο ἄριστον .
From this comes faction and from faction killing, and from killing it reverts to monarchy, and by this is shown how much better monarchy is.


3.82.4
3526
δήμου τε αὖ ἄρχοντος ἀδύνατα μὴ οὐ κακότητα ἐγγίνεσθαι ·
Then again, when the people rule it is impossible that wickedness will not occur;


3.82.4
3527
κακότητος τοίνυν ἐγγινομένης ἐς τὰ κοινὰ ἔχθεα μὲν οὐκ ἐγγίνεται τοῖσι κακοῖσι , φιλίαι δὲ ἰσχυραί ·
and when wickedness towards the state occurs, hatred does not result among the wicked, but strong alliances;


3.82.4
3528
οἱ γὰρ κακοῦντες τὰ κοινὰ συγκύψαντες ποιεῦσι .
for those that want to do the state harm conspire to do it together.


3.82.4
3529
τοῦτο δὲ τοιοῦτο γίνεται ἐς ὃ ἂν προστάς τις τοῦ δήμου τοὺς τοιούτους παύσῃ .
This goes on until one of the people rises to stop such men.


3.82.4
3530
ἐκ δὲ αὐτῶν θωμάζεται οὗτος δὴ ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου , θωμαζόμενος δὲ ἀν’ ὦν ἐφάνη μούναρχος ἐών , καὶ ἐν τούτῳ δηλοῖ καὶ οὗτος ὡς ἡ μουναρχίη κράτιστον .
He therefore becomes the people's idol, and being their idol is made their monarch; and thus he also proves that monarchy is best.


3.82.5
3531
ἑνὶ δὲ ἔπεϊ πάντα συλλαβόντα εἰπεῖν , κόθεν ἡμῖν ἡ ἐλευθερίη ἐγένετο καὶ τεῦ δόντος ;
But (to conclude the whole matter in one word) tell me, where did freedom come from for us and who gave it,


3.82.5
3532
κότερα παρὰ τοῦ δήμου ἢ ὀλιγαρχίης ἢ μουνάρχου ;
from the people or an oligarchy or a single ruler?


3.82.5
3533
ἔχω τοίνυν γνώμην ἡμέας ἐλευθερωθέντας διὰ ἕνα ἄνδρα τὸ τοιοῦτο περιστέλλειν , χωρίς τε τούτου πατρίους νόμους μὴ λύειν ἔχοντας εὖ ·
I believe, therefore, that we who were liberated through one man should maintain such a government, and, besides this, that we should not alter our ancestral ways that are good;


3.82.5
3534
οὐ γὰρ ἄμεινον " .
that would not be better.”


3.83.1
3535
γνῶμαι μὲν δὴ τρεῖς αὗται προεκέατο , οἱ δὲ τέσσερες τῶν ἑπτὰ ἀνδρῶν προσέθεντο ταύτῃ .
Having to choose between these three options, four of the seven men preferred the last.


3.83.1
3536
ὡς δὲ ἑσσώθη τῇ γνώμῃ ὁ Ὀτάνης Πέρσῃσι ἰσονομίην σπεύδων ποιῆσαι , ἔλεξε ἐς μέσον αὐτοῖσι τάδε .
Then Otanes, whose proposal to give the Persians equality was defeated, spoke thus among them all:


3.83.2
3537
" ἄνδρες στασιῶται , δῆλα γὰρ δὴ ὅτι δεῖ ἕνα γε τινὰ ἡμέων βασιλέα γενέσθαι , ἤτοι κλήρῳ γε λαχόντα , ἢ ἐπιτρεψάντων τῷ Περσέων πλήθεϊ τὸν ἂν ἐκεῖνο ἕληται , ἢ ἄλλῃ τινὶ μηχανῇ .
“Fellow partisans, it is plain that one of us must be made king (whether by lot, or entrusted with the office by the choice of the Persians, or in some other way),


3.83.2
3538
ἐγὼ μέν νυν ὑμῖν οὐκ ἐναγωνιεῦμαι ·
but I shall not compete with you;


3.83.2
3539
οὔτε γὰρ ἄρχειν οὔτε ἄρχεσθαι ἐθέλω ·
I desire neither to rule nor to be ruled;


3.83.2
3540
ἐπὶ τούτῳ δὲ ὑπεξίσταμαι τῆς ἀρχῆς , ἐπ’ ᾧ τε ὑπ’ οὐδενὸς ὑμέων ἄρξομαι , οὔτε αὐτὸς ἐγὼ οὔτε οἱ ἀπ’ ἐμεῦ αἰεὶ γινόμενοι " .
but if I waive my claim to be king, I make this condition, that neither I nor any of my descendants shall be subject to any one of you.”


3.83.3
3541
τούτου εἴπαντος ταῦτα ὡς συνεχώρεον οἱ ἓξ ἐπὶ τούτοισι , οὗτος μὲν δή σφι οὐκ ἐνηγωνίζετο ἀλλ’ ἐκ μέσου κατῆστο , καὶ νῦν αὕτη ἡ οἰκίη διατελέει μούνη ἐλευθέρη ἐοῦσα Περσέων καὶ ἄρχεται τοσαῦτα ὅσα αὐτὴ θέλει , νόμους οὐκ ὑπερβαίνουσα τοὺς Περσέων .
To these terms the six others agreed; Otanes took no part in the contest but stood aside; and to this day his house (and no other in    Persia   ) remains free, and is ruled only so far as it is willing to be, so long as it does not transgress Persian law.


3.84.1
3542
οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ τῶν ἑπτὰ ἐβουλεύοντο ὡς βασιλέα δικαιότατα στήσονται ·
The rest of the seven then considered what was the fairest way of making a king;


3.84.1
3543
καί σφι ἔδοξε Ὀτάνῃ μὲν καὶ τοῖσι ἀπὸ Ὀτάνεω αἰεὶ γινομένοισι , ἢν ἐς ἄλλον τινὰ τῶν ἑπτὰ ἔλθῃ ἡ βασιληίη , ἐξαίρετα δίδοσθαι ἐσθῆτά τε Μηδικὴν ἔτεος ἑκάστου καὶ τὴν πᾶσαν δωρεὴν ἣ γίνεται ἐν Πέρσῃσι τιμιωτάτη .
and they decided that if another of the seven than Otanes should gain the royal power, that Otanes and his descendants should receive a yearly gift of Median clothing and everything else that the Persians hold most valuable.


3.84.1
3544
τοῦδε δὲ εἵνεκεν ἐβούλευσάν οἱ δίδοσθαι ταῦτα , ὅτι ἐβούλευσέ τε πρῶτος τὸ πρῆγμα καὶ συνέστησε αὐτούς .
The reason for this decision was that it was he who had first planned the matter and assembled the conspirators.


3.84.2
3545
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ Ὀτάνῃ ἐξαίρετα , τάδε δὲ ἐς τὸ κοινὸν ἐβούλευσαν , παριέναι ἐς τὰ βασιλήια πάντα τὸν βουλόμενον τῶν ἑπτὰ ἄνευ ἐσαγγελέος , ἢν μὴ τυγχάνῃ εὕδων μετὰ γυναικὸς βασιλεύς , γαμέειν δὲ μὴ ἐξεῖναι ἄλλοθεν τῷ βασιλέι ἢ ἐκ τῶν συνεπαναστάντων .
For Otanes, then, they choose this particular honor; but with regard to all of them they decreed that any one of the seven should, if he wished, enter the king's palace unannounced, except when the king was sleeping with a woman; and that the king should be forbidden to take a wife except from the households of the conspirators.


3.84.3
3546
περὶ δὲ τῆς βασιληίης ἐβούλευσαν τοιόνδε ·
As for the making of a king, they decided the following sort of thing.


3.84.3
3547
ὅτευ ἂν ὁ ἵππος ἡλίου ἐπανατέλλοντος πρῶτος φθέγξηται , ἐν τῷ προαστείῳ αὐτῶν ἐπιβεβηκότων , τοῦτον ἔχειν τὴν βασιληίην .
He should be elected whose horse, after they were all in their saddles in the suburb of the city, should first be heard to neigh at sunrise.


3.85.1
3548
Δαρείῳ δὲ ἦν ἱπποκόμος ἀνὴρ σοφός , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Οἰβάρης .
Now Darius had a clever groom, whose name was Oebares.


3.85.1
3549
πρὸς τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα , ἐπείτε διελύθησαν , ἔλεξε Δαρεῖος τάδε .
When the council broke up, Darius said to him:


3.85.1
3550
" Οἴβαρες , ἡμῖν δέδοκται περὶ τῆς βασιληίης ποιέειν κατὰ τάδε ·
“Oebares, we have resolved to do as follows about the kingship:


3.85.1
3551
ὅτευ ἂν ὁ ἵππος πρῶτος φθέγξηται ἅμα τῷ ἡλίῳ ἀνιόντι αὐτῶν ἐπαναβεβηκότων , τοῦτον ἔχειν τὴν βασιληίην .
he shall be elected whose horse, after we are all mounted on our horses in the suburb of the city, neighs first at sunrise.


3.85.1
3552
νῦν ὦν εἴ τινα ἔχεις σοφίην , μηχανῶ ὡς ἂν ἡμεῖς σχῶμεν τοῦτο τὸ γέρας καὶ μὴ ἄλλος τις " .
Now if you have any cunning, figure out how we and no one else can win this prize.”


3.85.2
3553
ἀμείβεται Οἰβάρης τοῖσιδε .
Oebares answered,


3.85.2
3554
" εἰ μὲν δὴ ὦ δέσποτα ἐν τούτῳ τοι ἐστὶ ἢ βασιλέα εἶναι ἢ μή , θάρσεε τούτου εἵνεκεν καὶ θυμὸν ἔχε ἀγαθόν , ὡς βασιλεὺς οὐδεὶς ἄλλος πρὸ σεῦ ἔσται ·
“Master, if this is to determine whether you become king or not, be confident for this reason and have an easy mind, for no one else shall be king before you,


3.85.2
3555
τοιαῦτα ἔχω φάρμακα " .
such are the tricks I have.”


3.85.2
3556
λέγει Δαρεῖος " εἰ τοίνυν τι τοιοῦτον ἔχεις σόφισμα , ὥρη μηχανᾶσθαι καὶ μὴ ἀναβάλλεσθαι , ὡς τῆς ἐπιούσης ἡμέρης ὁ ἀγὼν ἡμῖν ἐστί " .
“Then,” said Darius, “if you have any trick such as you say, use it and don't put it off, for tomorrow is the day of decision.”


3.85.3
3557
ἀκούσας ταῦτα ὁ Οἰβάρης ποιέει τοιόνδε ·
When Oebares heard that, he did as follows.


3.85.3
3558
ὡς ἐγίνετο ἡ νύξ , τῶν θηλέων ἵππων μίαν , τὴν ὁ Δαρείου ἵππος ἔστεργε μάλιστα , ταύτην ἀγαγὼν ἐς τὸ προάστειον κατέδησε καὶ ἐπήγαγε τὸν Δαρείου ἵππον , καὶ τὰ μὲν πολλὰ περιῆγε ἀγχοῦ τῇ ἵππῳ ἐγχρίμπτων τῇ θηλέῃ , τέλος δὲ ἐπῆκε ὀχεῦσαι τὸν ἵππον .
At nightfall he brought one of the mares which Darius' horse particularly favored, and tethered her in the suburb of the city; then bringing Darius' horse, he repeatedly led him near the horse, bumping against the mare, and at last let the horse mount.


3.86.1
3559
ἅμ’ ἡμέρῃ δὲ διαφωσκούσῃ οἱ ἓξ κατὰ συνεθήκαντο παρῆσαν ἐπὶ τῶν ἵππων ·
At dawn of day the six came on horseback as they had agreed.


3.86.1
3560
διεξελαυνόντων δὲ κατὰ τὸ προάστειον , ὡς κατὰ τοῦτο τὸ χωρίον ἐγίνοντο ἵνα τῆς παροιχομένης νυκτὸς κατεδέδετο ἡ θήλεα ἵππος , ἐνθαῦτα ὁ Δαρείου ἵππος προσδραμὼν ἐχρεμέτισε ·
As they rode out through the suburb and came to the place where the mare had been tethered in the past night, Darius' horse trotted forward and whinnied;


3.86.2
3561
ἅμα δὲ τῷ ἵππῳ τοῦτο ποιήσαντι ἀστραπὴ ἐξ αἰθρίης καὶ βροντὴ ἐγένετο .
and as he so did there came lightning and thunder out of a clear sky.


3.86.2
3562
ἐπιγενόμενα δὲ ταῦτα τῷ Δαρείῳ ἐτελέωσέ μιν ὥσπερ ἐκ συνθέτου τευ γενόμενα ·
These signs given to Darius were thought to be foreordained and made his election perfect;


3.86.2
3563
οἳ δὲ καταθορόντες ἀπὸ τῶν ἵππων προσεκύνεον τὸν Δαρεῖον .
his companions leapt from their horses and bowed to him.


3.87.1
3564
οἳ μὲν δή φασι τὸν Οἰβάρεα ταῦτα μηχανήσασθαι , οἳ δὲ τοιάδε ( καὶ γὰρ ἐπ’ ἀμφότερα λέγεται ὑπὸ Περσέων ) , ὡς τῆς ἵππου ταύτης τῶν ἄρθρων ἐπιψαύσας τῇ χειρὶ ἔχοι αὐτὴν κρύψας ἐν τῇσι ἀναξυρίσι ·
Some say that this was Oebares' plan; but there is another story in Persia besides this: that he rubbed this mare's vulva with his hand, which he then kept inside his clothing until the six were about to let go their horses at sunrise,


3.87.1
3565
ὡς δὲ ἅμα τῷ ἡλίῳ ἀνιόντι ἀπίεσθαι μέλλειν τοὺς ἵππους , τὸν Οἰβάρεα τοῦτον ἐξείραντα τὴν χεῖρα πρὸς τοῦ Δαρείου ἵππου τοὺς μυκτῆρας προσενεῖκαι , τὸν δὲ αἰσθόμενον φριμάξασθαί τε καὶ χρεμετίσαι .
when he took his hand out and held it to the nostrils of Darius' horse, which at once snorted and whinnied.


3.88.1
3566
Δαρεῖός τε δὴ ὁ Ὑστάσπεος βασιλεὺς ἀπεδέδεκτο , καί οἱ ἦσαν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ πάντες κατήκοοι πλὴν Ἀραβίων , Κύρου τε καταστρεψαμένου καὶ ὕστερον αὖτις Καμβύσεω .
So Darius son of Hystaspes was made king, and the whole of Asia, which Cyrus first and Cambyses after him had conquered, was subject to him, except the Arabians;


3.88.1
3567
Ἀράβιοι δὲ οὐδαμὰ κατήκουσαν ἐπὶ δουλοσύνῃ Πέρσῃσι , ἀλλὰ ξεῖνοι ἐγένοντο παρέντες Καμβύσεα ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον ·
these did not yield as of slaves to the Persians, but were united to them by friendship, having given Cambyses passage into Egypt.


3.88.1
3568
ἀεκόντων γὰρ Ἀραβίων οὐκ ἂν ἐσβάλοιεν Πέρσαι ἐς Αἴγυπτον .
The Persians could not enter Egypt without the consent of the Arabians.


3.88.2
3569
γάμους τε τοὺς πρώτους ἐγάμεε Πέρσῃσι ὁ Δαρεῖος , Κύρου μὲν δύο θυγατέρας Ἄτοσσάν τε καὶ Ἀρτυστώνην , τὴν μὲν Ἄτοσσαν προσυνοικήσασαν Καμβύσῃ τε τῷ ἀδελφεῷ καὶ αὖτις τῷ Μάγῳ , τὴν δὲ Ἀρτυστώνην παρθένον ·
Darius took wives from the noblest houses of    Persia   , marrying Cyrus' daughters Atossa and Artystone; Atossa had been a wife of her brother Cambyses and afterwards of the Magus; Artystone was a virgin.


3.88.3
3570
ἑτέρην δὲ Σμέρδιος τοῦ Κύρου θυγατέρα ἔγημε , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Πάρμυς ·
He also married a daughter of Cyrus' son Smerdis, whose name was Parmys,


3.88.3
3571
ἔσχε δὲ καὶ τὴν τοῦ Ὀτάνεω θυγατέρα , ἣ τὸν Μάγον κατάδηλον ἐποίησε ·
and the daughter of Otanes who had discovered the truth about the Magus;


3.88.3
3572
δυνάμιός τε πάντα οἱ ἐπιμπλέατο .
and everything was full of his power.


3.88.3
3573
πρῶτον μέν νυν τύπον ποιησάμενος λίθινον ἔστησε ·
First he made and set up a carved stone,


3.88.3
3574
ζῷον δέ οἱ ἐνῆν ἀνὴρ ἱππεύς , ἐπέγραψε δὲ γράμματα λέγοντα τάδε ·
Upon this was cut the figure of a horseman, with this inscription:


3.88.3
3575
" Δαρεῖος ὁ Ὑστάσπεος σύν τε τοῦ ἵππου τῇ ἀρετῇ " τὸ οὔνομα λέγων " καὶ Οἰβάρεος τοῦ ἱπποκόμου ἐκτήσατο τὴν Περσέων βασιληίην " .
“Darius son of Hystaspes, aided by the excellence of his horse” (here followed the horse's name) “and of Oebares his groom, got possession of the kingdom of Persia.”


3.89.1
3576
ποιήσας δὲ ταῦτα ἐν Πέρσῃσι ἀρχὰς κατεστήσατο εἴκοσι , τὰς αὐτοὶ καλέουσι σατραπηίας ·
Having done these things in Persia, he divided his dominions into twenty provinces, which they call satrapies;


3.89.1
3577
καταστήσας δὲ τὰς ἀρχὰς καὶ ἄρχοντας ἐπιστήσας ἐτάξατο φόρους οἱ προσιέναι κατὰ ἔθνεά τε καὶ πρὸς τοῖσι ἔθνεσι τοὺς πλησιοχώρους προστάσσων , καὶ ὑπερβαίνων τοὺς προσεχέας τὰ ἑκαστέρω ἄλλοισι ἄλλα ἔθνεα νέμων .
and having divided his dominions and appointed governors, he instructed each people to pay him tribute, consolidating neighboring peoples and distributing outlying peoples among different provinces, passing over those adjoining.


3.89.2
3578
ἀρχὰς δὲ καὶ φόρων πρόσοδον τὴν ἐπέτειον κατὰ τάδε διεῖλε .
I will now show how he divided his provinces and the tributes which were paid him yearly.


3.89.2
3579
τοῖσι μὲν αὐτῶν ἀργύριον ἀπαγινέουσι εἴρητο Βαβυλώνιον σταθμὸν τάλαντον ἀπαγινέειν , τοῖσι δὲ χρυσίον ἀπαγινέουσι Εὐβοϊκόν .
Those that paid in silver were required to render the weight of a Babylonian talent; those that paid in gold, of a Euboic talent;


3.89.2
3580
τὸ δὲ Βαβυλώνιον τάλαντον δύναται Εὐβοΐδας ὀκτὼ καὶ ἑβδομήκοντα μνέας .
the Babylonian talent being equal to seventy-eight Euboic minae.


3.89.3
3581
ἐπὶ γὰρ Κύρου ἄρχοντος καὶ αὖτις Καμβύσεω ἦν κατεστηκὸς οὐδὲν φόρου πέρι , ἀλλὰ δῶρα ἀγίνεον .
In the reigns of Cyrus and Cambyses after him there was no fixed tribute, but payment was made in gifts.


3.89.3
3582
διὰ δὲ ταύτην τὴν ἐπίταξιν τοῦ φόρου καὶ παραπλήσια ταύτῃ ἄλλα λέγουσι Πέρσαι ὡς Δαρεῖος μὲν ἦν κάπηλος , Καμβύσης δὲ δεσπότης , Κῦρος δὲ πατήρ , ὃ μὲν ὅτι ἐκαπήλευε πάντα τὰ πρήγματα , ὁ δὲ ὅτι χαλεπός τε ἦν καὶ ὀλίγωρος , ὁ δὲ ὅτι ἤπιός τε καὶ ἀγαθά σφι πάντα ἐμηχανήσατο .
It is because of this fixing of tribute, and other similar ordinances, that the Persians called Darius the merchant, Cambyses the master, and Cyrus the father; for Darius made petty profit out of everything, Cambyses was harsh and arrogant, Cyrus was merciful and always worked for their well-being.


3.90.1
3583
ἀπὸ μὲν δὴ Ἰώνων καὶ Μαγνήτων τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ καὶ Αἰολέων καὶ Καρῶν καὶ Λυκίων καὶ Μιλυέων καὶ Παμφύλων ( εἷς γὰρ ἦν οἱ τεταγμένος οὗτος φόρος ) προσήιε τετρακόσια τάλαντα ἀργυρίου .
The Ionians, Magnesians of Asia, Aeolians, Carians, Lycians, Milyans, and Pamphylians, on whom Darius laid one joint tribute, paid a revenue of four hundred talents of silver.


3.90.1
3584
ὁ μὲν δὴ πρῶτος οὗτός οἱ νομὸς κατεστήκεε , ἀπὸ δὲ Μυσῶν καὶ Λυδῶν καὶ Λασονίων καὶ Καβαλέων καὶ Ὑτεννέων πεντακόσια τάλαντα ·
This was established as his first province. The Mysians, Lydians, Lasonians, Cabalians, and Hytennians paid five hundred talents;


3.90.1
3585
δεύτερος νομὸς οὗτος .
this was the second province.


3.90.2
3586
ἀπὸ δὲ Ἑλλησποντίων τῶν ἐπὶ δεξιὰ ἐσπλέοντι καὶ Φρυγῶν καὶ Θρηίκων τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ καὶ Παφλαγόνων καὶ Μαριανδυνῶν καὶ Συρίων ἑξήκοντα καὶ τριηκόσια τάλαντα ἦν φόρος ·
The third comprised the Hellespontians on the right of the entrance of the straits, the Phrygians, Thracians of Asia, Paphlagonians, Mariandynians, and Syrians;


3.90.2
3587
νομὸς τρίτος οὗτος .
these paid three hundred and sixty talents of tribute.


3.90.3
3588
ἀπὸ δὲ Κιλίκων ἵπποι τε λευκοὶ ἑξήκοντα καὶ τριηκόσιοι , ἑκάστης ἡμέρης εἷς γινόμενος , καὶ τάλαντα ἀργυρίου πεντακόσια ·
The fourth province was Cilicia.


3.90.3
3589
τούτων δὲ τεσσεράκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν ἐς τὴν φρουρέουσαν ἵππον τὴν Κιλικίην χώρην ἀναισιμοῦτο , τὰ δὲ τριηκόσια καὶ ἑξήκοντα Δαρείῳ ἐφοίτα ·
This rendered three hundred and sixty white horses, one for each day in the year, and five hundred talents of silver.


3.90.3
3590
νομὸς τέταρτος οὗτος .
A hundred and forty of these were expended on the horsemen who were the guard of Cilicia; the three hundred and sixty that remained were paid to Darius.


3.91.1
3591
ἀπὸ δὲ Ποσιδηίου πόλιος , τὴν Ἀμφίλοχος ὁ Ἀμφιάρεω οἴκισε ἐπ’ οὔροισι τοῖσι Κιλίκων τε καὶ Σύρων , ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ ταύτης μέχρι Αἰγύπτου , πλὴν μοίρης τῆς Ἀραβίων ( ταῦτα γὰρ ἦν ἀτελέα ) , πεντήκοντα καὶ τριηκόσια τάλαντα φόρος ἦν .
The fifth province was the country (except the part belonging to the Arabians, which paid no tribute) between Posideion, a city founded on the Cilician and Syrian border by Amphilochus son of Amphiaraus, and Egypt;


3.91.1
3592
ἔστι δὲ ἐν τῷ νομῷ τούτῳ Φοινίκη τε πᾶσα καὶ Συρίη ἡ Παλαιστίνη καλεομένη καὶ Κύπρος ·
this paid three hundred and fifty talents;


3.91.1
3593
νομὸς πέμπτος οὗτος .
in this province was all Phoenicia, and the part of Syria called Palestine, and Cyprus.


3.91.2
3594
ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου δὲ καὶ Λιβύων τῶν προσεχέων Αἰγύπτῳ καὶ Κυρήνης τε καὶ Βάρκης ( ἐς γὰρ τὸν Αἰγύπτιον νομὸν αὗται ἐκεκοσμέατο ) ἑπτακόσια προσήιε τάλαντα , πάρεξ τοῦ ἐκ τῆς Μοίριος λίμνης γινομένου ἀργυρίου , τὸ ἐγίνετο ἐκ τῶν ἰχθύων ·
The sixth province was    Egypt    and the neighboring parts of    Libya   , and    Cyrene    and    Barca   , all of which were included in the province of    Egypt   . From here came seven hundred talents, besides the income in silver from the fish of the    lake Moeris   ;


3.91.3
3595
τούτου τε δὴ χωρὶς τοῦ ἀργυρίου καὶ τοῦ ἐπιμετρουμένου σίτου προσήιε ἑπτακόσια τάλαντα ·
besides that silver and the assessment of grain that was given also, seven hundred talents were paid;


3.91.3
3596
σίτου γὰρ δύο καὶ δέκα μυριάδας Περσέων τε τοῖσι ἐν τῷ Λευκῷ τείχεϊ τῷ ἐν Μέμφι κατοικημένοισι καταμετρέουσι καὶ τοῖσι τούτων ἐπικούροισι .
for a hundred and twenty thousand bushels of grain were also assigned to the Persians quartered at the White Wall of Memphis and their allies.


3.91.3
3597
νομὸς ἕκτος οὗτος .
this was the sixth province.


3.91.4
3598
Σατταγύδαι δὲ καὶ Γανδάριοι καὶ Δαδίκαι τε καὶ Ἀπαρύται ἐς τ- αὐτὸ τεταγμένοι ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν τάλαντα προσέφερον ·
The Sattagydae, Gandarii, Dadicae, and Aparytae paid together a hundred and seventy talents;


3.91.4
3599
νομὸς δὲ οὗτος ἕβδομος .
this was the seventh province;


3.91.4
3600
ἀπὸ Σούσων δὲ καὶ τῆς ἄλλης Κισσίων χώρης τριηκόσια ·
From Susa and the rest of the Cissian country: three hundred talents.


3.91.4
3601
νομὸς ὄγδοος οὗτος .
This was the eighth province.


3.92.1
3602
ἀπὸ Βαβυλῶνος δὲ καὶ τῆς λοιπῆς Ἀσσυρίης χίλιά οἱ προσήιε τάλαντα ἀργυρίου καὶ παῖδες ἐκτομίαι πεντακόσιοι ·
From Babylon and the rest of Assyria came to Darius a thousand talents of silver and five hundred castrated boys;


3.92.1
3603
νομὸς εἴνατος οὗτος .
this was the ninth province;


3.92.1
3604
ἀπὸ δὲ Ἀγβατάνων καὶ τῆς λοιπῆς Μηδικῆς καὶ Παρικανίων καὶ Ὀρθοκορυβαντίων πεντήκοντά τε καὶ τετρακόσια τάλαντα ·
Ecbatana and the rest of Media, with the Paricanians and Orthocorybantians, paid four hundred and fifty talents,


3.92.1
3605
νομὸς δέκατος οὗτος .
and was the tenth province.


3.92.2
3606
Κάσπιοι δὲ καὶ Παυσίκαι καὶ Παντίμαθοί τε καὶ Δαρεῖται ἐς τ- αὐτὸ συμφέροντες διηκόσια τάλαντα ἀπαγίνεον ·
The eleventh comprised the Caspii, Pausicae, Pantimathi, and Daritae, paying jointly two hundred;


3.92.2
3607
νομὸς ἑνδέκατος οὗτος .
this was the eleventh province.


3.93.1
3608
ἀπὸ Βακτριανῶν δὲ μέχρι Αἰγλῶν ἑξήκοντα καὶ τριηκόσια τάλαντα φόρος ἦν ·
The twelfth, the Bactrians as far as the land of the Aegli;


3.93.1
3609
νομὸς δυωδέκατος οὗτος .
these paid three hundred and sixty.


3.93.1
3610
ἀπὸ Πακτυϊκῆς δὲ καὶ Ἀρμενίων καὶ τῶν προσεχέων μέχρι τοῦ πόντου τοῦ Εὐξείνου τετρακόσια τάλαντα ·
The thirteenth, the Pactyic country and Armenia and the lands adjoining as far as the Euxine sea;


3.93.1
3611
νομὸς τρίτος καὶ δέκατος οὗτος .
these paid four hundred.


3.93.2
3612
ἀπὸ δὲ Σαγαρτίων καὶ Σαραγγέων καὶ Θαμαναίων καὶ Οὐτίων καὶ Μύκων καὶ τῶν ἐν τῇσι νήσοισι οἰκεόντων τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἐρυθρῇ θαλάσσῃ , ἐν τῇσι τοὺς ἀνασπάστους καλεομένους κατοικίζει βασιλεύς , ἀπὸ τούτων πάντων ἑξακόσια τάλαντα ἐγίνετο φόρος ·
The fourteenth province was made up of the Sagartii, Sarangeis, Thamanaei, Utii, Myci, and the inhabitants of those islands of the southern sea on which the king settles the so-called displaced people;


3.93.2
3613
νομὸς τέταρτος καὶ δέκατος οὗτος .
these together paid a tribute of six hundred talents.


3.93.3
3614
Σάκαι δὲ καὶ Κάσπιοι πεντήκοντα καὶ διηκόσια ἀπαγίνεον τάλαντα ·
The Sacae and  paid two hundred and fifty.


3.93.3
3615
νομὸς πέμπτος καὶ δέκατος οὗτος .
This was the fifteenth province.


3.93.3
3616
Πάρθοι δὲ καὶ Χοράσμιοι καὶ Σόγδοι τε καὶ Ἄρειοι τριηκόσια τάλαντα ·
The Parthians, Chorasmians, Sogdi, and Arii were the sixteenth, paying three hundred.


3.93.3
3617
νομὸς ἕκτος καὶ δέκατος οὗτος .
this was the sixteenth province.


3.94.1
3618
Παρικάνιοι δὲ καὶ Αἰθίοπες οἱ ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης τετρακόσια τάλαντα ἀπαγίνεον ·
The Paricanii and Ethiopians of Asia, the seventeenth, paid four hundred;


3.94.1
3619
νομὸς ἕβδομος καὶ δέκατος οὗτος .
this was the seventeenth province.


3.94.1
3620
Ματιηνοῖσι δὲ καὶ Σάσπειρσι καὶ Ἀλαροδίοισι διηκόσια ἐπετέτακτο τάλαντα ·
The Matieni, Saspiri, and Alarodii were the eighteenth, and two hundred talents were the appointed tribute;


3.94.1
3621
νομὸς ὄγδοος καὶ δέκατος οὗτος .
this was the eighteenth province.


3.94.2
3622
Μόσχοισι δὲ καὶ Τιβαρηνοῖσι καὶ Μάκρωσι καὶ Μοσσυνοίκοισι καὶ Μαρσὶ τριηκόσια τάλαντα προείρητο ·
The Moschi, Tibareni, Macrones, Mossynoeci, and Mares, the nineteenth province, were ordered to pay three hundred.


3.94.2
3623
νομὸς εἴνατος καὶ δέκατος οὗτος .
this was the nineteenth province.


3.94.2
3624
Ἰνδῶν δὲ πλῆθός τε πολλῷ πλεῖστον ἐστὶ πάντων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν ἀνθρώπων , καὶ φόρον ἀπαγίνεον πρὸς πάντας τοὺς ἄλλους ἑξήκοντα καὶ τριηκόσια τάλαντα ψήγματος ·
The Indians made up the twentieth province. These are more in number than any nation of which we know, and they paid a greater tribute than any other province, namely three hundred and sixty talents of gold dust.


3.94.2
3625
νομὸς εἰκοστὸς οὗτος .
this was the twentieth province.


3.95.1
3626
τὸ μὲν δὴ ἀργύριον τὸ Βαβυλώνιον πρὸς τὸ Εὐβοϊκὸν συμβαλλόμενον τάλαντον γίνεται ὀγδώκοντα καὶ ὀκτακόσια καὶ εἰνακισχίλια τάλαντα ·τὸ δὲ χρυσίον τρισκαιδεκαστάσιον λογιζόμενον , τὸ ψῆγμα εὑρίσκεται ἐὸν Εὐβοϊκῶν ταλάντων ὀγδώκοντα καὶ ἑξακοσίων καὶ τετρακισχιλίων .
Now if these Babylonian silver talents be calculated in Euboic money, the sum is seen to be nine thousand eight hundred and eighty Euboic talents:


3.95.2
3627
τούτων ὦν πάντων συντιθεμένων τὸ πλῆθος Εὐβοϊκὰ τάλαντα συνελέγετο ἐς τὸν ἐπέτειον φόρον Δαρείῳ μύρια καὶ τετρακισχίλια καὶ πεντακόσια καὶ ἑξήκοντα ·
Therefore it is seen by adding all together that Darius collected a yearly tribute of fourteen thousand five hundred and sixty talents;


3.95.2
3628
τὸ δ’ ἔτι τούτων ἔλασσον ἀπιεὶς οὐ λέγω .
I take no account of figures less than ten.


3.96.1
3629
οὗτος Δαρείῳ προσήιε φόρος ἀπὸ τῆς τε Ἀσίης καὶ τῆς Λιβύης ὀλιγαχόθεν .
This was Darius' revenue from Asia and a few parts of Libya.


3.96.1
3630
προϊόντος μέντοι τοῦ χρόνου καὶ ἀπὸ νήσων προσήιε ἄλλος φόρος καὶ τῶν ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ μέχρι Θεσσαλίης οἰκημένων .
But as time went on he drew tribute also from the islands and the dwellers in Europe, as far as Thessaly.


3.96.2
3631
τοῦτον τὸν φόρον θησαυρίζει βασιλεὺς τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
The tribute is stored by the king in this fashion:


3.96.2
3632
ἐς πίθους κεραμίνους τήξας καταχέει , πλήσας δὲ τὸ ἄγγος περιαιρέει τὸν κέραμον ·
he melts it down and pours it into earthen vessels; when the vessel is full he breaks the earthenware away,


3.96.2
3633
ἐπεὰν δὲ δεηθῇ χρημάτων , κατακόπτει τοσοῦτο ὅσου ἂν ἑκάστοτε δέηται .
and when he needs money coins as much as serves his purpose.


3.97.1
3634
αὗται μὲν ἀρχαί τε ἦσαν καὶ φόρων ἐπιτάξιες .
These were the governments and appointments of tribute.


3.97.1
3635
ἡ Περσὶς δὲ χώρη μούνη μοι οὐκ εἴρηται δασμοφόρος ·
The Persian country is the only one which I have not recorded as tributary;


3.97.1
3636
ἀτελέα γὰρ Πέρσαι νέμονται χώρην .
for the Persians live free from all taxes.


3.97.2
3637
οἵδε δὲ φόρον μὲν οὐδένα ἐτάχθησαν φέρειν , δῶρα δὲ ἀγίνεον ·
As for those on whom no tribute was laid, but who rendered gifts instead, they were, firstly, the Ethiopians nearest to Egypt,


3.97.2
3638
Αἰθίοπες οἱ πρόσουροι Αἰγύπτῳ , τοὺς Καμβύσης ἐλαύνων ἐπὶ τοὺς μακροβίους Αἰθίοπας κατεστρέψατο , οἵ τε περί τε Νύσην τὴν ἱρὴν κατοίκηνται καὶ τῷ Διονύσῳ ἀνάγουσι τὰς ὁρτάς ·
whom Cambyses conquered in his march towards the long-lived Ethiopians; and also those who dwell about the holy Nysa, where Dionysus is the god of their festivals.


3.97.2
3639
οὗτοι οἱ Αἰθίοπες καὶ οἱ πλησιόχωροι τούτοισι σπέρματι μὲν χρέωνται τῷ αὐτῷ τῷ καὶ οἱ Καλλαντίαι Ἰνδοί , οἰκήματα δὲ ἔκτηνται κατάγαια .
These Ethiopians and their neighbors use the same seed as the Indian Callantiae, and they live underground.


3.97.3
3640
οὗτοι συναμφότεροι διὰ τρίτου ἔτεος ἀγίνεον , ἀγινέουσι δὲ καὶ τὸ μέχρι ἐμεῦ , δύο χοίνικας ἀπύρου χρυσίου καὶ διηκοσίας φάλαγγας ἐβένου καὶ πέντε παῖδας Αἰθίοπας καὶ ἐλέφαντος ὀδόντας μεγάλους εἴκοσι .
These together brought every other year and still bring a gift of two choenixes of unrefined gold, two hundred blocks of ebony, five Ethiopian boys, and twenty great elephants' tusks.


3.97.4
3641
Κόλχοι δὲ τὰ ἐτάξαντο ἐς τὴν δωρεὴν καὶ οἱ προσεχέες μέχρι Καυκάσιος ὄρεος ( ἐς τοῦτο γὰρ τὸ ὄρος ὑπὸ Πέρσῃσι ἄρχεται , τὰ δὲ πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον τοῦ Καυκάσιος Περσέων οὐδὲν ἔτι φροντίζει ) , οὗτοι ὦν δῶρα τὰ ἐτάξαντο ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ διὰ πεντετηρίδος ἀγίνεον , ἑκατὸν παῖδας καὶ ἑκατὸν παρθένους .
Gifts were also required of the Colchians and their neighbors as far as the    Caucasus mountains    (which is as far as the Persian rule reaches, the country north of the    Caucasus    paying no regard to the Persians); these were rendered every four years and are still rendered, namely, a hundred boys and as many maids.


3.97.5
3642
Ἀράβιοι δὲ χίλια τάλαντα ἀγίνεον λιβανωτοῦ ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος .
The Arabians rendered a thousand talents' weight of frankincense yearly.


3.97.5
3643
ταῦτα μὲν οὗτοι δῶρα πάρεξ τοῦ φόρου βασιλέι ἐκόμιζον .
Such were the gifts of these peoples to the king, besides the tribute.


3.98.1
3644
τὸν δὲ χρυσὸν τοῦτον τὸν πολλὸν οἱ Ἰνδοί , ἀπ’ οὗ τὸ ψῆγμα τῷ βασιλέι τὸ εἰρημένον κομίζουσι , τρόπῳ τοιῷδε κτῶνται .
All this abundance of gold, from which the Indians send the aforementioned gold-dust to the king, they obtain in the following way.


3.98.2
3645
ἔστι τῆς Ἰνδικῆς χώρης τὸ πρὸς ἥλιον ἀνίσχοντα ψάμμος ·
To the east of the Indian country is sand.


3.98.2
3646
τῶν γὰρ ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν , τῶν καὶ πέρι ἀτρεκές τι λέγεται , πρῶτοι πρὸς ἠῶ καὶ ἡλίου ἀνατολὰς οἰκέουσι ἀνθρώπων τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ Ἰνδοί ·
Of all the people of Asia whom we know - even those about whom something is said with precision - the Indians dwell nearest to the dawn and the rising sun;


3.98.2
3647
Ἰνδῶν γὰρ τὸ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ ἐρημίη ἐστὶ διὰ τὴν ψάμμον .
for on the eastern side of India all is desolate because of the sand.


3.98.3
3648
ἔστι δὲ πολλὰ ἔθνεα Ἰνδῶν καὶ οὐκ ὁμόφωνα σφίσι , καὶ οἳ μὲν αὐτῶν νομάδες εἰσὶ οἳ δὲ οὔ , οἳ δὲ ἐν τοῖσι ἕλεσι οἰκέουσι τοῦ ποταμοῦ καὶ ἰχθύας σιτέονται ὠμούς , τοὺς αἱρέουσι ἐκ πλοίων καλαμίνων ὁρμώμενοι ·
There are many Indian nations, none speaking the same language; some of them are nomads, some not;


3.98.3
3649
καλάμου δὲ ἓν γόνυ πλοῖον ἕκαστον ποιέεται .
some dwell in the river marshes and live on raw fish, which they catch from reed boats. Each boat is made of one joint of reed.


3.98.4
3650
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ τῶν Ἰνδῶν φορέουσι ἐσθῆτα φλοΐνην ·
These Indians wear clothes of bullrushes;


3.98.4
3651
ἐπεὰν ἐκ τοῦ ποταμοῦ φλοῦν ἀμήσωσι καὶ κόψωσι , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν φορμοῦ τρόπον καταπλέξαντες ὡς θώρηκα ἐνδύνουσι .
they mow and cut these from the river, then weave them crosswise like a mat, and wear them like a breastplate.


3.99.1
3652
ἄλλοι δὲ τῶν Ἰνδῶν πρὸς ἠῶ οἰκέοντες τούτων νομάδες εἰσὶ κρεῶν ἐδεσταὶ ὠμῶν , καλέονται δὲ Παδαῖοι , νομαίοισι δὲ τοιοῖσιδε λέγονται χρᾶσθαι ·
Other Indians, to the east of these, are nomads and eat raw flesh;


3.99.1
3653
ὃς ἂν κάμῃ τῶν ἀστῶν , ἤν τε γυνὴ ἤν τε ἀνήρ , τὸν μὲν ἄνδρα ἄνδρες οἱ μάλιστά οἱ ὁμιλέοντες κτείνουσι , φάμενοι αὐτὸν τηκόμενον τῇ νούσῳ τὰ κρέα σφίσι διαφθείρεσθαι ·
they are called Padaei. It is said to be their custom that when anyone of their fellows, whether man or woman, is sick, a man's closest friends kill him, saying that if wasted by disease he will be lost to them as meat;


3.99.1
3654
ὁ δὲ ἄπαρνος ἐστὶ μὴ μὲν νοσέειν , οἱ δὲ οὐ συγγινωσκόμενοι ἀποκτείναντες κατευωχέονται .
though he denies that he is sick, they will not believe him, but kill and eat him.


3.99.2
3655
ἣ δὲ ἂν γυνὴ κάμῃ , ὡσαύτως αἱ ἐπιχρεώμεναι μάλιστα γυναῖκες τ- αὐτὰ τοῖσι ἀνδράσι ποιεῦσι .
When a woman is sick, she is put to death like the men by the women who are her close acquaintances.


3.99.2
3656
τὸν γὰρ δὴ ἐς γῆρας ἀπικόμενον θύσαντες κατευωχέονται ·
As for one that has come to old age, they sacrifice him and feast on his flesh;


3.99.2
3657
ἐς δὲ τούτου λόγον οὐ πολλοί τινες αὐτῶν ἀπικνέονται ·
but not many reach this reckoning,


3.99.2
3658
πρὸ γὰρ τοῦ τὸν ἐς νοῦσον πίπτοντα πάντα κτείνουσι .
for before that everyone who falls ill they kill.


3.100.1
3659
ἑτέρων δὲ ἐστὶ Ἰνδῶν ὅδε ἄλλος τρόπος ·
The character of other Indians is different.


3.100.1
3660
οὔτε κτείνουσι οὐδὲν ἔμψυχον οὔτε τι σπείρουσι οὔτε οἰκίας νομίζουσι ἐκτῆσθαι ποιηφαγέουσί τε ·
They kill no living creature, nor plant anything, nor are accustomed to have houses and they eat grass.


3.100.1
3661
καὶ αὐτοῖσι ἐστὶ ὅσον κέγχρος τὸ μέγαθος ἐν κάλυκι , αὐτόματον ἐκ τῆς γῆς γινόμενον , τὸ συλλέγοντες αὐτῇ τῇ κάλυκι ἕψουσί τε καὶ σιτέονται .
They have a grain growing naturally from the earth in its husk, about the size of a millet-seed, which they gather with the husk and boil and eat.


3.100.1
3662
ὃς δ’ ἂν ἐς νοῦσον αὐτῶν πέσῃ , ἐλθὼν ἐς τὴν ἔρημον κεῖται ·
When any one of them falls sick, he goes into the desert and lies there,


3.100.1
3663
φροντίζει δὲ οὐδεὶς οὔτε ἀποθανόντος οὔτε κάμνοντος .
and no one notices whether he is sick or dies.


3.101.1
3664
μίξις δὲ τούτων τῶν Ἰνδῶν τῶν κατέλεξα πάντων ἐμφανής ἐστι κατά περ τῶν προβάτων , καὶ τὸ χρῶμα φορέουσι ὅμοιον πάντες καὶ παραπλήσιον Αἰθίοψι .
These Indians whom I have described have intercourse openly like cattle; they are all black-skinned, like the Ethiopians.


3.101.2
3665
ἡ γονὴ δὲ αὐτῶν , τὴν ἀπίενται ἐς τὰς γυναῖκας , οὐ κατά περ τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων ἐστὶ λευκή , ἀλλὰ μέλαινα κατά περ τὸ χρῶμα .
Their semen too, which they ejaculate into the women, is not white like other men's, but black like their skin,


3.101.2
3666
τοιαύτην δὲ καὶ Αἰθίοπες ἀπίενται θορήν .
and resembles in this respect that of the Ethiopians.


3.101.2
3667
οὗτοι μὲν τῶν Ἰνδῶν ἑκαστέρω τῶν Περσέων οἰκέουσι καὶ πρὸς νότου ἀνέμου , καὶ Δαρείου βασιλέος οὐδαμὰ ὑπήκουσαν .
These Indians dwell far away from the Persians southwards, and were not subjects of King Darius.


3.102.1
3668
ἄλλοι δὲ τῶν Ἰνδῶν Κασπατύρῳ τε πόλι καὶ τῇ Πακτυϊκῇ χώρῃ εἰσὶ πρόσουροι , πρὸς ἄρκτου τε καὶ βορέω ἀνέμου κατοικημένοι τῶν ἄλλων Ἰνδῶν , οἳ Βακτρίοισι παραπλησίην ἔχουσι δίαιταν .
Other Indians dwell near the town of Caspatyrus and the Pactyic country, north of the rest of India;


3.102.1
3669
οὗτοι καὶ μαχιμώτατοι εἰσὶ Ἰνδῶν καὶ οἱ ἐπὶ τὸν χρυσὸν στελλόμενοι εἰσὶ οὗτοι ·
these live like the Bactrians; they are of all Indians the most warlike, and it is they who are sent for the gold;


3.102.1
3670
κατὰ γὰρ τοῦτο ἐστὶ ἐρημίη διὰ τὴν ψάμμον .
for in these parts all is desolate because of the sand.


3.102.2
3671
ἐν δὴ ὦν τῇ ἐρημίῃ ταύτῃ καὶ τῇ ψάμμῳ γίνονται μύρμηκες μεγάθεα ἔχοντες κυνῶν μὲν ἐλάσσονα ἀλωπέκων δὲ μέζονα ·
In this sandy desert are ants, not as big as dogs but bigger than foxes;


3.102.2
3672
εἰσὶ γὰρ αὐτῶν καὶ παρὰ βασιλέι τῷ Περσέων ἐνθεῦτεν θηρευθέντες .
the Persian king has some of these, which have been caught there.


3.102.2
3673
οὗτοι ὦν οἱ μύρμηκες ποιεύμενοι οἴκησιν ὑπὸ γῆν ἀναφορέουσι τὴν ψάμμον κατά περ οἱ ἐν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι μύρμηκες κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον , εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ τὸ εἶδος ὁμοιότατοι ·
These ants live underground, digging out the sand in the same way as the ants in Greece, to which they are very similar in shape,


3.102.2
3674
ἡ δὲ ψάμμος ἡ ἀναφερομένη ἐστὶ χρυσῖτις .
and the sand which they carry from the holes is full of gold.


3.102.3
3675
ἐπὶ δὴ ταύτην τὴν ψάμμον στέλλονται ἐς τὴν ἔρημον οἱ Ἰνδοί , ζευξάμενος ἕκαστος καμήλους τρεῖς , σειρηφόρον μὲν ἑκατέρωθεν ἔρσενα παρέλκειν , θήλεαν δὲ ἐς μέσον ·
It is for this sand that the Indians set forth into the desert.


3.102.3
3676
ἐπὶ ταύτην δὴ αὐτὸς ἀναβαίνει , ἐπιτηδεύσας ὅκως ἀπὸ τέκνων ὡς νεωτάτων ἀποσπάσας ζεύξει .
They harness three camels apiece, males on either side sharing the drawing, and a female in the middle: the man himself rides on the female, that when harnessed has been taken away from as young an offspring as may be.


3.102.3
3677
αἱ γάρ σφι κάμηλοι ἵππων οὐκ ἥσσονες ἐς ταχυτῆτα εἰσί , χωρὶς δὲ ἄχθεα δυνατώτεραι πολλὸν φέρειν .
Their camels are as swift as horses, and much better able to bear burdens besides.


3.103.1
3678
τὸ μὲν δὴ εἶδος ὁκοῖόν τι ἔχει ἡ κάμηλος , ἐπισταμένοισι τοῖσι Ἕλλησι οὐ συγγράφω ·
I do not describe the camel's appearance to Greeks, for they know it;


3.103.1
3679
τὸ δὲ μὴ ἐπιστέαται αὐτῆς , τοῦτο φράσω ·
but I shall tell them something that they do not know concerning it:


3.103.1
3680
κάμηλος ἐν τοῖσι ὀπισθίοισι σκέλεσι ἔχει τέσσερας μηροὺς καὶ γούνατα τέσσερα , τά τε αἰδοῖα διὰ τῶν ὀπισθίων σκελέων πρὸς τὴν οὐρὴν τετραμμένα .
the hindlegs of the camel have four thighbones and four knee-joints; its genitals are turned towards the tail between the hindlegs.


3.104.1
3681
οἱ δὲ δὴ Ἰνδοὶ τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ καὶ ζεύξι τοιαύτῃ χρεώμενοι ἐλαύνουσι ἐπὶ τὸν χρυσὸν λελογισμένως ὅκως καυμάτων τῶν θερμοτάτων ἐόντων ἔσονται ἐν τῇ ἁρπαγῇ ·
Thus and with teams so harnessed the Indians ride after the gold, being careful to be engaged in taking it when the heat is greatest;


3.104.1
3682
ὑπὸ γὰρ τοῦ καύματος οἱ μύρμηκες ἀφανέες γίνονται ὑπὸ γῆν .
for the ants are then out of sight underground.


3.104.2
3683
θερμότατος δὲ ἐστὶ ὁ ἥλιος τούτοισι τοῖσι ἀνθρώποισι τὸ ἑωθινόν , οὐ κατά περ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι μεσαμβρίης , ἀλλ’ ὑπερτείλας μέχρι οὗ ἀγορῆς διαλύσιος .
Now in these parts the sun is hottest in the morning, not at midday as elsewhere, but from sunrise to the hour of market-closing.


3.104.2
3684
τοῦτον δὲ τὸν χρόνον καίει πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἢ τῇ μεσαμβρίῃ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , οὕτω ὥστ’ ἐν ὕδατι λόγος αὐτούς ἐστι βρέχεσθαι τηνικαῦτα .
Through these hours it is much hotter than in Hellas at noon, so that men are said to sprinkle themselves with water at this time.


3.104.3
3685
μεσοῦσα δὲ ἡ ἡμέρη σχεδὸν παραπλησίως καίει τούς τε ἄλλους ἀνθρώπους καὶ τοὺς Ἰνδούς .
At midday the sun's heat is nearly the same in India as elsewhere.


3.104.3
3686
ἀποκλινομένης δὲ τῆς μεσαμβρίης γίνεταί σφι ὁ ἥλιος κατά περ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ὁ ἑωθινός , καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τούτου ἀπιὼν ἐπὶ μᾶλλον ψύχει , ἐς ὃ ἐπὶ δυσμῇσι ἐὼν καὶ τὸ κάρτα ψύχει .
As it goes to afternoon, the sun of India has the power of the morning sun in other lands; as day declines it becomes ever cooler, until at sunset it is exceedingly cold.


3.105.1
3687
ἐπεὰν δὲ ἔλθωσι ἐς τὸν χῶρον οἱ Ἰνδοὶ ἔχοντες θυλάκια , ἐμπλήσαντες ταῦτα τῆς ψάμμου τὴν ταχίστην ἐλαύνουσι ὀπίσω ·
So when the Indians come to the place with their sacks, they fill these with the sand and drive back as fast as possible;


3.105.1
3688
αὐτίκα γὰρ οἱ μύρμηκες ὀδμῇ , ὡς δὴ λέγεται ὑπὸ Περσέων , μαθόντες διώκουσι .
for the ants at once scent them out, the Persians say, and give chase.


3.105.1
3689
εἶναι δὲ ταχυτῆτα οὐδενὶ ἑτέρῳ ὅμοιον , οὕτω ὥστε , εἰ μὴ προλαμβάνειν τοὺς Ἰνδοὺς τῆς ὁδοῦ ἐν ᾧ τοὺς μύρμηκας συλλέγεσθαι , οὐδένα ἂν σφέων ἀποσώζεσθαι .
They say nothing is equal to them for speed, so that unless the Indians have a headstart while the ants were gathering, not one of them would get away.


3.105.2
3690
τοὺς μέν νυν ἔρσενας τῶν καμήλων , εἶναι γὰρ ἥσσονας θέειν τῶν θηλέων , παραλύεσθαι ἐπελκομένους , οὐκ ὁμοῦ ἀμφοτέρους ·
They cut loose the male trace-camels, which are slower than the females, as they begin to lag, one at a time;


3.105.2
3691
τὰς δὲ θηλέας ἀναμιμνησκομένας τῶν ἔλιπον τέκνων ἐνδιδόναι μαλακὸν οὐδέν .
the mares never tire, for they remember the young that they have left.


3.105.2
3692
τὸν μὲν δὴ πλέω τοῦ χρυσοῦ οὕτω οἱ Ἰνδοὶ κτῶνται , ὡς Πέρσαι φασί ·
Such is the tale.


3.105.2
3693
ἄλλος δὲ σπανιώτερος ἐστι ἐν τῇ χώρῃ ὀρυσσόμενος .
Most of the gold (say the Persians) is got in this way by the Indians; they dig some from mines in their country, too, but it is less abundant.


3.106.1
3694
αἱ δ’ ἐσχατιαί κως τῆς οἰκεομένης τὰ κάλλιστα ἔλαχον , κατά περ ἡ Ἑλλὰς τὰς ὥρας πολλόν τι κάλλιστα κεκρημένας ἔλαχε .
The most outlying nations of the world have somehow drawn the finest things as their lot, exactly as    Greece    has drawn the possession of far the best seasons.


3.106.2
3695
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ ἐσχάτη τῶν οἰκεομενέων ἡ Ἰνδική ἐστι , ὥσπερ ὀλίγῳ πρότερον εἴρηκα ·
As I have lately said, India lies at the world's most distant eastern limit;


3.106.2
3696
ἐν ταύτῃ τοῦτο μὲν τὰ ἔμψυχα , τετράποδά τε καὶ τὰ πετεινά , πολλῷ μέζω ἢ ἐν τοῖσι ἄλλοισι χωρίοισι ἐστί , πάρεξ τῶν ἵππων ( οὗτοι δὲ ἑσσοῦνται ὑπὸ τῶν Μηδικῶν , Νησαίων δὲ καλευμένων ἵππων ) , τοῦτο δὲ χρυσὸς ἄπλετος αὐτόθι ἐστί , ὃ μὲν ὀρυσσόμενος , ὁ δὲ καταφορεύμενος ὑπὸ ποταμῶν , ὁ δὲ ὥσπερ ἐσήμηνα ἁρπαζόμενος .
and in India all living creatures four-footed and flying are much bigger than those of other lands, except the horses, which are smaller than the Median horses called Nesaean; moreover, the gold there, whether dug from the earth or brought down by rivers or got as I have described, is very abundant.


3.106.3
3697
τὰ δὲ δένδρεα τὰ ἄγρια αὐτόθι φέρει καρπὸν εἴρια καλλονῇ τε προφέροντα καὶ ἀρετῇ τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ὀίων ·
There, too, wool more beautiful and excellent than the wool of sheep grows on wild trees;


3.106.3
3698
καὶ ἐσθῆτι Ἰνδοὶ ἀπὸ τούτων τῶν δενδρέων χρέωνται .
these trees supply the Indians with clothing.


3.107.1
3699
πρὸς δ’ αὖ μεσαμβρίης ἐσχάτη Ἀραβίη τῶν οἰκεομενέων χωρέων ἐστί , ἐν δὲ ταύτῃ λιβανωτός τε ἐστὶ μούνῃ χωρέων πασέων φυόμενος καὶ σμύρνη καὶ κασίη καὶ κινάμωμον καὶ λήδανον .
Again, Arabia is the most distant to the south of all inhabited countries:


3.107.1
3700
ταῦτα πάντα πλὴν τῆς σμύρνης δυσπετέως κτῶνται οἱ Ἀράβιοι .
and this is the only country which produces frankincense and myrrh and casia and cinnamon and gum-mastich.


3.107.2
3701
τὸν μέν γε λιβανωτὸν συλλέγουσι τὴν στύρακα θυμιῶντες , τὴν ἐς Ἕλληνας Φοίνικες ἐξάγουσι ·
They gather frankincense by burning that storax which Phoenicians carry to Hellas;


3.107.2
3702
ταύτην θυμιῶντες λαμβάνουσι ·
they burn this and so get the frankincense;


3.107.2
3703
τὰ γὰρ δένδρεα ταῦτα τὰ λιβανωτοφόρα ὄφιες ὑπόπτεροι , μικροὶ τὰ μεγάθεα , ποικίλοι τὰ εἴδεα , φυλάσσουσι πλήθεϊ πολλοὶ περὶ δένδρον ἕκαστον , οὗτοι οἵ περ ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον ἐπιστρατεύονται , οὐδενὶ δὲ ἄλλῳ ἀπελαύνονται ἀπὸ τῶν δενδρέων ἢ τῆς στύρακος τῷ καπνῷ .
for the spice-bearing trees are guarded by small winged snakes of varied color, many around each tree; these are the snakes that attack Egypt. Nothing except the smoke of storax will drive them away from the trees.


3.108.1
3704
λέγουσι δὲ καὶ τόδε Ἀράβιοι , ὡς πᾶσα ἂν γῆ ἐπίμπλατο τῶν ὀφίων τούτων , εἰ μὴ γίνεσθαι κατ’ αὐτοὺς οἷόν τι κατὰ τὰς ἐχίδνας ἠπιστάμην γίνεσθαι .
The Arabians also say that the whole country would be full of these snakes if the same thing did not occur among them that I believe occurs among vipers.


3.108.2
3705
καί κως τοῦ θείου ἡ προνοίη , ὥσπερ καὶ οἰκός ἐστι , ἐοῦσα σοφή , ὅσα μὲν ψυχήν τε δειλὰ καὶ ἐδώδιμα , ταῦτα μὲν πάντα πολύγονα πεποίηκε , ἵνα μὴ ἐπιλίπῃ κατεσθιόμενα , ὅσα δὲ σχέτλια καὶ ἀνιηρά , ὀλιγόγονα .
Somehow the forethought of God (just as is reasonable) being wise has made all creatures prolific that are timid and edible, so that they do not become extinct through being eaten, whereas few young are born to hardy and vexatious creatures.


3.108.3
3706
τοῦτο μέν , ὅτι ὁ λαγὸς ὑπὸ παντὸς θηρεύεται θηρίου καὶ ὄρνιθος καὶ ἀνθρώπου , οὕτω δή τι πολύγονον ἐστί ·
On the one hand, because the hare is hunted by every beast and bird and man, therefore it is quite prolific;


3.108.3
3707
ἐπικυΐσκεται μοῦνον πάντων θηρίων , καὶ τὸ μὲν δασὺ τῶν τέκνων ἐν τῇ γαστρὶ τὸ δὲ ψιλόν , τὸ δὲ ἄρτι ἐν τῇσι μήτρῃσι πλάσσεται , τὸ δὲ ἀναιρέεται .
alone of all creatures it conceives during pregnancy; some of the unborn young are hairy, some still naked, some are still forming in the womb while others are just conceived.


3.108.4
3708
τοῦτο μὲν δὴ τοιοῦτο ἐστί ·
On the one hand there is this sort of thing,


3.108.4
3709
ἡ δὲ δὴ λέαινα ἐὸν ἰσχυρότατον καὶ θρασύτατον ἅπαξ ἐν τῷ βίῳ τίκτει ἕν ·
but on the other hand the lioness, that is so powerful and so bold, once in her life bears one cub;


3.108.4
3710
τίκτουσα γὰρ συνεκβάλλει τῷ τέκνῳ τὰς μήτρας .
for in the act of bearing she casts her uterus out with her cub.


3.108.4
3711
τὸ δὲ αἴτιον τούτου τόδε ἐστί ·
The explanation of this is as follows.


3.108.4
3712
ἐπεὰν ὁ σκύμνος ἐν τῇ μητρὶ ἐὼν ἄρχηται διακινεόμενος , ὁ δὲ ἔχων ὄνυχας θηρίων πολλὸν πάντων ὀξυτάτους ἀμύσσει τὰς μήτρας , αὐξόμενός τε δὴ πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἐσικνέεται καταγράφων ·
When the cub first begins to stir in the mother, its claws, much sharper than those of any other creature, tear the uterus,


3.108.4
3713
πέλας τε δὴ ὁ τόκος ἐστί , καὶ τὸ παράπαν λείπεται αὐτέων ὑγιὲς οὐδέν .
and the more it grows the more it scratches and tears, so that when the hour of birth is near seldom is any of the uterus left intact.


3.109.1
3714
ὣς δὲ καὶ οἱ ἔχιδναί τε καὶ οἱ ἐν Ἀραβίοισι ὑπόπτεροι ὄφιες εἰ ἐγίνοντο ὡς ἡ φύσις αὐτοῖσι ὑπάρχει , οὐκ ἂν ἦν βιώσιμα ἀνθρώποισι ·
So too if the vipers and the winged serpents of Arabia were born in the natural manner of serpents life would be impossible for men;


3.109.1
3715
νῦν δ’ ἐπεὰν θορνύωνται κατὰ ζεύγεα καὶ ἐν αὐτῇ ᾖ ὁ ἔρσην τῇ ἐκποιήσι , ἀπιεμένου αὐτοῦ τὴν γονὴν ἡ θήλεα ἅπτεται τῆς δειρῆς , καὶ ἐμφῦσα οὐκ ἀνιεῖ πρὶν ἂν διαφάγῃ .
but as it is, when they copulate, while the male is in the act of procreation and as soon as he has ejaculated his seed, the female seizes him by the neck, and does not let go until she has bitten through.


3.109.2
3716
ὁ μὲν δὴ ἔρσην ἀποθνήσκει τρόπῳ τῷ εἰρημένῳ , ἡ δὲ θήλεα τίσιν τοιήνδε ἀποτίνει τῷ ἔρσενι ·
The male dies in the way described,


3.109.2
3717
τῷ γονέι τιμωρέοντα ἔτι ἐν τῇ γαστρὶ ἐόντα τὰ τέκνα διεσθίει τὴν μητέρα , διαφαγόντα δὲ τὴν νηδὺν αὐτῆς οὕτω τὴν ἔκδυσιν ποιέεται .
but the female suffers in return for the male the following punishment: avenging their father, the young while they are still within the womb gnaw at their mother and eating through her bowels thus make their way out.


3.109.3
3718
οἱ δὲ ἄλλοι ὄφιες ἐόντες ἀνθρώπων οὐ δηλήμονες τίκτουσί τε ᾠὰ καὶ ἐκλέπουσι πολλόν τι χρῆμα τῶν τέκνων .
Other snakes, that do no harm to men, lay eggs and hatch out a vast number of young.


3.109.3
3719
αἱ μέν νυν ἔχιδναι κατὰ πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν εἰσί , οἱ δὲ ὑπόπτεροι ὄφιες ἀθρόοι εἰσὶ ἐν τῇ Ἀραβίῃ καὶ οὐδαμῇ ἄλλῃ ·
The Arabian winged serpents do indeed seem to be numerous;


3.109.3
3720
κατὰ τοῦτο δοκέουσι πολλοὶ εἶναι .
but that is because (although there are vipers in every land) these are all in Arabia and are found nowhere else.


3.110.1
3721
τὸν μὲν δὴ λιβανωτὸν τοῦτον οὕτω κτῶνται Ἀράβιοι , τὴν δὲ κασίην ὧδε .
The Arabians get frankincense in the foregoing way, and casia in the following way:


3.110.1
3722
ἐπεὰν καταδήσωνται βύρσῃσι καὶ δέρμασι ἄλλοισι πᾶν τὸ σῶμα καὶ τὸ πρόσωπον πλὴν αὐτῶν τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν , ἔρχονται ἐπὶ τὴν κασίην ·
when they go after it they bind oxhides and other skins all over their bodies and faces except for the eyes.


3.110.1
3723
ἣ δὲ ἐν λίμνῃ φύεται οὐ βαθέῃ , περὶ δὲ αὐτὴν καὶ ἐν αὐτῇ αὐλίζεταί κου θηρία πτερωτά , τῇσι νυκτερίσι προσείκελα μάλιστα , καὶ τέτριγε δεινόν , καὶ ἐς ἀλκὴν ἄλκιμα ·
Casia grows in a shallow lake; around this and in it live winged creatures, very like bats, that squeak similarly and make a fierce resistance;


3.110.1
3724
τὰ δεῖ ἀπαμυνομένους ἀπὸ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν οὕτω δρέπειν τὴν κασίην .
these have to be kept away from the eyes in order to take the casia.


3.111.1
3725
τὸ δὲ δὴ κινάμωμον ἔτι τούτων θωμαστότερον συλλέγουσι .
As for cinnamon, they gather it in an even stranger way.


3.111.1
3726
ὅκου μὲν γὰρ γίνεται καὶ ἥτις μιν γῆ ἡ τρέφουσα ἐστί , οὐκ ἔχουσι εἰπεῖν , πλὴν ὅτι λόγῳ οἰκότι χρεώμενοι ἐν τοῖσιδε χωρίοισι φασὶ τινὲς αὐτὸ φύεσθαι ἐν τοῖσι ὁ Διόνυσος ἐτράφη ·
Where it comes from and what land produces it they cannot say, except that it is reported, reasonably enough, to grow in the places where Dionysus was reared.


3.111.2
3727
ὄρνιθας δὲ λέγουσι μεγάλας φορέειν ταῦτα τὰ κάρφεα τὰ ἡμεῖς ἀπὸ Φοινίκων μαθόντες κινάμωμον καλέομεν , φορέειν δὲ τὰς ὄρνιθας ἐς νεοσσιὰς προσπεπλασμένας ἐκ πηλοῦ πρὸς ἀποκρήμνοισι ὄρεσι , ἔνθα πρόσβασιν ἀνθρώπῳ οὐδεμίαν εἶναι .
There are great birds, it is said, that take these dry sticks which we have learned from the Phoenicians to call cinnamon and carry them off to nests stuck with mud to precipitous cliffs, where man has no means of approach.


3.111.3
3728
πρὸς ὦν δὴ ταῦτα τοὺς Ἀραβίους σοφίζεσθαι τάδε ·
The Arabian solution to this is to cut dead oxen and asses and other beasts of burden into the largest possible pieces,


3.111.3
3729
βοῶν τε καὶ ὄνων τῶν ἀπογινομένων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὑποζυγίων τὰ μέλεα διαταμόντας ὡς μέγιστα κομίζειν ἐς ταῦτα τὰ χωρία , καί σφεα θέντας ἀγχοῦ τῶν νεοσσιέων ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι ἑκὰς αὐτέων ·
then to set these near the eyries and withdraw far off.


3.111.3
3730
τὰς δὲ ὄρνιθας καταπετομένας τὰ μέλεα τῶν ὑποζυγίων ἀναφορέειν ἐπὶ τὰς νεοσσιάς , τὰς δὲ οὐ δυναμένας ἴσχειν καταρρήγνυσθαι ἐπὶ γῆν , τοὺς δὲ ἐπιόντας συλλέγειν .
The birds then fly down (it is said) and carry the pieces of the beasts up to their nests, while these, not being able to bear the weight, break and fall down the mountain side, and then the Arabians come and gather them up.


3.111.3
3731
οὕτω μὲν τὸ κινάμωμον συλλεγόμενον ἐκ τούτων ἀπικνέεσθαι ἐς τὰς ἄλλας χώρας .
Thus is cinnamon said to be gathered, and so to come from Arabia to other lands.


3.112.1
3732
τὸ δὲ δὴ λήδανον , τὸ καλέουσι Ἀράβιοι λάδανον , ἔτι τούτου θωμασιώτερον γίνεται ·
But ledanon, which the Arabians call ladanon, is produced yet more strangely than this.


3.112.1
3733
ἐν γὰρ δυσοδμοτάτῳ γινόμενον εὐωδέστατον ἐστί ·
For it is the most fragrant thing produced in the most malodorous;


3.112.1
3734
τῶν γὰρ αἰγῶν τῶν τράγων ἐν τοῖσι πώγωσι εὑρίσκεται ἐγγινόμενον οἷον γλοιὸς ἀπὸ τῆς ὕλης .
for it is found in he-goats' beards, forming in them like gum among timber.


3.112.1
3735
χρήσιμον δ’ ἐς πολλὰ τῶν μύρων ἐστί , θυμιῶσί τε μάλιστα τοῦτο Ἀράβιοι .
This is used in the manufacture of many perfumes; there is nothing that the Arabians burn so often as incense.


3.113.1
3736
τοσαῦτα μὲν θυωμάτων πέρι εἰρήσθω , ἀπόζει δὲ τῆς χώρης τῆς Ἀραβίης θεσπέσιον ὡς ἡδύ .
Enough of marvels, and yet the land of Arabia gives off a scent as sweet as if divine.


3.113.1
3737
δύο δὲ γένεα ὀίων σφι ἐστὶ θώματος ἄξια , τὰ οὐδαμόθι ἑτέρωθι ἐστί .
They have besides two marvellous kinds of sheep, found nowhere else.


3.113.1
3738
τὸ μὲν αὐτῶν ἕτερον ἔχει τὰς οὐρὰς μακράς , τριῶν πηχέων οὐκ ἐλάσσονας , τὰς εἴ τις ἐπείη σφι ἐπέλκειν , ἕλκεα ἂν ἔχοιεν ἀνατριβομενέων πρὸς τῇ γῇ τῶν οὐρέων ·
One of these has tails no less than nine feet long. Were the sheep to trail these after them they would suffer by the chafing of the tails on the ground;


3.113.2
3739
νῦν δ’ ἅπας τις τῶν ποιμένων ἐπίσταται ξυλουργέειν ἐς τοσοῦτο ·
but every shepherd there knows enough of carpentry to make little carts


3.113.2
3740
ἁμαξίδας γὰρ ποιεῦντες ὑποδέουσι αὐτὰς τῇσι οὐρῇσι , ἑνὸς ἑκάστου κτήνεος τὴν οὐρὴν ἐπὶ ἁμαξίδα ἑκάστην καταδέοντες .
which they fix under the tails, binding the tail of each sheep on its own cart.


3.113.2
3741
τὸ δὲ ἕτερον γένος τῶν ὀίων τὰς οὐρὰς πλατέας φορέουσι καὶ ἐπὶ πῆχυν πλάτος .
The other kind of sheep has a tail a full three feet broad.


3.114.1
3742
ἀποκλινομένης δὲ μεσαμβρίης παρήκει πρὸς δύνοντα ἥλιον ἡ Αἰθιοπίη χώρη ἐσχάτη τῶν οἰκεομενέων ·
Where south inclines westwards, the part of the world stretching farthest towards the sunset is Ethiopia;


3.114.1
3743
αὕτη δὲ χρυσόν τε φέρει πολλὸν καὶ ἐλέφαντας ἀμφιλαφέας καὶ δένδρεα πάντα ἄγρια καὶ ἔβενον καὶ ἄνδρας μεγίστους καὶ καλλίστους καὶ μακροβιωτάτους .
this produces gold in abundance, and huge elephants, and all sorts of wild trees, and ebony, and the tallest and handsomest and longest-lived people.


3.115.1
3744
αὗται μέν νυν ἔν τε τῇ Ἀσίῃ ἐσχατιαί εἰσι καὶ ἐν τῇ Λιβύῃ .
These then are the most distant lands in Asia and Libya.


3.115.1
3745
περὶ δὲ τῶν ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ τῶν πρὸς ἑσπέρην ἐσχατιέων ἔχω μὲν οὐκ ἀτρεκέως λέγειν ·
But concerning those in Europe that are the farthest away towards evening, I cannot speak with assurance;


3.115.1
3746
οὔτε γὰρ ἔγωγε ἐνδέκομαι Ἠριδανὸν καλέεσθαι πρὸς βαρβάρων ποταμὸν ἐκδιδόντα ἐς θάλασσαν τὴν πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον , ἀπ’ ὅτευ τὸ ἤλεκτρον φοιτᾶν λόγος ἐστί , οὔτε νήσους οἶδα Κασσιτερίδας ἐούσας , ἐκ τῶν ὁ κασσίτερος ἡμῖν φοιτᾷ .
for I do not believe that there is a river called by foreigners Eridanus issuing into the northern sea, where our amber is said to come from, nor do I have any knowledge of Tin Islands, where our tin is brought from.


3.115.2
3747
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ ὁ Ἠριδανὸς αὐτὸ κατηγορέει τὸ οὔνομα ὡς ἔστι Ἑλληνικὸν καὶ οὐ βάρβαρον , ὑπὸ ποιητέω δὲ τινὸς ποιηθέν ·
The very name Eridanus betrays itself as not a foreign but a Greek name, invented by some poet;


3.115.2
3748
τοῦτο δὲ οὐδενὸς αὐτόπτεω γενομένου δύναμαι ἀκοῦσαι , τοῦτο μελετῶν , ὅκως θάλασσα ἐστὶ τὰ ἐπέκεινα Εὐρώπης .
nor for all my diligence have I been able to learn from one who has seen it that there is a sea beyond Europe.


3.115.2
3749
ἐξ ἐσχάτης δ’ ὦν ὁ κασσίτερος ἡμῖν φοιτᾷ καὶ τὸ ἤλεκτρον .
All we know is that our tin and amber come from the most distant parts.


3.116.1
3750
πρὸς δὲ ἄρκτου τῆς Εὐρώπης πολλῷ τι πλεῖστος χρυσὸς φαίνεται ἐών ·
But in the north of Europe there is by far the most gold.


3.116.1
3751
ὅκως μὲν γινόμενος , οὐκ ἔχω οὐδὲ τοῦτο ἀτρεκέως εἶπαι , λέγεται δὲ ὑπὲκ τῶν γρυπῶν ἁρπάζειν Ἀριμασποὺς ἄνδρας μουνοφθάλμους .
In this matter again I cannot say with assurance how the gold is produced, but it is said that one-eyed men called Arimaspians steal it from griffins.


3.116.2
3752
πείθομαι δὲ οὐδὲ τοῦτο ὅκως μουνόφθαλμοι ἄνδρες φύονται , φύσιν ἔχοντες τὴν ἄλλην ὁμοίην τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ἀνθρώποισι ·
But I do not believe this, that there are one-eyed men who have a nature otherwise the same as other men.


3.116.3
3753
αἱ δὲ ὦν ἐσχατιαὶ οἴκασι , περικληίουσαι τὴν ἄλλην χώρην καὶ ἐντὸς ἀπέργουσαι , τὰ κάλλιστα δοκέοντα ἡμῖν εἶναι καὶ σπανιώτατα ἔχειν αὗται .
The most outlying lands, though, as they enclose and wholly surround all the rest of the world, are likely to have those things which we think the finest and the rarest.


3.117.1
3754
ἔστι δὲ πεδίον ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ περικεκληιμένον ὄρεϊ πάντοθεν , διασφάγες δὲ τοῦ ὄρεος εἰσὶ πέντε .
There is a plain in Asia shut in on all sides by mountains through which there are five passes.


3.117.1
3755
τοῦτο τὸ πεδίον ἦν μὲν κοτὲ Χορασμίων , ἐν οὔροισι ἐὸν Χορασμίων τε αὐτῶν καὶ Ὑρκανίων καὶ Πάρθων καὶ Σαραγγέων καὶ Θαμαναίων , ἐπείτε δὲ Πέρσαι ἔχουσι τὸ κράτος , ἐστὶ τοῦ βασιλέος .
This plain was once the Chorasmians', being at the boundaries of the Chorasmians, the Hyrcanians, Parthians, Sarangians, and Thamanaei, but since the Persians have held power it has been the king's.


3.117.2
3756
ἐκ δὴ ὦν τοῦ περικληίοντος ὄρεος τούτου ῥέει ποταμὸς μέγας , οὔνομα δέ οἱ ἐστὶ Ἄκης .
Now from the encircling mountains flows a great river whose name is the Aces.


3.117.2
3757
οὗτος πρότερον μὲν ἄρδεσκε διαλελαμμένος πενταχοῦ τούτων τῶν εἰρημένων τὰς χώρας , διὰ διασφάγος ἀγόμενος ἑκάστης ἑκάστοισι ·
Its stream divides into five channels and formerly watered the lands of the above-mentioned peoples, going to each through a different pass,


3.117.2
3758
ἐπείτε δὲ ὑπὸ τῷ Πέρσῃ εἰσί , πεπόνθασι τοιόνδε ·
but since the beginning of the Persian rule


3.117.3
3759
τὰς διασφάγας τῶν ὀρέων ἐνδείμας ὁ βασιλεὺς πύλας ἐπ’ ἑκάστῃ διασφάγι ἔστησε ·
the king has blocked the mountain passes, and closed each passage with a gate;


3.117.3
3760
ἀποκεκληιμένου δὲ τοῦ ὕδατος τῆς ἐξόδου τὸ πεδίον τὸ ἐντὸς τῶν ὀρέων πέλαγος γίνεται , ἐνδιδόντος μὲν τοῦ ποταμοῦ , ἔχοντος δὲ οὐδαμῇ ἐξήλυσιν .
with the water barred from outlet, the plain within the mountains becomes a lake, seeing that the river pours into it and finds no way out.


3.117.4
3761
οὗτοι ὦν οἵ περ ἔμπροσθε ἐώθεσαν χρᾶσθαι τῷ ὕδατι , οὐκ ἔχοντες αὐτῷ χρᾶσθαι συμφορῇ μεγάλῃ διαχρέωνται .
Those therefore who before were accustomed to use the water endure great hardship in not being able to use it;


3.117.4
3762
τὸν μὲν γὰρ χειμῶνα ὕει σφι ὁ θεὸς ὥσπερ καὶ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ἀνθρώποισι , τοῦ δὲ θέρεος σπείροντες μελίνην καὶ σήσαμον χρηίσκονται τῷ ὕδατι .
for during the winter, god rains for them just as for the rest of mankind, but in the summer they are in need of the water for their sown millet and sesame.


3.117.5
3763
ἐπεὰν ὦν μηδέν σφι παραδιδῶται τοῦ ὕδατος , ἐλθόντες ἐς τοὺς Πέρσας αὐτοί τε καὶ γυναῖκες , στάντες κατὰ τὰς θύρας τοῦ βασιλέος βοῶσι ὠρυόμενοι , ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς τοῖσι δεομένοισι αὐτῶν μάλιστα ἐντέλλεται ἀνοίγειν τὰς πύλας τὰς ἐς τοῦτο φερούσας .
So whenever no water is given to them, they come into    Persia    with their women, and cry and howl before the door of the king's palace, until the king commands that the river-gate should be opened for those whose need is greatest;


3.117.6
3764
ἐπεὰν δὲ διάκορος ἡ γῆ σφεων γένηται πίνουσα τὸ ὕδωρ , αὗται μὲν αἱ πύλαι ἀποκληίονται , ἄλλας δ’ ἐντέλλεται ἀνοίγειν ἄλλοισι τοῖσι δεομένοισι μάλιστα τῶν λοιπῶν .
then, when this land has drunk its fill of water, that gate is shut, and the king has another opened for those of the rest who most require it.


3.117.6
3765
ὡς δ’ ἐγὼ οἶδα ἀκούσας , χρήματα μεγάλα πρησσόμενος ἀνοίγει πάρεξ τοῦ φόρου .
I know by hearsay that he gets a lot of money, over and above the tribute, for opening the gates.


3.118.1
3766
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ ἔχει οὕτω .
So much for these matters.


3.118.1
3767
τῶν δὲ τῷ Μάγῳ ἐπαναστάντων ἑπτὰ ἀνδρῶν , ἕνα αὐτῶν Ἰνταφρένεα κατέλαβε ὑβρίσαντα τάδε ἀποθανεῖν αὐτίκα μετὰ τὴν ἐπανάστασιν .
Of the seven men who revolted against the Magus, one, Intaphrenes, got his death through his own violence immediately after the rebellion.


3.118.1
3768
ἤθελε ἐς τὰ βασιλήια ἐσελθὼν χρηματίσασθαι τῷ βασιλέι ·
He wanted to enter the palace and speak with the king;


3.118.1
3769
καὶ γὰρ δὴ καὶ ὁ νόμος οὕτω εἶχε , τοῖσι ἐπαναστᾶσι τῷ Μάγῳ ἔσοδον εἶναι παρὰ βασιλέα ἄνευ ἀγγέλου , ἢν μὴ γυναικὶ τυγχάνῃ μισγόμενος βασιλεύς .
and in fact the law was, that the rebels against the Magus could come into the king's presence unannounced, if the king were not having intercourse with one of his wives.


3.118.2
3770
οὔκων δὴ Ἰνταφρένης ἐδικαίου οὐδένα οἱ ἐσαγγεῖλαι , ἀλλ’ ὅτι ἦν τῶν ἑπτά , ἐσιέναι ἤθελε .
Intaphrenes, as one of the seven, claimed his right to enter unannounced;


3.118.2
3771
ὁ δὲ πυλουρὸς καὶ ὁ ἀγγελιηφόρος οὐ περιώρων , φάμενοι τὸν βασιλέα γυναικὶ μίσγεσθαι .
but the gatekeeper and the messenger forbade him, telling him that the king was having intercourse with one of his wives.


3.118.2
3772
ὁ δὲ Ἰνταφρένης δοκέων σφέας ψεύδεα λέγειν ποιέει τοιάδε ·
Intaphrenes thought that they were lying;


3.118.2
3773
σπασάμενος τὸν ἀκινάκεα ἀποτάμνει αὐτῶν τά τε ὦτα καὶ τὰς ῥῖνας , καὶ ἀνείρας περὶ τὸν χαλινὸν τοῦ ἵππου περὶ τοὺς αὐχένας σφέων ἔδησε , καὶ ἀπῆκε .
drawing his scimitar he cut off their noses and ears, then strung these on his horse's bridle and hung it around the men's necks, and so let them go.


3.119.1
3774
οἳ δὲ τῷ βασιλέι δεικνύουσι ἑωυτοὺς καὶ τὴν αἰτίην εἶπον δι’ ἣν πεπονθότες εἴησαν .
They showed themselves to the king and told him why they had been treated so.


3.119.1
3775
Δαρεῖος δὲ ἀρρωδήσας μὴ κοινῷ λόγῳ οἱ ἓξ πεποιηκότες ἔωσι ταῦτα , μεταπεμπόμενος ἕνα ἕκαστον ἀπεπειρᾶτο γνώμης , εἰ συνέπαινοι εἰσὶ τῷ πεποιημένῳ .
Darius, fearing that the six had done this by common consent, sent for each and asked his opinion, whether they approved what had been done;


3.119.2
3776
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐξέμαθε ὡς οὐ σὺν κείνοισι εἴη ταῦτα πεποιηκώς , ἔλαβε αὐτόν τε τὸν Ἰνταφρένεα καὶ τοὺς παῖδας αὐτοῦ καὶ τοὺς οἰκηίους πάντας , ἐλπίδας πολλὰς ἔχων μετὰ τῶν συγγενέων μιν ἐπιβουλεύειν οἱ ἐπανάστασιν , συλλαβὼν δὲ σφέας ἔδησε τὴν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ .
and being assured that they had no part in it, he seized Intaphrenes with his sons and all his household — for he strongly suspected that the man was plotting a rebellion with his kinsmen — and imprisoned them with the intention of putting them to death.


3.119.3
3777
ἡ δὲ γυνὴ τοῦ Ἰνταφρένεος φοιτῶσα ἐπὶ τὰς θύρας τοῦ βασιλέος κλαίεσκε ἂν καὶ ὀδυρέσκετο ·
Then Intaphrenes' wife began coming to the palace gates, weeping and lamenting;


3.119.3
3778
ποιεῦσα δὲ αἰεὶ τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο τὸν Δαρεῖον ἔπεισε οἰκτεῖραί μιν .
and by continuing to do this same thing she persuaded Darius to pity her;


3.119.3
3779
πέμψας δὲ ἄγγελον ἔλεγε τάδε ·
and he sent a messenger to tell her,


3.119.3
3780
" ὦ γύναι , βασιλεύς τοι Δαρεῖος διδοῖ ἕνα τῶν δεδεμένων οἰκηίων ῥύσασθαι τὸν βούλεαι ἐκ πάντων " .
“Woman, King Darius will allow one of your imprisoned relatives to survive, whomever you prefer of them all.”


3.119.4
3781
ἣ δὲ βουλευσαμένη ὑπεκρίνετο τάδε ·
After considering she answered,


3.119.4
3782
" εἰ μὲν δή μοι διδοῖ βασιλεὺς ἑνὸς τὴν ψυχήν , αἱρέομαι ἐκ πάντων τὸν ἀδελφεόν " .
“If indeed the king gives me the life of one, I chose from them all my brother.”


3.119.5
3783
πυθόμενος δὲ Δαρεῖος ταῦτα καὶ θωμάσας τὸν λόγον , πέμψας ἠγόρευε " ὦ γύναι , εἰρωτᾷ σε βασιλεύς , τίνα ἔχουσα γνώμην , τὸν ἄνδρα τε καὶ τὰ τέκνα ἐγκαταλιποῦσα , τὸν ἀδελφεὸν εἵλευ περιεῖναί τοι , ὃς καὶ ἀλλοτριώτερός τοι τῶν παίδων καὶ ἧσσον κεχαρισμένος τοῦ ἀνδρός ἐστι " .
Darius was astonished when he heard her answer, and sent someone who asked her: “Woman, the king asks you with what in mind you abandon your husband and your children and choose to save the life of your brother, who is less close to you than your children and less dear than your husband?”


3.119.6
3784
ἣ δ’ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
“O King,” she answered,


3.119.6
3785
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἀνὴρ μέν μοι ἂν ἄλλος γένοιτο , εἰ δαίμων ἐθέλοι , καὶ τέκνα ἄλλα , εἰ ταῦτα ἀποβάλοιμι ·
“I may have another husband, if a god is willing, and other children, if I lose these;


3.119.6
3786
πατρὸς δὲ καὶ μητρὸς οὐκέτι μευ ζωόντων ἀδελφεὸς ἂν ἄλλος οὐδενὶ τρόπῳ γένοιτο .
but since my father and mother are no longer living, there is no way that I can have another brother;


3.119.6
3787
ταύτῃ τῇ γνώμῃ χρεωμένη ἔλεξα ταῦτα " .
I said what I did with that in mind.”


3.119.7
3788
εὖ τε δὴ ἔδοξε τῷ Δαρείῳ εἰπεῖν ἡ γυνή , καί οἱ ἀπῆκε τοῦτόν τε τὸν παραιτέετο καὶ τῶν παίδων τὸν πρεσβύτατον , ἡσθεὶς αὐτῇ , τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους ἀπέκτεινε πάντας .
Darius thought that the woman answered well, and for her sake he released the one for whom she had asked, and the eldest of her sons as well;


3.119.7
3789
τῶν μὲν δὴ ἑπτὰ εἷς αὐτίκα τρόπῳ τῷ εἰρημένῳ ἀπολώλεε .
he put to death all the rest. Thus immediately perished one of the seven.


3.120.1
3790
κατὰ δέ κου μάλιστα τὴν Καμβύσεω νοῦσον ἐγίνετο τάδε .
While Cambyses was still ill, the following events occurred.


3.120.1
3791
ὑπὸ Κύρου κατασταθεὶς ἦν Σαρδίων ὕπαρχος Ὀροίτης ἀνὴρ Πέρσης ·
The governor of Sardis appointed by Cyrus was Oroetes, a Persian.


3.120.1
3792
οὗτος ἐπεθύμησε πρήγματος οὐκ ὁσίου ·
This man had an impious desire;


3.120.1
3793
οὔτε γάρ τι παθὼν οὔτε ἀκούσας μάταιον ἔπος πρὸς Πολυκράτεος τοῦ Σαμίου , οὐδὲ ἰδὼν πρότερον , ἐπεθύμεε λαβὼν αὐτὸν ἀπολέσαι , ὡς μὲν οἱ πλεῦνες λέγουσι , διὰ τοιήνδε τινὰ αἰτίην .
for although he had not been injured or spoken badly of by Polycrates of Samos, and had in fact never even seen him before, he desired to seize and kill him, for the following reason, most people say.


3.120.2
3794
ἐπὶ τῶν βασιλέος θυρέων κατήμενον τόν τε Ὀροίτεα καὶ ἄλλον Πέρσην τῷ οὔνομα εἶναι Μιτροβάτεα , νομοῦ ἄρχοντα τοῦ ἐν Δασκυλείῳ , τούτους ἐκ λόγων ἐς νείκεα συμπεσεῖν , κρινομένων δὲ περὶ ἀρετῆς εἰπεῖν τὸν Μιτροβάτεα τῷ Ὀροίτῃ προφέροντα " σὺ γὰρ ἐν ἀνδρῶν λόγῳ , ὃς βασιλέι νῆσον Σάμον πρὸς τῷ σῷ νομῷ προσκειμένην οὐ προσεκτήσαο , ὧδε δή τι ἐοῦσαν εὐπετέα χειρωθῆναι , τὴν τῶν τις ἐπιχωρίων πεντεκαίδεκα ὁπλίτῃσι ἐπαναστὰς ἔσχε καὶ νῦν αὐτῆς τυραννεύει " ;
As Oroetes and another Persian whose name was Mitrobates, governor of the province at Dascyleium, sat at the king's doors, they fell from talking to quarreling; and as they compared their achievements Mitrobates said to Oroetes,


3.120.4
3795
οἳ μὲν δή μιν φασὶ τοῦτο ἀκούσαντα καὶ ἀλγήσαντα τῷ ὀνείδεϊ ἐπιθυμῆσαι οὐκ οὕτω τὸν εἴπαντα ταῦτα τίσασθαι ὡς Πολυκράτεα πάντως ἀπολέσαι , δι’ ὅντινα κακῶς ἤκουσε .
Some say that Oroetes, angered by this reproach, did not so much desire to punish the source of it as to destroy Polycrates utterly, the occasion of the reproach.


3.121.1
3796
οἱ δὲ ἐλάσσονες λέγουσι πέμψαι Ὀροίτεα ἐς Σάμον κήρυκα ὅτευ δὴ χρήματος δεησόμενον ( οὐ γὰρ ὦν δὴ τοῦτό γε λέγεται ) , καὶ τὸν Πολυκράτεα τυχεῖν κατακείμενον ἐν ἀνδρεῶνι , παρεῖναι δέ οἱ καὶ Ἀνακρέοντα τὸν Τήιον ·
A few people, however, say that when Oroetes sent a herald to    Samos    with some request (it is not said what this was), the herald found Polycrates lying in the men's apartments, in the company of Anacreon of    Teos   ;


3.121.2
3797
καί κως εἴτ’ ἐκ προνοίης αὐτὸν κατηλογέοντα τὰ Ὀροίτεω πρήγματα , εἴτε καὶ συντυχίη τις τοιαύτη ἐπεγένετο ·
and, whether on purpose to show contempt for Oroetes, or by mere chance, an event like this happened.


3.121.2
3798
τόν τε γὰρ κήρυκα τὸν Ὀροίτεω παρελθόντα διαλέγεσθαι , καὶ τὸν Πολυκράτεα ( τυχεῖν γὰρ ἀπεστραμμένον πρὸς τὸν τοῖχον ) οὔτε τι μεταστραφῆναι οὔτε ὑποκρίνασθαι .
When Oroetes' herald entered and addressed him, Polycrates, then lying with his face to the wall, never turned or answered him.


3.122.1
3799
αἰτίαι μὲν δὴ αὗται διφάσιαι λέγονται τοῦ θανάτου τοῦ Πολυκράτεος γενέσθαι , πάρεστι δὲ πείθεσθαι ὁκοτέρῃ τις βούλεται αὐτέων .
These are the two reasons alleged for Polycrates' death; believe whichever you like.


3.122.1
3800
ὁ δὲ ὦν Ὀροίτης ἱζόμενος ἐν Μαγνησίῃ τῇ ὑπὲρ Μαιάνδρου ποταμοῦ οἰκημένῃ ἔπεμπε Μύρσον τὸν Γύγεω ἄνδρα Λυδὸν ἐς Σάμον ἀγγελίην φέροντα , μαθὼν τοῦ Πολυκράτεος τὸν νόον .
But the consequence was that Oroetes, then at Magnesia which is above the river Maeander, sent Myrsus son of Gyges, a Lydian, with a message to Samos, having learned Polycrates' intention;


3.122.2
3801
Πολυκράτης γὰρ ἐστὶ πρῶτος τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν Ἑλλήνων ὃς θαλασσοκρατέειν ἐπενοήθη , πάρεξ Μίνωός τε τοῦ Κνωσσίου καὶ εἰ δή τις ἄλλος πρότερος τούτου ἦρξε τῆς θαλάσσης ·
for Polycrates was the first of the Greeks whom we know to aim at the mastery of the sea, leaving out of account Minos of Cnossus and any others who before him may have ruled the sea;


3.122.2
3802
τῆς δὲ ἀνθρωπηίης λεγομένης γενεῆς Πολυκράτης πρῶτος , ἐλπίδας πολλὰς ἔχων Ἰωνίης τε καὶ νήσων ἄρξειν .
of what may be called the human race Polycrates was the first, and he had great hope of ruling Ionia and the Islands.


3.122.3
3803
μαθὼν ὦν ταῦτά μιν διανοεύμενον ὁ Ὀροίτης πέμψας ἀγγελίην ἔλεγε τάδε .
Learning then that he had this intention, Oroetes sent him this message:


3.122.3
3804
" Ὀροίτης Πολυκράτεϊ ὧδε λέγει .
“Oroetes addresses Polycrates as follows:


3.122.3
3805
πυνθάνομαι ἐπιβουλεύειν σε πρήγμασι μεγάλοισι , καὶ χρήματά τοι οὐκ εἶναι κατὰ τὰ φρονήματα .
I find that you aim at great things, but that you have not sufficient money for your purpose.


3.122.3
3806
σύ νυν ὧδε ποιήσας ὀρθώσεις μὲν σεωυτόν , σώσεις δὲ καὶ ἐμέ ·
Do then as I direct, and you will succeed yourself and will save me.


3.122.3
3807
ἐμοὶ γὰρ βασιλεὺς Καμβύσης ἐπιβουλεύει θάνατον , καί μοι τοῦτο ἐξαγγέλλεται σαφηνέως .
King Cambyses aims at my death; of this I have clear intelligence.


3.122.4
3808
σύ νυν ἐμὲ ἐκκομίσας αὐτὸν καὶ χρήματα , τὰ μὲν αὐτῶν αὐτὸς ἔχε , τὰ δὲ ἐμὲ ἔα ἔχειν ·
Now if you will transport me and my money, you may take some yourself and let me keep the rest;


3.122.4
3809
εἵνεκέν τε χρημάτων ἄρξεις ἁπάσης τῆς Ἑλλάδος .
thus you shall have wealth enough to rule all Hellas.


3.122.4
3810
εἰ δέ μοι ἀπιστέεις τὰ περὶ τῶν χρημάτων , πέμψον ὅστις τοι πιστότατος τυγχάνει ἐών , τῷ ἐγὼ ἀποδέξω " .
If you mistrust what I tell you about the money, send someone who is most trusted by you and I will prove it to him.”


3.123.1
3811
ταῦτα ἀκούσας Πολυκράτης ἥσθη τε καὶ ἐβούλετο ·
Hearing this, Polycrates was pleased and willing;


3.123.1
3812
καί κως ἱμείρετο γὰρ χρημάτων μεγάλως , ἀποπέμπει πρῶτα κατοψόμενον Μαιάνδριον Μαιανδρίου ἄνδρα τῶν ἀστῶν , ὅς οἱ ἦν γραμματιστής ·
and since he had a great desire for money he first sent one of his townsmen, Maeandrius, son of Maeandrius, to have a look; this man was his scribe;


3.123.1
3813
ὃς χρόνῳ οὐ πολλῷ ὕστερον τούτων τὸν κόσμον τὸν ἐκ τοῦ ἀνδρεῶνος τοῦ Πολυκράτεος ἐόντα ἀξιοθέητον ἀνέθηκε πάντα ἐς τὸ Ἥραιον .
it was he who not long afterwards dedicated in the Heraeum all the splendid furnishings of the men's apartment in Polycrates' house.


3.123.2
3814
ὁ δὲ Ὀροίτης μαθὼν τὸν κατάσκοπον ἐόντα προσδόκιμον ἐποίεε τοιάδε ·
When Oroetes heard that an inspection was imminent, he filled eight chests with stones, leaving only a very shallow space at the top;


3.123.2
3815
λάρνακας ὀκτὼ πληρώσας λίθων πλὴν κάρτα βραχέος τοῦ περὶ αὐτὰ τὰ χείλεα , ἐπιπολῆς τῶν λίθων χρυσὸν ἐπέβαλε , καταδήσας δὲ τὰς λάρνακας εἶχε ἑτοίμας .
then he laid gold on top of the stones, locked the chests, and kept them ready.


3.123.2
3816
ἐλθὼν δὲ ὁ Μαιάνδριος καὶ θεησάμενος ἀπήγγελλε τῷ Πολυκράτεϊ .
Maeandrius came and saw, and brought word back to his master.


3.124.1
3817
ὁ δὲ πολλὰ μὲν τῶν μαντίων ἀπαγορευόντων πολλὰ δὲ τῶν φίλων ἐστέλλετο αὐτόσε , πρὸς δὲ καὶ ἰδούσης τῆς θυγατρὸς ὄψιν ἐνυπνίου τοιήνδε ·
Polycrates then prepared to visit Oroetes, despite the strong dissuasion of his diviners and friends, and a vision seen by his daughter in a dream;


3.124.1
3818
ἐδόκεε οἷ τὸν πατέρα ἐν τῷ ἠέρι μετέωρον ἐόντα λοῦσθαι μὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ Διός , χρίεσθαι δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου .
she dreamt that she saw her father in the air overhead being washed by Zeus and anointed by Helios;


3.124.2
3819
ταύτην ἰδοῦσα τὴν ὄψιν παντοίη ἐγίνετο μὴ ἀποδημῆσαι τὸν Πολυκράτεα παρὰ τὸν Ὀροίτεα , καὶ δὴ καὶ ἰόντος αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τὴν πεντηκόντερον ἐπεφημίζετο .
after this vision she used all means to persuade him not to go on this journey to Oroetes; even as he went to his fifty-oared ship she prophesied evil for him.


3.124.2
3820
ὁ δέ οἱ ἠπείλησε , ἢν σῶς ἀπονοστήσῃ , πολλόν μιν χρόνον παρθενεύεσθαι .
When Polycrates threatened her that if he came back safe, she would long remain unmarried,


3.124.2
3821
ἣ δὲ ἠρήσατο ἐπιτελέα ταῦτα γενέσθαι ·
she answered with a prayer that his threat might be fulfilled:


3.124.2
3822
βούλεσθαι γὰρ παρθενεύεσθαι πλέω χρόνον ἢ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐστερῆσθαι .
for she would rather, she said, long remain unmarried than lose her father.


3.125.1
3823
Πολυκράτης δὲ πάσης συμβουλίης ἀλογήσας ἔπλεε παρὰ τὸν Ὀροίτεα , ἅμα ἀγόμενος ἄλλους τε πολλοὺς τῶν ἑταίρων , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ Δημοκήδεα τὸν Καλλιφῶντος Κροτωνιήτην ἄνδρα , ἰητρόν τε ἐόντα καὶ τὴν τέχνην ἀσκέοντα ἄριστα τῶν κατ’ ἑωυτόν .
But Polycrates would listen to no advice. He sailed to meet Oroetes, with a great retinue of followers, among whom was Democedes, son of Calliphon, a man of    Croton    and the most skillful physician of his time.


3.125.2
3824
ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐς τὴν Μαγνησίην ὁ Πολυκράτης διεφθάρη κακῶς , οὔτε ἑωυτοῦ ἀξίως οὔτε τῶν ἑωυτοῦ φρονημάτων ·
But no sooner had Polycrates come to Magnesia than he was horribly murdered in a way unworthy of him and of his aims;


3.125.2
3825
ὅτι γὰρ μὴ οἱ Συρηκοσίων γενόμενοι τύραννοι οὐδὲ εἷς τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλληνικῶν τυράννων ἄξιος ἐστὶ Πολυκράτεϊ μεγαλοπρεπείην συμβληθῆναι .
for, except for the sovereigns of Syracuse, no sovereign of Greek race is fit to be compared with Polycrates for magnificence.


3.125.3
3826
ἀποκτείνας δέ μιν οὐκ ἀξίως ἀπηγήσιος Ὀροίτης ἀνεσταύρωσε ·
Having killed him in some way not fit to be told, Oroetes then crucified him;


3.125.3
3827
τῶν δέ οἱ ἑπομένων ὅσοι μὲν ἦσαν Σάμιοι , ἀπῆκε , κελεύων σφέας ἑωυτῷ χάριν εἰδέναι ἐόντας ἐλευθέρους , ὅσοι δὲ ἦσαν ξεῖνοί τε καὶ δοῦλοι τῶν ἑπομένων , ἐν ἀνδραπόδων λόγῳ ποιεύμενος εἶχε .
as for those who had accompanied him, he let the Samians go, telling them to thank him that they were free; those who were not Samians, or were servants of Polycrates' followers, he kept for slaves.


3.125.4
3828
Πολυκράτης δὲ ἀνακρεμάμενος ἐπετέλεε πᾶσαν τὴν ὄψιν τῆς θυγατρός ·
And Polycrates hanging in the air fulfilled his daughter's vision in every detail;


3.125.4
3829
ἐλοῦτο μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ τοῦ Διὸς ὅκως ὕοι , ἐχρίετο δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου , ἀνιεὶς αὐτὸς ἐκ τοῦ σώματος ἰκμάδα .
for he was washed by Zeus when it rained, and he was anointed by Helios as he exuded sweat from his body.


3.126.1
3830
Πολυκράτεος μὲν δὴ αἱ πολλαὶ εὐτυχίαι ἐς τοῦτο ἐτελεύτησαν τῇ οἱ Ἄμασις ὁ Αἰγύπτου βασιλεὺς προεμαντεύσατο .
This was the end of Polycrates' string of successes [as Amasis king of Egypt had forewarned him].


3.126.1
3831
χρόνῳ δὲ οὐ πολλῷ ὕστερον καὶ Ὀροίτεα Πολυκράτεος τίσιες μετῆλθον .
But not long after, atonement for Polycrates overtook Oroetes.


3.126.1
3832
μετὰ γὰρ τὸν Καμβύσεω θάνατον καὶ τῶν Μάγων τὴν βασιληίην μένων ἐν τῇσι Σάρδισι Ὀροίτης ὠφέλεε μὲν οὐδὲν Πέρσας ὑπὸ Μήδων ἀπαραιρημένους τὴν ἀρχήν ·
After the death of Cambyses and the rule of the Magi, Oroetes stayed in Sardis, where he did not help the Persians in any way to regain the power taken from them by the Medes,


3.126.2
3833
ὁ δὲ ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ταραχῇ κατὰ μὲν ἔκτεινε Μιτροβάτεα τὸν ἐκ Δασκυλείου ὕπαρχον , ὅς οἱ ὠνείδισε τὰ ἐς Πολυκράτεα ἔχοντα , κατὰ δὲ τοῦ Μιτροβάτεω τὸν παῖδα Κρανάσπην , ἄνδρας ἐν Πέρσῃσι δοκίμους , ἄλλα τε ἐξύβρισε παντοῖα καί τινα ἀγγελιηφόρον ἐλθόντα Δαρείου παρ’ αὐτόν , ὡς οὐ πρὸς ἡδονήν οἱ ἦν τὰ ἀγγελλόμενα , κτείνει μιν ὀπίσω κομιζόμενον , ἄνδρας οἱ ὑπείσας κατ’ ὁδόν , ἀποκτείνας δέ μιν ἠφάνισε αὐτῷ ἵππῳ .
but, to the contrary, in this confusion killed two prominent Persians, Mitrobates, the governor from Dascyleium, who had taunted him about Polycrates, and Mitrobates' son Cranaspes; and on top of many other violent acts, he set an ambush down the road after a messenger from Darius came with a message which displeased him and killed that messenger on his homeward journey, and concealed the man's body and horse.


3.127.1
3834
Δαρεῖος δὲ ὡς ἔσχε τὴν ἀρχήν , ἐπεθύμεε τὸν Ὀροίτεα τίσασθαι πάντων τῶν ἀδικημάτων εἵνεκεν καὶ μάλιστα Μιτροβάτεω καὶ τοῦ παιδός .
So when Darius became king, he wanted to punish Oroetes for all his wrongdoing, and especially for killing Mitrobates and his son.


3.127.1
3835
ἐκ μὲν δὴ τῆς ἰθέης στρατὸν ἐπ’ αὐτὸν οὐκ ἐδόκεε πέμπειν ἅτε οἰδεόντων ἔτι τῶν πρηγμάτων , καὶ νεωστὶ ἔχων τὴν ἀρχὴν καὶ τὸν Ὀροίτεα μεγάλην τὴν ἰσχὺν πυνθανόμενος ἔχειν ·
But he thought it best not to send an army openly against the satrap, seeing that everything was still in confusion and he was still new to the royal power;


3.127.1
3836
τὸν χίλιοι μὲν Περσέων ἐδορυφόρεον , εἶχε δὲ νομὸν τόν τε Φρύγιον καὶ Λύδιον καὶ Ἰωνικόν .
moreover he heard that Oroetes was very powerful, having a guard of a thousand Persian spearmen and being governor of the Phrygian and Lydian and Ionian province.


3.127.2
3837
πρὸς ταῦτα δὴ ὦν ὁ Δαρεῖος τάδε ἐμηχανήσατο .
He had recourse, then, to the following expedient:


3.127.2
3838
συγκαλέσας Περσέων τοὺς δοκιμωτάτους ἔλεγέ σφι τάδε .
having summoned an assembly of the most prominent Persians, he addressed them as follows:


3.127.2
3839
" ὦ Πέρσαι , τίς ἄν μοι τοῦτο ὑμέων ὑποστὰς ἐπιτελέσειε σοφίῃ καὶ μὴ βίῃ τε καὶ ὁμίλῳ ;
“Persians, which of you will promise to do this for me, not with force and numbers, but by cunning?


3.127.2
3840
ἔνθα γὰρ σοφίης δέει , βίης ἔργον οὐδέν ·
Where there is need for cunning, force has no business.


3.127.3
3841
ὑμέων δὲ ὦν τίς μοι Ὀροίτεα ἢ ζώοντα ἀγάγοι ἢ ἀποκτείνειε ;
So then, which of you would either bring me Oroetes alive or kill him?


3.127.3
3842
ὃς ὠφέλησε μέν κω Πέρσας οὐδέν , κακὰ δὲ μεγάλα ἔοργε ·
For he has done the Persians no good, but much harm;


3.127.3
3843
τοῦτο μὲν δύο ἡμέων ἠίστωσε , Μιτροβάτεά τε καὶ τὸν παῖδα αὐτοῦ , τοῦτο δὲ τοὺς ἀνακαλέοντας αὐτὸν καὶ πεμπομένους ὑπ’ ἐμεῦ κτείνει , ὕβριν οὐκ ἀνασχετὸν φαίνων .
he has destroyed two of us, Mitrobates and his son, and is killing my messengers that are sent to recall him, displaying an insolence that is not to be borne.


3.127.3
3844
πρίν τι ὦν μέζον ἐξεργάσασθαί μιν Πέρσας κακόν , καταλαμπτέος ἐστὶ ἡμῖν θανάτῳ " .
So, then, before he does the Persians some still greater harm, he has to be punished by us with death.”


3.128.1
3845
Δαρεῖος μὲν ταῦτα ἐπειρώτα , τῷ δὲ ἄνδρες τριήκοντα ὑπέστησαν , αὐτὸς ἕκαστος ἐθέλων ποιέειν ταῦτα .
Darius asked this and thirty men promised, each wanting to do it himself.


3.128.1
3846
ἐρίζοντας δὲ Δαρεῖος κατελάμβανε κελεύων πάλλεσθαι ·
Darius told them not to argue but draw lots;


3.128.1
3847
παλλομένων δὲ λαγχάνει ἐκ πάντων Βαγαῖος ὁ Ἀρτόντεω ·
they did, and the lot fell to Bagaeus, son of Artontes.


3.128.2
3848
λαχὼν δὲ ὁ Βαγαῖος ποιέει τάδε ·
Bagaeus, having drawn the lot, did as follows:


3.128.2
3849
βυβλία γραψάμενος πολλὰ καὶ περὶ πολλῶν ἔχοντα πρηγμάτων σφρηγῖδά σφι ἐπέβαλε τὴν Δαρείου , μετὰ δὲ ἤιε ἔχων ταῦτα ἐς τὰς Σάρδις .
he had many letters written concerning many things and put the seal of Darius on them, and then went with them to Sardis.


3.128.3
3850
ἀπικόμενος δὲ καὶ Ὀροίτεω ἐς ὄψιν ἐλθών , τῶν βυβλίων ἓν ἕκαστον περιαιρεόμενος ἐδίδου τῷ γραμματιστῇ τῷ βασιληίῳ ἐπιλέγεσθαι ·
When he got there and came into Oroetes' presence, he took out each letter in turn and gave it to one of the royal scribes to read


3.128.3
3851
γραμματιστὰς δὲ βασιληίους οἱ πάντες ὕπαρχοι ἔχουσι ·
(all of the governors of the King have scribes);


3.128.3
3852
ἀποπειρώμενος δὲ τῶν δορυφόρων ἐδίδου τὰ βυβλία ὁ Βαγαῖος , εἰ ἐνδεξαίατο ἀπόστασιν ἀπὸ Ὀροίτεω .
Bagaeus gave the letters to test the spearmen, whether they would consent to revolt against Oroetes.


3.128.4
3853
ὁρέων δὲ σφέας τά τε βυβλία σεβομένους μεγάλως καὶ τὰ λεγόμενα ἐκ τῶν βυβλίων ἔτι μεζόνως , διδοῖ ἄλλο ἐν τῷ ἐνῆν ἔπεα τάδε ·
Seeing that they were greatly affected by the rolls and yet more by what was written in them, he gave another, in which were these words:


3.128.4
3854
" ὦ Πέρσαι , βασιλεὺς Δαρεῖος ἀπαγορεύει ὑμῖν μὴ δορυφορέειν Ὀροίτεα " .
“Persians! King Darius forbids you to be Oroetes' guard.”


3.128.4
3855
οἳ δὲ ἀκούσαντες τούτων μετῆκάν οἱ τὰς αἰχμάς .
Hearing this, they lowered their spears for him.


3.128.5
3856
ἰδὼν δὲ τοῦτο σφέας ὁ Βαγαῖος πειθομένους τῷ βυβλίῳ , ἐνθαῦτα δὴ θαρσήσας τὸ τελευταῖον τῶν βυβλίων διδοῖ τῷ γραμματιστῇ , ἐν τῷ ἐγέγραπτο " βασιλεὺς Δαρεῖος Πέρσῃσι τοῖσι ἐν Σάρδισι ἐντέλλεται κτείνειν Ὀροίτεα " .
When Bagaeus saw that they obeyed the letter so far, he was encouraged and gave the last roll to the scribe, in which was written: “King Darius instructs the Persians in Sardis to kill Oroetes.”


3.128.5
3857
οἱ δὲ δορυφόροι ὡς ἤκουσαν ταῦτα , σπασάμενοι τοὺς ἀκινάκας κτείνουσι παραυτίκα μιν , οὕτω δὴ Ὀροίτεα τὸν Πέρσην Πολυκράτεος τοῦ Σαμίου τίσιες μετῆλθον .
Hearing this the spearmen drew their scimitars and killed him at once. Thus atonement for Polycrates the Samian overtook Oroetes the Persian.


3.129.1
3858
ἀπικομένων δὲ καὶ ἀνακομισθέντων τῶν Ὀροίτεω χρημάτων ἐς τὰ Σοῦσα , συνήνεικε χρόνῳ οὐ πολλῷ ὕστερον βασιλέα Δαρεῖον ἐν ἄγρῃ θηρῶν ἀποθρώσκοντα ἀπ’ ἵππου στραφῆναι τὸν πόδα .
Oroetes' slaves and other possessions were brought to    Susa   . Not long after this, it happened that Darius twisted his foot in dismounting from his horse while hunting


3.129.2
3859
καί κως ἰσχυροτέρως ἐστράφη ·
And somehow it was quite violently twisted.


3.129.2
3860
ὁ γάρ οἱ ἀστράγαλος ἐξεχώρησε ἐκ τῶν ἄρθρων .
For the ball of the ankle joint was dislocated from its socket.


3.129.2
3861
νομίζων δὲ καὶ πρότερον περὶ ἑωυτὸν ἔχειν Αἰγυπτίων τοὺς δοκέοντας εἶναι πρώτους τὴν ἰητρικήν , τούτοισι ἐχρᾶτο .
Darius called in the best physicians of Egypt, whom he had until now kept near his person.


3.129.2
3862
οἳ δὲ στρεβλοῦντες καὶ βιώμενοι τὸν πόδα κακὸν μέζον ἐργάζοντο .
But by violently twisting the foot they made the injury worse;


3.129.3
3863
ἐπ’ ἑπτὰ μὲν δὴ ἡμέρας καὶ ἑπτὰ νύκτας ὑπὸ τοῦ παρεόντος κακοῦ ὁ Δαρεῖος ἀγρυπνίῃσι εἴχετο ·
and for seven days and nights the king could not sleep because of the pain.


3.129.3
3864
τῇ δὲ δὴ ὀγδόῃ ἡμέρῃ ἔχοντί οἱ φλαύρως , παρακούσας τις πρότερον ἔτι ἐν Σάρδισι τοῦ Κροτωνιήτεω Δημοκήδεος τὴν τέχνην ἀγγέλλει τῷ Δαρείῳ ·
On the eighth day, when he was doing poorly, someone who had heard in Sardis of the skill of Democedes of Croton told Darius of him;


3.129.3
3865
ὁ δὲ ἄγειν μιν τὴν ταχίστην παρ’ ἑωυτὸν ἐκέλευσε ·
and he told them to bring him as quickly as possible.


3.129.3
3866
τὸν δὲ ὡς ἐξεῦρον ἐν τοῖσι Ὀροίτεω ἀνδραπόδοισι ὅκου δὴ ἀπημελημένον , παρῆγον ἐς μέσον πέδας τε ἕλκοντα καὶ ῥάκεσι ἐσθημένον .
When they found him among the slaves of Oroetes, where he was forgotten, they brought him along, dragging his chains and dressed in rags.


3.130.1
3867
σταθέντα δὲ ἐς μέσον εἰρώτα ὁ Δαρεῖος τὴν τέχνην εἰ ἐπίσταιτο ·
Darius asked him when he was brought in if he were trained in medicine.


3.130.1
3868
ὁ δὲ οὐκ ὑπεδέκετο , ἀρρωδέων μὴ ἑωυτὸν ἐκφήνας τὸ παράπαν τῆς Ἑλλάδος ᾖ ἀπεστερημένος ·
He refused to admit it, for he was afraid that if he revealed himself he would be cut off from Hellas for good.


3.130.2
3869
κατεφάνη τε τῷ Δαρείῳ τεχνάζειν ἐπιστάμενος , καὶ τοὺς ἀγαγόντας αὐτὸν ἐκέλευσε μάστιγάς τε καὶ κέντρα παραφέρειν ἐς τὸ μέσον .
It was clear to Darius, however, that he was trained in deceit, and he ordered those who had brought him to bring along scourges and goads.


3.130.2
3870
ὁ δὲ ἐνθαῦτα δὴ ὦν ἐκφαίνει , φὰς ἀτρεκέως μὲν οὐκ ἐπίστασθαι , ὁμιλήσας δὲ ἰητρῷ φλαύρως ἔχειν τὴν τέχνην .
Then he confessed, saying that his training was not exact, but that he had associated with a physician and had a passing acquaintance with medicine.


3.130.3
3871
μετὰ δέ , ὥς οἱ ἐπέτρεψε , Ἑλληνικοῖσι ἰήμασι χρεώμενος καὶ ἤπια μετὰ τὰ ἰσχυρὰ προσάγων ὕπνου τέ μιν λαγχάνειν ἐποίεε καὶ ἐν χρόνῳ ὀλίγῳ ὑγιέα μιν ἀπέδεξε , οὐδαμὰ ἔτι ἐλπίζοντα ἀρτίπουν ἔσεσθαι .
But when Darius turned the case over to him and Democedes applied Greek remedies and used gentleness instead of the Egyptians' violence, he enabled him to sleep and in a short time had him well, although Darius had had no hope of regaining the use of his foot.


3.130.4
3872
δωρέεται δή μιν μετὰ ταῦτα ὁ Δαρεῖος πεδέων χρυσέων δύο ζεύγεσι ·
After this, Darius rewarded him with a gift of two pairs of golden fetters.


3.130.4
3873
ὁ δέ μιν ἐπείρετο εἴ οἱ διπλήσιον τὸ κακὸν ἐπίτηδες νέμει , ὅτι μιν ὑγιέα ἐποίησε .
“Is it your purpose,” Democedes asked, “to double my pains for making you well?”


3.130.4
3874
ἡσθεὶς δὲ τῷ ἔπεϊ ὁ Δαρεῖος ἀποπέμπει μιν παρὰ τὰς ἑωυτοῦ γυναῖκας ·
Pleased by the retort, Darius sent him to his own wives.


3.130.4
3875
παράγοντες δὲ οἱ εὐνοῦχοι ἔλεγον πρὸς τὰς γυναῖκας ὡς βασιλέι οὗτος εἴη ὃς τὴν ψυχὴν ἀπέδωκε .
The eunuchs who conducted him told the women that this was the man who had given the king his life back.


3.130.5
3876
ὑποτύπτουσα δὲ αὐτέων ἑκάστη φιάλῃ τοῦ χρυσοῦ ἐς θήκην ἐδωρέετο Δημοκήδεα οὕτω δή τι δαψιλέι δωρεῇ ὡς τοὺς ἀποπίπτοντας ἀπὸ τῶν φιαλέων στατῆρας ἑπόμενος ὁ οἰκέτης , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Σκίτων , ἀνελέγετο καί οἱ χρῆμα πολλόν τι χρυσοῦ συνελέχθη .
Each of them took a bowl and dipped it in a chest full of gold, so richly rewarding Democedes that the servant accompanying him, whose name was Sciton, collected a very great sum of gold by picking up the staters that fell from the bowls.


3.131.1
3877
ὁ δὲ Δημοκήδης οὗτος ὧδε ἐκ Κρότωνος ἀπιγμένος Πολυκράτεϊ ὡμίλησε ·
Now this is how Democedes had come from Croton to live with Polycrates:


3.131.1
3878
πατρὶ συνείχετο ἐν τῇ Κρότωνι ὀργὴν χαλεπῷ ·
he was oppressed by a harsh-tempered father at Croton;


3.131.1
3879
τοῦτον ἐπείτε οὐκ ἐδύνατο φέρειν , ἀπολιπὼν οἴχετο ἐς Αἴγιναν .
since he could not stand him, he left him and went to Aegina.


3.131.1
3880
καταστὰς δὲ ἐς ταύτην πρώτῳ ἔτεϊ ὑπερεβάλετο τοὺς ἄλλους ἰητρούς , ἀσκευής περ ἐὼν καὶ ἔχων οὐδὲν τῶν ὅσα περὶ τὴν τέχνην ἐστὶ ἐργαλήια .
Within the first year after settling there, he excelled the rest of the physicians, although he had no equipment nor any medical implements.


3.131.2
3881
καί μιν δευτέρῳ ἔτεϊ ταλάντου Αἰγινῆται δημοσίῃ μισθοῦνται , τρίτῳ δὲ ἔτεϊ Ἀθηναῖοι ἑκατὸν μνέων , τετάρτῳ δὲ ἔτεϊ Πολυκράτης δυῶν ταλάντων .
In his second year the Aeginetans paid him a talent to be their public physician; in the third year the Athenians hired him for a hundred minae, and Polycrates in the fourth year for two talents.


3.131.2
3882
οὕτω μὲν ἀπίκετο ἐς τὴν Σάμον , καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου τοῦ ἀνδρὸς οὐκ ἥκιστα Κροτωνιῆται ἰητροὶ εὐδοκίμησαν .
Thus he came to Samos, and not least because of this man the physicians of Croton were well-respected.


3.131.3
3883
ἐγένετο γὰρ ὦν τοῦτο ὅτε πρῶτοι μὲν Κροτωνιῆται ἰητροὶ ἐλέγοντο ἀνὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα εἶναι , δεύτεροι δὲ Κυρηναῖοι .
for at this time the best physicians in Greek countries were those of Croton, and next to them those of Cyrene.


3.131.3
3884
κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν δὲ τοῦτον χρόνον καὶ Ἀργεῖοι ἤκουον μουσικὴν εἶναι Ἑλλήνων πρῶτοι .
About the same time the Argives had the name of being the best musicians.


3.132.1
3885
τότε δὴ ὁ Δημοκήδης ἐν τοῖσι Σούσοισι ἐξιησάμενος Δαρεῖον οἶκόν τε μέγιστον εἶχε καὶ ὁμοτράπεζος βασιλέι ἐγεγόνεε , πλήν τε ἑνὸς τοῦ ἐς Ἕλληνας ἀπιέναι πάντα τ- ἄλλα οἱ παρῆν .
So now because he had healed Darius at    Susa    Democedes had a very grand house and ate at the king's table; he had everything, except permission to return to the Greeks.


3.132.2
3886
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους ἰητρούς , οἳ βασιλέα πρότερον ἰῶντο , μέλλοντας ἀνασκολοπιεῖσθαι ὅτι ὑπὸ Ἕλληνος ἰητροῦ ἑσσώθησαν , τούτους βασιλέα παραιτησάμενος ἐρρύσατο ·
When the Egyptian physicians who until now had attended the king were about to be impaled for being less skilful than a Greek, Democedes interceded with the king for them and saved them;


3.132.2
3887
τοῦτο δὲ μάντιν Ἠλεῖον Πολυκράτεϊ ἐπισπόμενον καὶ ἀπημελημένον ἐν τοῖσι ἀνδραπόδοισι ἐρρύσατο .
and he saved an Elean seer, too, who had been a retainer of Polycrates' and was forgotten among the slaves.


3.132.2
3888
ἦν δὲ μέγιστον πρῆγμα Δημοκήδης παρὰ βασιλέι .
Democedes was a man of considerable influence with the King.


3.133.1
3889
ἐν χρόνῳ δὲ ὀλίγῳ μετὰ ταῦτα τάδε ἄλλα συνήνεικε γενέσθαι .
A short time after this, something else occurred;


3.133.1
3890
Ἀτόσσῃ τῇ Κύρου μὲν θυγατρὶ Δαρείου δὲ γυναικὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ μαστοῦ ἔφυ φῦμα , μετὰ δὲ ἐκραγὲν ἐνέμετο πρόσω .
there was a swelling on the breast of Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus and wife of Darius, which broke and spread further.


3.133.1
3891
ὅσον μὲν δὴ χρόνον ἦν ἔλασσον , ἣ δὲ κρύπτουσα καὶ αἰσχυνομένη ἔφραζε οὐδενί ·
As long as it was small, she hid it out of shame and told no one;


3.133.1
3892
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐν κακῷ ἦν , μετεπέμψατο τὸν Δημοκήδεα καί οἱ ἐπέδεξε .
but when it got bad, she sent for Democedes and showed it to him.


3.133.2
3893
ὁ δὲ φὰς ὑγιέα ποιήσειν ἐξορκοῖ μιν ἦ μέν οἱ ἀντυπουργήσειν ἐκείνην τοῦτο τὸ ἂν αὐτῆς δεηθῇ ·
He said he would cure her, but made her swear that she would repay him by granting whatever he asked of her,


3.133.2
3894
δεήσεσθαι δὲ οὐδενὸς τῶν ὅσα ἐς αἰσχύνην ἐστὶ φέροντα .
and said that he would ask nothing shameful.


3.134.1
3895
ὡς δὲ ἄρα μιν μετὰ ταῦτα ἰώμενος ὑγιέα ἀπέδεξε , ἐνθαῦτα δὴ διδαχθεῖσα ὑπὸ τοῦ Δημοκήδεος ἡ Ἄτοσσα προσέφερε ἐν τῇ κοίτῃ Δαρείῳ λόγον τοιόνδε .
And after he treated her and did cure her, Atossa addressed Darius in their chamber as she had been instructed by Democedes:


3.134.1
3896
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἔχων δύναμιν τοσαύτην κάτησαι , οὔτε τι ἔθνος προσκτώμενος οὔτε δύναμιν Πέρσῃσι .
“O King, although you have so much power you are idle, acquiring no additional people or power for the Persians.


3.134.2
3897
οἰκὸς δὲ ἐστὶ ἄνδρα καὶ νέον καὶ χρημάτων μεγάλων δεσπότην φαίνεσθαί τι ἀποδεικνύμενον , ἵνα καὶ Πέρσαι ἐκμάθωσι ὅτι ὑπ’ ἀνδρὸς ἄρχονται .
The right thing for a man who is both young and the master of great wealth is to be seen aggrandizing himself, so that the Persians know too that they are ruled by a man.


3.134.2
3898
ἐπ’ ἀμφότερα δέ τοι συμφέρει ταῦτα ποιέειν , καὶ ἵνα σφέων Πέρσαι ἐπίστωνται ἄνδρα εἶναι τὸν προεστεῶτα , καὶ ἵνα τρίβωνται πολέμῳ μηδὲ σχολὴν ἄγοντες ἐπιβουλεύωσί τοι .
On two counts it is in your interest to do this, both so that the Persians know that their leader is a man, and so that they be occupied by war and not have time to plot against you.


3.134.3
3899
νῦν γὰρ ἄν τι καὶ ἀποδέξαιο ἔργον , ἕως νέος εἶς ἡλικίην ·
You should show some industry now, while you are still young:


3.134.3
3900
αὐξομένῳ γὰρ τῷ σώματι συναύξονται καὶ αἱ φρένες , γηράσκοντι δὲ συγγηράσκουσι καὶ ἐς τὰ πρήγματα πάντα ἀπαμβλύνονται " .
for sense grows with the growing body, but grows old too with the aging body and loses its edge for all purposes.”


3.134.4
3901
ἣ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἐκ διδαχῆς ἔλεγε , ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
She said this as instructed, but he replied with this:


3.134.4
3902
" ὦ γύναι , πάντα ὅσα περ αὐτὸς ἐπινοέω ποιήσειν εἴρηκας ·
“Woman, what you have said is exactly what I had in mind to do.


3.134.4
3903
ἐγὼ γὰρ βεβούλευμαι ζεύξας γέφυραν ἐκ τῆσδε τῆς ἠπείρου ἐς τὴν ἑτέρην ἤπειρον ἐπὶ Σκύθας στρατεύεσθαι ·
For I have planned to make a bridge from this continent to the other continent and lead an army against the Scythians;


3.134.4
3904
καὶ ταῦτα ὀλίγου χρόνου ἔσται τελεύμενα " .
and this will be done in a short time.”


3.134.4
3905
λέγει Ἄτοσσα τάδε .
Atossa said this.


3.134.5
3906
" ὅρα νυν , ἐπὶ Σκύθας μὲν τὴν πρώτην ἰέναι ἔασον ·
“Look,” Atossa said, “let the Scythians go for the present;


3.134.5
3907
οὗτοι γάρ , ἐπεὰν σὺ βούλῃ , ἔσονταί τοι ·
you shall have them whenever you like;


3.134.5
3908
σὺ δέ μοι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα στρατεύεσθαι .
I tell you, march against Hellas.


3.134.5
3909
ἐπιθυμέω γὰρ λόγῳ πυνθανομένη Λακαίνας τέ μοι γενέσθαι θεραπαίνας καὶ Ἀργείας καὶ Ἀττικὰς καὶ Κορινθίας .
I have heard of Laconian and Argive and Attic and Corinthian women, and would like to have them as servants.


3.134.5
3910
ἔχεις δὲ ἄνδρα ἐπιτηδεότατον ἀνδρῶν πάντων δέξαι τε ἕκαστα τῆς Ἑλλάδος καὶ κατηγήσασθαι , τοῦτον ὅς σευ τὸν πόδα ἐξιήσατο " .
You have a man who is fitter than any other to instruct and guide you in everything concerning Hellas: I mean the physician who healed your foot.”


3.134.6
3911
ἀμείβεται Δαρεῖος " ὦ γύναι , ἐπεὶ τοίνυν τοι δοκέει τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἡμέας πρῶτα ἀποπειρᾶσθαι , κατασκόπους μοι δοκέει Περσέων πρῶτον ἄμεινον εἶναι ὁμοῦ τούτῳ τῷ σὺ λέγεις πέμψαι ἐς αὐτούς , οἳ μαθόντες καὶ ἰδόντες ἐξαγγελέουσι ἕκαστα αὐτῶν ἡμῖν ·
Darius answered, “Woman, since you think that we should make an attempt on Greece first, it seems to me to be best that we first send Persian spies with the man whom you mention, who shall tell us everything that they learn and observe;


3.134.6
3912
καὶ ἔπειτα ἐξεπιστάμενος ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς τρέψομαι " .
and then when I am fully informed I shall rouse myself against them.”


3.135.1
3913
ταῦτα εἶπε καὶ ἅμα ἔπος τε καὶ ἔργον ἐποίεε .
He said this, and no sooner said than did it.


3.135.1
3914
ἐπείτε γὰρ τάχιστα ἡμέρη ἐπέλαμψε , καλέσας Περσέων ἄνδρας δοκίμους πεντεκαίδεκα ἐνετέλλετό σφι ἑπομένους Δημοκήδεϊ διεξελθεῖν τὰ παραθαλάσσια τῆς Ἑλλάδος , ὅκως τε μὴ διαδρήσεται σφέας ὁ Δημοκήδης , ἀλλά μιν πάντως ὀπίσω ἀπάξουσι .
For the next day at dawn he summoned fifteen prominent Persians, and instructed them to go with Democedes and sail along the coast of Hellas; telling them, too, by all means to bring the physician back and not let him escape.


3.135.2
3915
ἐντειλάμενος δὲ τούτοισι ταῦτα , δεύτερα καλέσας αὐτὸν Δημοκήδεα ἐδέετο αὐτοῦ ὅκως ἐξηγησάμενος πᾶσαν καὶ ἐπιδέξας τὴν Ἑλλάδα τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι ὀπίσω ἥξει ·
Having given these instructions to them, he then sent for Democedes, and asked of him that when he had shown and made clear all of Greece to the Persians, he would come back;


3.135.2
3916
δῶρα δέ μιν τῷ πατρὶ καὶ τοῖσι ἀδελφεοῖσι ἐκέλευε πάντα τὰ ἐκείνου ἔπιπλα λαβόντα ἄγειν , φὰς ἄλλα οἱ πολλαπλήσια ἀντιδώσειν ·
and he told him to take all his movable goods to give to his father and siblings, saying that he would give him many times as much in return.


3.135.2
3917
πρὸς δὲ ἐς τὰ δῶρα ὁλκάδα οἱ ἔφη συμβαλέεσθαι πλήσας ἀγαθῶν παντοίων , τὴν ἅμα οἱ πλεύσεσθαι .
He would send with him a ship with a cargo of all good things.


3.135.3
3918
Δαρεῖος μὲν δή , δοκέειν ἐμοί , ἀπ’ οὐδενὸς δολεροῦ νόου ἐπαγγέλλετό οἱ ταῦτα .
Darius, I think, made this promise without a treacherous intent,


3.135.3
3919
Δημοκήδης δὲ δείσας μή εὑ ἐκπειρῷτο Δαρεῖος , οὔτι ἐπιδραμὼν πάντα τὰ διδόμενα ἐδέκετο , ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν ἑωυτοῦ κατὰ χώρην ἔφη καταλείψειν , ἵνα ὀπίσω σφέα ἀπελθὼν ἔχοι , τὴν μέντοι ὁλκάδα , τήν οἱ Δαρεῖος ἐπαγγέλλετο ἐς τὴν δωρεὴν τοῖσι ἀδελφεοῖσι , δέκεσθαι ἔφη .
but Democedes was afraid that Darius was testing him; therefore he was in no hurry to accept all that was offered, but answered that he would leave his own possessions where they were, so as to have them when he returned; the ship which Darius promised him to carry the gifts for his siblings, he said he would accept.


3.135.3
3920
ἐντειλάμενος δὲ καὶ τούτῳ τ- αὐτὰ ὁ Δαρεῖος ἀποστέλλει αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ θάλασσαν .
Having given the same instructions to Democedes too, Darius sent them all to the coast.


3.136.1
3921
καταβάντες δὲ οὗτοι ἐς Φοινίκην καὶ Φοινίκης ἐς Σιδῶνα πόλιν αὐτίκα μὲν τριήρεας δύο ἐπλήρωσαν , ἅμα δὲ αὐτῇσι καὶ γαῦλον μέγαν παντοίων ἀγαθῶν ·
They came down to the city of Sidon in Phoenicia, and there chartered two triremes, as well as a great galley laden with all good things;


3.136.1
3922
παρεσκευασμένοι δὲ πάντα ἔπλεον ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα , προσίσχοντες δὲ αὐτῆς τὰ παραθαλάσσια ἐθηεῦντο καὶ ἀπεγράφοντο , ἐς ὃ τὰ πολλὰ αὐτῆς καὶ ὀνομαστὰ θεησάμενοι ἀπίκοντο τῆς Ἰταλίης ἐς Τάραντα .
and when everything was ready they set sail for Hellas, where they surveyed and mapped the coasts to which they came; until having viewed the greater and most famous parts they reached Tarentum in Italy.


3.136.2
3923
ἐνθαῦτα δὲ ἐκ ῥηστώνης τῆς Δημοκήδεος Ἀριστοφιλίδης τῶν Ταραντίνων ὁ βασιλεὺς τοῦτο μὲν τὰ πηδάλια παρέλυσε τῶν Μηδικέων νεῶν , τοῦτο δὲ αὐτοὺς τοὺς Πέρσας εἶρξε ὡς κατασκόπους δῆθεν ἐόντας .
There Aristophilides, king of the Tarentines, out of sympathy for Democedes, took the steering gear off the Median ships and put the Persians under a guard, calling them spies.


3.136.2
3924
ἐν ᾧ δὲ οὗτοι ταῦτα ἔπασχον , ὁ Δημοκήδης ἐς τὴν Κρότωνα ἀπικνέεται ·
While they were in this plight, Democedes made his way to Croton;


3.136.2
3925
ἀπιγμένου δὲ ἤδη τούτου ἐς τὴν ἑωυτοῦ ὁ Ἀριστοφιλίδης ἔλυσε τοὺς Πέρσας , καὶ τὰ παρέλαβε τῶν νεῶν ἀπέδωκέ σφι .
and Aristophilides did not set the Persians free and give them back what he had taken from their ships until the physician was in his own country.


3.137.1
3926
πλέοντες δὲ ἐνθεῦτεν οἱ Πέρσαι καὶ διώκοντες Δημοκήδεα ἀπικνέονται ἐς τὴν Κρότωνα , εὑρόντες δέ μιν ἀγοράζοντα ἅπτοντο αὐτοῦ .
The Persians sailed from    Tarentum    and pursued Democedes to    Croton   , where they found him in the marketplace and tried to seize him.


3.137.2
3927
τῶν δὲ Κροτωνιητέων οἳ μὲν καταρρωδέοντες τὰ Περσικὰ πρήγματα προϊέναι ἕτοιμοι ἦσαν , οἳ δὲ ἀντάπτοντο καὶ τοῖσι σκυτάλοισι ἔπαιον τοὺς Πέρσας προϊσχομένους ἔπεα τάδε .
Some Crotoniats, who feared the Persian power, would have given him up; but others resisted and beat the Persians with their sticks.


3.137.2
3928
" ἄνδρες Κροτωνιῆται , ὁρᾶτε τὰ ποιέετε ·
“Men of Croton, watch what you do,” said the Persians;


3.137.2
3929
ἄνδρα βασιλέος δρηπέτην γενόμενον ἐξαιρέεσθε .
“you are harboring an escaped slave of the King's.


3.137.3
3930
κῶς ταῦτα βασιλέι Δαρείῳ ἐκχρήσει περιυβρίσθαι ;
How do you think King Darius will like this insolence?


3.137.3
3931
κῶς δὲ ὑμῖν τὰ ποιεύμενα ἕξει καλῶς , ἢν ἀπέλησθε ἡμέας ;
What good will it do you if he gets away from us?


3.137.3
3932
ἐπὶ τίνα δὲ τῆσδε προτέρην στρατευσόμεθα πόλιν ;
What city will we attack first here?


3.137.3
3933
τίνα δὲ προτέρην ἀνδραποδίζεσθαι περιησόμεθα " ;
Which will we try to enslave first?”


3.137.4
3934
ταῦτα λέγοντες τοὺς Κροτωνιήτας οὔκων ἔπειθον , ἀλλ’ ἐξαιρεθέντες τε τὸν Δημοκήδεα καὶ τὸν γαῦλον τὸν ἅμα ἤγοντο ἀπαιρεθέντες ἀπέπλεον ὀπίσω ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην , οὐδ’ ἔτι ἐζήτησαν τὸ προσωτέρω τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἀπικόμενοι ἐκμαθεῖν , ἐστερημένοι τοῦ ἡγεμόνος .
But the men of    Croton    paid no attention to them; so the Persians lost Democedes and the galley with which they had come, and sailed back for    Asia   , making no attempt to visit and learn of the further parts of    Hellas    now that their guide was taken from them.


3.137.5
3935
τοσόνδε μέντοι ἐνετείλατό σφι Δημοκήδης ἀναγομένοισι , κελεύων εἰπεῖν σφεας Δαρείῳ ὅτι ἅρμοσται τὴν Μίλωνος θυγατέρα Δημοκήδης γυναῖκα .
But Democedes gave them a message as they were setting sail; they should tell Darius, he said, that Democedes was engaged to the daughter of Milon.


3.137.5
3936
τοῦ γὰρ δὴ παλαιστέω Μίλωνος ἦν οὔνομα πολλὸν παρὰ βασιλέι ·
For Darius held the name of Milon the wrestler in great honor;


3.137.5
3937
κατὰ δὲ τοῦτό μοι δοκέει σπεῦσαι τὸν γάμον τοῦτον τελέσας χρήματα μεγάλα Δημοκήδης , ἵνα φανῇ πρὸς Δαρείου ἐὼν καὶ ἐν τῇ ἑωυτοῦ δόκιμος .
and, to my thinking, Democedes sought this match and paid a great sum for it to show Darius that he was a man of influence in his own country as well as in Persia.


3.138.1
3938
ἀναχθέντες δὲ ἐκ τῆς Κρότωνος οἱ Πέρσαι ἐκπίπτουσι τῇσι νηυσὶ ἐς Ἰηπυγίην , καί σφεας δουλεύοντας ἐνθαῦτα Γίλλος ἀνὴρ Ταραντῖνος φυγὰς ῥυσάμενος ἀπήγαγε παρὰ βασιλέα Δαρεῖον .
The Persians then put out from Croton; but their ships were wrecked on the coast of Iapygia, and they were made slaves in the country until Gillus, an exile from Tarentum, released and restored them to Darius,


3.138.1
3939
ὁ δὲ ἀντὶ τούτων ἕτοιμος ἦν διδόναι τοῦτο ὅ τι βούλοιτο αὐτός .
who was ready to give him whatever he wanted in return.


3.138.2
3940
Γίλλος δὲ αἱρέεται κάτοδόν οἱ ἐς Τάραντα γενέσθαι , προαπηγησάμενος τὴν συμφορήν ·
Gillus chose to be restored to Tarentum and told the story of his misfortune;


3.138.2
3941
ἵνα δὲ μὴ συνταράξῃ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἢν δι’ αὐτὸν στόλος μέγας πλέῃ ἐπὶ τὴν Ἰταλίην , Κνιδίους μούνους ἀποχρᾶν οἱ ἔφη τοὺς κατάγοντας γίνεσθαι , δοκέων ἀπὸ τούτων ἐόντων τοῖσι Ταραντίνοισι φίλων μάλιστα τὴν κάτοδόν οἱ ἔσεσθαι .
but, so as not to be the occasion of agitating Greece, if on his account a great expedition sailed against Italy, he said that it was enough that the Cnidians alone be his escort; for he supposed that the Tarentines would be the readier to receive him back as the Cnidians were their friends.


3.138.3
3942
Δαρεῖος δὲ ὑποδεξάμενος ἐπετέλεε ·
Darius kept his word,


3.138.3
3943
πέμψας γὰρ ἄγγελον ἐς Κνίδον κατάγειν σφέας ἐκέλευε Γίλλον ἐς Τάραντα .
and sent a messenger to the men of Cnidos, telling them to take Gillus back to Tarentum.


3.138.3
3944
πειθόμενοι δὲ Δαρείῳ Κνίδιοι Ταραντίνους οὔκων ἔπειθον , βίην δὲ ἀδύνατοι ἦσαν προσφέρειν .
They obeyed Darius; but they could not persuade the Tarentines, and were not able to apply force.


3.138.4
3945
ταῦτα μέν νυν οὕτω ἐπρήχθη ·
This is what happened,


3.138.4
3946
οὗτοι δὲ πρῶτοι ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἀπίκοντο Πέρσαι , καὶ οὗτοι διὰ τοιόνδε πρῆγμα κατάσκοποι ἐγένοντο .
and these Persians were the first who came from Asia into Hellas, and they came to view the country for this reason.


3.139.1
3947
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Σάμον βασιλεὺς Δαρεῖος αἱρέει , πολίων πασέων πρώτην Ἑλληνίδων καὶ βαρβάρων , διὰ τοιήνδε τινὰ αἰτίην .
After this, King Darius conquered Samos, the greatest of all city states, Greek or barbarian, the reason for his conquest being this:


3.139.1
3948
Καμβύσεω τοῦ Κύρου στρατευομένου ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον ἄλλοι τε συχνοὶ ἐς τὴν Αἴγυπτον ἀπίκοντο Ἑλλήνων , οἳ μέν , ὡς οἰκός , κατ’ ἐμπορίην στρατευόμενοι , οἳ δὲ τινὲς καὶ αὐτῆς τῆς χώρης θεηταί ·
when Cambyses, son of Cyrus, invaded Egypt, many Greeks came with the army, some to trade, as was natural, and some to see the country itself;


3.139.1
3949
τῶν ἦν καὶ Συλοσῶν ὁ Αἰάκεος , Πολυκράτεός τε ἐὼν ἀδελφεὸς καὶ φεύγων ἐκ Σάμου .
among them was Syloson, son of Aeaces, who was Polycrates' brother and in exile from Samos.


3.139.2
3950
τοῦτον τὸν Συλοσῶντα κατέλαβε εὐτυχίη τις τοιήδε .
This Syloson had a stroke of good luck.


3.139.2
3951
λαβὼν χλανίδα καὶ περιβαλόμενος πυρρὴν ἠγόραζε ἐν τῇ Μέμφι ·
He was in the market at Memphis wearing a red cloak,


3.139.2
3952
ἰδὼν δὲ αὐτὸν Δαρεῖος , δορυφόρος τε ἐὼν Καμβύσεω καὶ λόγου οὐδενός κω μεγάλου , ἐπεθύμησε τῆς χλανίδος καὶ αὐτὴν προσελθὼν ὠνέετο .
when Darius, at that time one of Cambyses' guard and as yet a man of no great importance, saw him, and coveting the cloak came and tried to buy it.


3.139.3
3953
ὁ δὲ Συλοσῶν ὁρέων τὸν Δαρεῖον μεγάλως ἐπιθυμέοντα τῆς χλανίδος , θείῃ τύχῃ χρεώμενος λέγει " ἐγὼ ταύτην πωλέω μὲν οὐδενὸς χρήματος , δίδωμι δὲ ἄλλως , εἴ περ οὕτω δεῖ γενέσθαι πάντως τοι " .
When Syloson saw Darius' eagerness, by good luck he said, “I will not sell this for any money, but I give it to you free if you must have it so much.”


3.139.3
3954
αἰνέσας ταῦτα ὁ Δαρεῖος παραλαμβάνει τὸ εἷμα .
Extolling this, Darius accepted the garment.


3.140.1
3955
ὁ μὲν δὴ Συλοσῶν ἠπίστατο τοῦτό οἱ ἀπολωλέναι δι’ εὐηθείην .
Syloson supposed that he had lost his cloak out of foolish good nature.


3.140.1
3956
ὡς δὲ τοῦ χρόνου προβαίνοντος Καμβύσης τε ἀπέθανε καὶ τῷ Μάγῳ ἐπανέστησαν οἱ ἑπτὰ καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἑπτὰ Δαρεῖος τὴν βασιληίην ἔσχε , πυνθάνεται ὁ Συλοσῶν ὡς ἡ βασιληίη περιεληλύθοι ἐς τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα τῷ κοτὲ αὐτὸς ἔδωκε ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ δεηθέντι τὸ εἷμα .
But in time Cambyses died, the seven rebelled against the Magus, and Darius of the seven came to the throne; Syloson then learned that the successor to the royal power was the man to whom he had given the garment in Egypt;


3.140.1
3957
ἀναβὰς δὲ ἐς τὰ Σοῦσα ἵζετο ἐς τὰ πρόθυρα τῶν βασιλέος οἰκίων καὶ ἔφη Δαρείου εὐεργέτης εἶναι .
so he went up to Susa and sat in the king's antechamber, saying that he was one of Darius' benefactors.


3.140.2
3958
ἀγγέλλει ταῦτα ἀκούσας ὁ πυλουρὸς τῷ βασιλέι ·
When the doorkeeper brought word of this to the king,


3.140.2
3959
ὁ δὲ θωμάσας λέγει πρὸς αὐτόν " καὶ τίς ἐστὶ Ἑλλήνων εὐεργέτης τῷ ἐγὼ προαιδεῦμαι , νεωστὶ μὲν τὴν ἀρχὴν ἔχων ;
Darius asked “But to what Greek benefactor can I owe thanks? In the little time since I have been king hardly one of that nation has come to us,


3.140.2
3960
ἀναβέβηκε δ’ ἤ τις ἢ οὐδείς κω παρ’ ἡμέας αὐτῶν , ἔχω δὲ χρέος εἰπεῖν οὐδὲν ἀνδρὸς Ἕλληνος .
and I have, I may say, no use for any Greek. Nevertheless bring him in, so that I may know what he means.”


3.140.2
3961
ὅμως δὲ αὐτὸν παράγετε ἔσω , ἵνα εἰδέω τί θέλων λέγει ταῦτα " .
Nevertheless bring him in, so that I may know what he means.


3.140.3
3962
παρῆγε ὁ πυλουρὸς τὸν Συλοσῶντα , στάντα δὲ ἐς μέσον εἰρώτων οἱ ἑρμηνέες τίς τε εἴη καὶ τί ποιήσας εὐεργέτης φησὶ εἶναι βασιλέος .
The doorkeeper brought Syloson in and the interpreters asked him as he stood there who he was and what he had done to call himself the king’s benefactor.


3.140.3
3963
εἶπε ὦν ὁ Συλοσῶν πάντα τὰ περὶ τὴν χλανίδα γενόμενα , καὶ ὡς αὐτὸς εἴη κεῖνος ὁ δούς .
Then Syloson told the story of the cloak, and said that it was he who had given it.


3.140.4
3964
ἀμείβεται πρὸς ταῦτα Δαρεῖος " ὦ γενναιότατε ἀνδρῶν , σὺ κεῖνος εἶς ὃς ἐμοὶ οὐδεμίαν ἔχοντί κω δύναμιν ἔδωκας εἰ καὶ σμικρά , ἀλλ’ ὦν ἴση γε ἡ χάρις ὁμοίως ὡς εἰ νῦν κοθέν τι μέγα λάβοιμι ·
“Most generous man,” said Darius, “it was you who gave me a present when I had as yet no power; and if it was a small one, I was none the less grateful then than I am now when I get a big one.


3.140.4
3965
ἀντ’ ὧν τοι χρυσὸν καὶ ἄργυρον ἄπλετον δίδωμι , ὡς μή κοτέ τοι μεταμελήσῃ Δαρεῖον τὸν Ὑστάσπεος εὖ ποιήσαντι " .
In return, I give you gold and silver in abundance so you may never be sorry that you did Darius son of Hystaspes good.”


3.140.4
3966
λέγει πρὸς ταῦτα ὁ Συλοσῶν " ἐμοὶ μήτε χρυσὸν ὦ βασιλεῦ μήτε ἄργυρον δίδου , ἀλλ’ ἀνασωσάμενός μοι δὸς τὴν πατρίδα Σάμον , τὴν νῦν ἀδελφεοῦ τοῦ ἐμοῦ Πολυκράτεος ἀποθανόντος ὑπὸ Ὀροίτεω ἔχει δοῦλος ἡμέτερος ·
Syloson replied, “Do not give me gold or silver, O King, but save my native land, Samos, which is now held by our slave since my brother Polycrates was killed by Oroetes.”


3.140.5
3967
ταύτην μοι δὸς ἄνευ τε φόνου καὶ ἐξανδραποδίσιος " .
Syloson answered, “Do not give me gold, O king, or silver, but    Samos   , my country, which our slave has now that my brother Polycrates has been killed by Oroetes; give me this without killing or enslaving.”


3.141.1
3968
ταῦτα ἀκούσας Δαρεῖος ἀπέστελλε στρατιήν τε καὶ στρατηγὸν Ὀτάνεα ἀνδρῶν τῶν ἑπτὰ γενόμενον , ἐντειλάμενος , ὅσων ἐδεήθη ὁ Συλοσῶν , ταῦτά οἱ ποιέειν ἐπιτελέα .
Having heard this, Darius sent an army and Otanes, one of the seven, to command it, instructing him to do whatever Syloson asked.


3.141.1
3969
καταβὰς δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν ὁ Ὀτάνης ἔστελλε τὴν στρατιήν .
So Otanes went down to the coast and got his army ready.


3.142.1
3970
τῆς δὲ Σάμου Μαιάνδριος ὁ Μαιανδρίου εἶχε τὸ κράτος , ἐπιτροπαίην παρὰ Πολυκράτεος λαβὼν τὴν ἀρχήν ·
Now Samos was ruled by Maeandrius, son of Maeandrius, who had authority delegated by Polycrates.


3.142.1
3971
τῷ δικαιοτάτῳ ἀνδρῶν βουλομένῳ γενέσθαι οὐκ ἐξεγένετο .
He wanted to be the justest of men, but that was impossible.


3.142.2
3972
ἐπειδὴ γάρ οἱ ἐξαγγέλθη ὁ Πολυκράτεος θάνατος , ἐποίεε τοιάδε ·
For when he learned of Polycrates' death, he did the following things.


3.142.2
3973
πρῶτα μὲν Διὸς ἐλευθερίου βωμὸν ἱδρύσατο καὶ τέμενος περὶ αὐτὸν οὔρισε τοῦτο τὸ νῦν ἐν τῷ προαστείῳ ἐστί ·
first he set up an altar to Zeus the Liberator and marked out around it that sacred enclosure which is still to be seen in the suburb of the city;


3.142.2
3974
μετὰ δέ , ὥς οἱ ἐπεποίητο , ἐκκλησίην συναγείρας πάντων τῶν ἀστῶν ἔλεξε τάδε .
when this had been done, he called an assembly of all the citizens, and addressed them thus:


3.142.3
3975
" ἐμοί , ὡς ἴστε καὶ ὑμεῖς , σκῆπτρον καὶ δύναμις πᾶσα ἡ Πολυκράτεος ἐπιτέτραπται , καί μοι παρέχει νῦν ὑμέων ἄρχειν .
“To me, as you know, have come Polycrates' scepter and all of his power, and it is in my power now to rule you.


3.142.3
3976
ἐγὼ δὲ τὰ τῷ πέλας ἐπιπλήσσω , αὐτὸς κατὰ δύναμιν οὐ ποιήσω ·
But I, so far as it lies in me, shall not do myself what I blame in my neighbor.


3.142.3
3977
οὔτε γάρ μοι Πολυκράτης ἤρεσκε δεσπόζων ἀνδρῶν ὁμοίων ἑωυτῷ οὔτε ἄλλος ὅστις τοιαῦτα ποιέει .
I always disliked it that Polycrates or any other man should lord it over men like himself.


3.142.3
3978
Πολυκράτης μέν νυν ἐξέπλησε μοῖραν τὴν ἑωυτοῦ , ἐγὼ δὲ ἐς μέσον τὴν ἀρχὴν τιθεὶς ἰσονομίην ὑμῖν προαγορεύω .
Polycrates has fulfilled his destiny, and inviting you to share his power I proclaim equality.


3.142.4
3979
τοσάδε μέντοι δικαιῶ γέρεα ἐμεωυτῷ γενέσθαι , ἐκ μέν γε τῶν Πολυκράτεος χρημάτων ἐξαίρετα ἓξ τάλαντά μοι γενέσθαι , ἱρωσύνην δὲ πρὸς τούτοισι αἱρεῦμαι αὐτῷ τέ μοι καὶ τοῖσι ἀπ’ ἐμεῦ αἰεὶ γινομένοισι τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ ἐλευθερίου ·
Only I claim for my own privilege that six talents of Polycrates' wealth be set apart for my use,


3.142.4
3980
τῷ αὐτός τε ἱρὸν ἱδρυσάμην καὶ τὴν ἐλευθερίην ὑμῖν περιτίθημι " .
and that I and my descendants keep the priesthood of Zeus the Liberator, whose temple I have founded, and now I give you freedom.”


3.142.5
3981
ὃ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα τοῖσι Σαμίοισι ἐπαγγέλλετο ·
Such was Maeandrius' promise to the Samians.


3.142.5
3982
τῶν δέ τις ἐξαναστὰς εἶπε " ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ἄξιος εἶς σύ γε ἡμέων ἄρχειν , γεγονώς τε κακῶς καὶ ἐὼν ὄλεθρος ·
But one of them arose and answered:


3.142.5
3983
ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ὅκως λόγον δώσεις τῶν μετεχείρισας χρημάτων " .
“But you are not even fit to rule us, low-born and vermin, but you had better give an account of the monies that you have handled.”


3.143.1
3984
ταῦτα εἶπε ἐὼν ἐν τοῖσι ἀστοῖσι δόκιμος , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Τελέσαρχος .
This was the speech of Telesarchus, a man of consequence among the citizens.


3.143.1
3985
Μαιάνδριος δὲ νόῳ λαβὼν ὡς εἰ μετήσει τὴν ἀρχήν , ἄλλος τις ἀντ’ αὐτοῦ τύραννος καταστήσεται , οὐδὲν ἔτι ἐν νόῳ εἶχε μετιέναι αὐτήν , ἀλλ’ ὡς ἀνεχώρησε ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν , μεταπεμπόμενος ἕνα ἕκαστον ὡς δὴ λόγον τῶν χρημάτων δώσων , συνέλαβε σφέας καὶ κατέδησε .
But Maeandrius, realizing that if he let go of the sovereignty someone else would make himself sovereign instead, resolved not to let it go. Withdrawing into the acropolis, he sent for the citizens individually as if he would give an account of the money; then he seized and bound them.


3.143.2
3986
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἐδεδέατο , Μαιάνδριον δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα κατέλαβε νοῦσος .
So they were imprisoned, and afterwards Maeandrius fell sick.


3.143.2
3987
ἐλπίζων δέ μιν ἀποθανέεσθαι ὁ ἀδελφεός , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Λυκάρητος , ἵνα εὐπετεστέρως κατάσχῃ τὰ ἐν τῇ Σάμῳ πρήγματα , κατακτείνει τοὺς δεσμώτας πάντας ·
His brother Lycaretus thought him likely to die, and, so that he might the more easily make himself master of Samos, he put all the prisoners to death.


3.143.2
3988
οὐ γὰρ δή , ὡς οἴκασι , ἐβούλοντο εἶναι ἐλεύθεροι .
They had, it would seem, no desire to be free.


3.144.1
3989
ἐπειδὴ ὦν ἀπίκοντο ἐς τὴν Σάμον οἱ Πέρσαι κατάγοντες Συλοσῶντα , οὔτε τίς σφι χεῖρας ἀνταείρεται , ὑπόσπονδοί τε ἔφασαν εἶναι ἕτοιμοι οἱ τοῦ Μαιανδρίου στασιῶται καὶ αὐτὸς Μαιάνδριος ἐκχωρῆσαι ἐκ τῆς νήσου .
So when the Persians brought Syloson back to Samos, no one raised a hand against them,


3.144.1
3990
καταινέσαντος δ’ ἐπὶ τούτοισι Ὀτάνεω καὶ σπεισαμένου , τῶν Περσέων οἱ πλείστου ἄξιοι θρόνους θέμενοι κατεναντίον τῆς ἀκροπόλιος κατέατο .
but Maeandrius and those of his faction offered to evacuate the island under a flag of truce; Otanes agreed to this, and after the treaty was made, the Persians of highest rank sat down on seats facing the acropolis.


3.145.1
3991
Μαιανδρίῳ δὲ τῷ τυράννῳ ἦν ἀδελφεὸς ὑπομαργότερος , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Χαρίλεως ·
Now Maeandrius the sovereign had a crazy brother named Charilaus, who lay bound in the dungeon for some offense;


3.145.1
3992
οὗτος ὅ τι δὴ ἐξαμαρτὼν ἐν γοργύρῃ ἐδέδετο , καὶ δὴ τότε ἐπακούσας τε τὰ πρησσόμενα καὶ διακύψας διὰ τῆς γοργύρης , ὡς εἶδε τοὺς Πέρσας εἰρηναίως κατημένους , ἐβόα τε καὶ ἔφη λέγων Μαιανδρίῳ θέλειν ἐλθεῖν ἐς λόγους .
this man heard what was going on, and by peering through the dungeon window saw the Persians sitting there peaceably; whereupon he cried with a loud voice that he wanted to talk to Maeandrius.


3.145.2
3993
ἐπακούσας δὲ ὁ Μαιάνδριος λύσαντας αὐτὸν ἐκέλευε ἄγειν παρ’ ἑωυτόν ·
His brother, hearing him, had Charilaus loosed and brought before him.


3.145.2
3994
ὡς δὲ ἄχθη τάχιστα , λοιδορέων τε καὶ κακίζων μιν ἀνέπειθε ἐπιθέσθαι τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι , λέγων τοιάδε .
No sooner had he been brought than he attempted with reviling and abuse to persuade Maeandrius to attack the Persians.


3.145.2
3995
" ἐμὲ μέν , ὦ κάκιστε ἀνδρῶν , ἐόντα σεωυτοῦ ἀδελφεὸν καὶ ἀδικήσαντα οὐδὲν ἄξιον δεσμοῦ δήσας γοργύρης ἠξίωσας ·
“Although I am your brother, you coward,” he said, “and did no wrong deserving of prison, you have bound and imprisoned me;


3.145.2
3996
ὁρέων δὲ τοὺς Πέρσας ἐκβάλλοντάς τέ σε καὶ ἄνοικον ποιέοντας οὐ τολμᾷς τίσασθαι , οὕτω δή τι ἐόντας εὐπετέας χειρωθῆναι .
but when you see the Persians throwing you out of house and home, you have no courage to avenge yourself, though you could so easily beat them?


3.145.3
3997
ἀλλ’ εἴ τοι σὺ σφέας καταρρώδηκας , ἐμοὶ δὸς τοὺς ἐπικούρους , καί σφεας ἐγὼ τιμωρήσομαι τῆς ἐνθάδε ἀπίξιος ·
If you are yourself afraid of them, give me your foreign guards, and I will punish them for coming here;


3.145.3
3998
αὐτὸν δέ σε ἐκπέμψαι ἐκ τῆς νήσου ἕτοιμος εἰμί " .
as for you, I will give you safe conduct out of the island.”


3.146.1
3999
ταῦτα δὲ ἔλεξε ὁ Χαρίλεως ·
This was what Charilaus said;


3.146.1
4000
Μαιάνδριος δὲ ὑπέλαβε τὸν λόγον , ὡς μὲν ἐγὼ δοκέω , οὐκ ἐς τοῦτο ἀφροσύνης ἀπικόμενος ὡς δόξαι τὴν ἑωυτοῦ δύναμιν περιέσεσθαι τῆς βασιλέος , ἀλλὰ φθονήσας μᾶλλον Συλοσῶντι εἰ ἀπονητὶ ἔμελλε ἀπολάμψεσθαι ἀκέραιον τὴν πόλιν .
and Maeandrius took his advice, to my thinking not because he was so foolish as to suppose that he would be strong enough to defeat the king, but because he did not want Syloson to recover Samos safe and sound with no trouble.


3.146.2
4001
ἐρεθίσας ὦν τοὺς Πέρσας ἤθελε ὡς ἀσθενέστατα ποιῆσαι τὰ Σάμια πρήγματα καὶ οὕτω παραδιδόναι , εὖ ἐξεπιστάμενος ὡς παθόντες οἱ Πέρσαι κακῶς προσεμπικρανέεσθαι ἔμελλον τοῖσι Σαμίοισι , εἰδώς τε ἑωυτῷ ἀσφαλέα ἔκδυσιν ἐοῦσαν ἐκ τῆς νήσου τότε ἐπεὰν αὐτὸς βούληται ·
He wanted therefore by provoking the Persians to weaken Samos as much as he could before surrendering it, for he was well aware that if the Persians were hurt they would be furiously angry with the Samians.


3.146.2
4002
ἐπεποίητο γάρ οἱ κρυπτὴ διῶρυξ ἐκ τῆς ἀκροπόλιος φέρουσα ἐπὶ θάλασσαν .
Besides, he knew that he could get himself safely off the island whenever he liked, having built a secret passage leading from the acropolis to the sea.


3.146.3
4003
αὐτὸς μὲν δὴ ὁ Μαιάνδριος ἐκπλέει ἐκ τῆς Σάμου ·
Maeandrius then set sail from Samos;


3.146.3
4004
τοὺς δ’ ἐπικούρους πάντας ὁπλίσας ὁ Χαρίλεως , καὶ ἀναπετάσας τὰς πύλας , ἐξῆκε ἐπὶ τοὺς Πέρσας οὔτε προσδεκομένους τοιοῦτο οὐδὲν δοκέοντάς τε δὴ πάντα συμβεβάναι .
but Charilaus armed all the guards, opened the acropolis' gates, and attacked the Persians.


3.146.3
4005
ἐμπεσόντες δὲ οἱ ἐπίκουροι τῶν Περσέων τοὺς διφροφορευμένους τε καὶ λόγου πλείστου ἐόντας ἔκτεινον .
These supposed that a full agreement had been made, and were taken unawares; the guard fell upon them and killed the Persians of highest rank, those who were carried in litters.


3.146.4
4006
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν ταῦτα ἐποίευν , ἡ δὲ ἄλλη στρατιὴ ἡ Περσικὴ ἐπεβοήθεε ·
They were engaged in this when the rest of the Persian force came up in reinforcement,


3.146.4
4007
πιεζεύμενοι δὲ οἱ ἐπίκουροι ὀπίσω κατειλήθησαν ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν .
and, hard-pressed, the guards retreated into the acropolis.


3.147.1
4008
Ὀτάνης δὲ ὁ στρατηγὸς ἰδὼν πάθος μέγα Πέρσας πεπονθότας , ἐντολὰς μὲν τὰς Δαρεῖός οἱ ἀποστέλλων ἐνετέλλετο , μήτε κτείνειν μηδένα Σαμίων μήτε ἀνδραποδίζεσθαι ἀπαθέα τε κακῶν ἀποδοῦναι τὴν νῆσον Συλοσῶντι , τουτέων μὲν τῶν ἐντολέων μεμνημένος ἐπελανθάνετο , ὁ δὲ παρήγγειλε τῇ στρατιῇ πάντα τὸν ἂν λάβωσι καὶ ἄνδρα καὶ παῖδα ὁμοίως κτείνειν .
The Persian captain Otanes, seeing how big a loss the Persians had suffered, deliberately forgot the command given him at his departure by Darius not to kill or enslave any Samian but to deliver the island intact to Syloson; and he commanded his army to kill everyone they took, men and boys alike.


3.147.2
4009
ἐνθαῦτα τῆς στρατιῆς οἳ μὲν τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἐπολιόρκεον , οἳ δὲ ἔκτεινον πάντα τὸν ἐμποδὼν γινόμενον ὁμοίως ἔν τε ἱρῷ καὶ ἔξω ἱροῦ .
Then, while some of the Persians laid siege to the acropolis, the rest killed everyone they met, inside the temples and outside the temples alike.


3.148.1
4010
Μαιάνδριος δὲ ἀποδρὰς ἐκ τῆς Σάμου ἐκπλέει ἐς Λακεδαίμονα ·
Maeandrius sailed to Lacedaemon, escaping from Samos;


3.148.1
4011
ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐς αὐτὴν καὶ ἀνενεικάμενος τὰ ἔχων ἐξεχώρησε , ἐποίεε τοιάδε ·
and after he arrived there and brought up the possessions with which he had left his country, it became his habit to make a display of silver and gold drinking cups;


3.148.1
4012
ὅκως ποτήρια ἀργύρεά τε καὶ χρύσεα προθεῖτο , οἱ μὲν θεράποντες αὐτοῦ ἐξέσμων αὐτά , ὃ δ’ ἂν τὸν χρόνον τοῦτον τῷ Κλεομένεϊ τῷ Ἀναξανδρίδεω ἐν λόγοισι ἐών , βασιλεύοντι Σπάρτης , προῆγέ μιν ἐς τὰ οἰκία ·
while his servants were cleaning these, he would converse with the king of Sparta, Cleomenes son of Anaxandrides, and would bring him to his house.


3.148.1
4013
ὅκως δὲ ἴδοιτο Κλεομένης τὰ ποτήρια , ἀπεθώμαζέ τε καὶ ἐξεπλήσσετο ·
As Cleomenes marvelled greatly at the cups whenever he saw them,


3.148.1
4014
ὁ δὲ ἂν ἐκέλευε αὐτὸν ἀποφέρεσθαι αὐτῶν ὅσα βούλοιτο .
Maeandrius would tell him to take as many as he liked.


3.148.2
4015
τοῦτο καὶ δὶς καὶ τρὶς εἴπαντος Μαιανδρίου ὁ Κλεομένης δικαιότατος ἀνδρῶν γίνεται , ὃς λαβεῖν μὲν διδόμενα οὐκ ἐδικαίου , μαθὼν δὲ ὡς ἄλλοισι διδοὺς τῶν ἀστῶν εὑρήσεται τιμωρίην , βὰς ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐφόρους ἄμεινον εἶναι ἔφη τῇ Σπάρτῃ τὸν ξεῖνον τὸν Σάμιον ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι ἐκ τῆς Πελοποννήσου , ἵνα μὴ ἀναπείσῃ ἢ αὐτὸν ἢ ἄλλον τινὰ Σπαρτιητέων κακὸν γενέσθαι .
Maeandrius made this offer two or three times; Cleomenes showed his great integrity in that he would not accept; but realizing that there were others in Lacedaemon from whom Maeandrius would get help by offering them the cups, he went to the ephors and told them it would be best for Sparta if this Samian stranger quit the country, lest he persuade Cleomenes himself or some other Spartan to do evil.


3.148.2
4016
οἳ δ’ ὑπακούσαντες ἐξεκήρυξαν Μαιάνδριον .
The ephors listened to his advice and banished Maeandrius by proclamation.


3.149.1
4017
τὴν δὲ Σάμον σαγηνεύσαντες οἱ Πέρσαι παρέδοσαν Συλοσῶντι ἔρημον ἐοῦσαν ἀνδρῶν .
As for Samos, the Persians swept it clear and turned it over uninhabited to Syloson.


3.149.1
4018
ὑστέρῳ μέντοι χρόνῳ καὶ συγκατοίκισε αὐτὴν ὁ στρατηγὸς Ὀτάνης ἔκ τε ὄψιος ὀνείρου καὶ νούσου ἥ μιν κατέλαβε νοσῆσαι τὰ αἰδοῖα .
But afterwards Otanes, the Persian general, helped to settle the land, prompted by a dream and a disease that he contracted in his genitals.


3.150.1
4019
ἐπὶ δὲ Σάμον στρατεύματος ναυτικοῦ οἰχομένου Βαβυλώνιοι ἀπέστησαν , κάρτα εὖ παρεσκευασμένοι ·
While the fleet was away at Samos, the Babylonians revolted.


3.150.1
4020
ἐν ὅσῳ γὰρ ὅ τε Μάγος ἦρχε καὶ οἱ ἑπτὰ ἐπανέστησαν , ἐν τούτῳ παντὶ τῷ χρόνῳ καὶ τῇ ταραχῇ ἐς τὴν πολιορκίην παρεσκευάζοντο .
They had made very good preparation; for during the reign of the Magus, and the rebellion of the seven, they had taken advantage of the time and the confusion to provision themselves against the siege;


3.150.2
4021
καί κως ταῦτα ποιεῦντες ἐλάνθανον .
and (I cannot tell how) this went undetected.


3.150.2
4022
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐκ τοῦ ἐμφανέος ἀπέστησαν , ἐποίησαν τοιόνδε ·
At last they revolted openly and did this: —


3.150.2
4023
τὰς μητέρας ἐξελόντες , γυναῖκα ἕκαστος μίαν προσεξαιρέετο τὴν ἐβούλετο ἐκ τῶν ἑωυτοῦ οἰκίων , τὰς δὲ λοιπὰς ἁπάσας συναγαγόντες ἀπέπνιξαν ·
sending away all the mothers, each chose one woman,


3.150.2
4024
τὴν δὲ μίαν ἕκαστος σιτοποιὸν ἐξαιρέετο ·
whomever he liked of his domestics, as a bread-maker;


3.150.2
4025
ἀπέπνιξαν δὲ αὐτάς , ἵνα μή σφεων τὸν σῖτον ἀναισιμώσωσι .
as for the rest, they gathered them together and strangled them so they would not consume their bread.


3.151.1
4026
πυθόμενος δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Δαρεῖος καὶ συλλέξας πᾶσαν τὴν ἑωυτοῦ δύναμιν ἐστρατεύετο ἐπ’ αὐτούς , ἐπελάσας δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν Βαβυλῶνα ἐπολιόρκεε φροντίζοντας οὐδὲν τῆς πολιορκίης .
When Darius heard of this, he collected all his forces and led them against Babylon, and he marched up to the town and laid siege to it;


3.151.1
4027
ἀναβαίνοντες γὰρ ἐπὶ τοὺς προμαχεῶνας τοῦ τείχεος οἱ Βαβυλώνιοι κατωρχέοντο καὶ κατέσκωπτον Δαρεῖον καὶ τὴν στρατιὴν αὐτοῦ , καί τις αὐτῶν εἶπε τοῦτο τὸ ἔπος .
but the Babylonians thought nothing of the siege. They came up on to the ramparts of the wall and taunted Darius and his army with gesture and word, and one of them uttered this mot:


3.151.2
4028
" τί κάτησθε ὦ Πέρσαι ἐνθαῦτα , ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἀπαλλάσσεσθε ;
“Why loiter there, Persians, and not go away?


3.151.2
4029
τότε γὰρ αἱρήσετε ἡμέας , ἐπεὰν ἡμίονοι τέκωσι " .
You will take us when mules give birth.”


3.151.2
4030
τοῦτο εἶπε τῶν τις Βαβυλωνίων οὐδαμὰ ἐλπίζων ἂν ἡμίονον τεκεῖν .
One of the Babylonians said this, by no means expecting that a mule would give birth.


3.152.1
4031
ἑπτὰ δὲ μηνῶν καὶ ἐνιαυτοῦ διεληλυθότος ἤδη ὁ Δαρεῖός τε ἤσχαλλε καὶ ἡ στρατιὴ πᾶσα οὐ δυνατὴ ἐοῦσα ἑλεῖν τοὺς Βαβυλωνίους .
A year and seven months passed, and Darius and his whole army were bitter because they could not take Babylon.


3.152.1
4032
καίτοι πάντα σοφίσματα καὶ πάσας μηχανὰς ἐπεποιήκεε ἐς αὐτοὺς Δαρεῖος ·
Yet Darius had used every trick and every device against it.


3.152.1
4033
ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ὣς ἐδύνατο ἑλεῖν σφεας , ἄλλοισί τε σοφίσμασι πειρησάμενος , καὶ δὴ καὶ τῷ Κῦρος εἷλε σφέας , καὶ τούτῳ ἐπειρήθη .
He tried the stratagem by which Cyrus took it, and every other stratagem and device, yet with no success;


3.152.1
4034
ἀλλὰ γὰρ δεινῶς ἦσαν ἐν φυλακῇσι οἱ Βαβυλώνιοι , οὐδὲ σφέας οἷός τε ἦν ἑλεῖν .
for the Babylonians kept a vigilant watch, and he could not take them.


3.153.1
4035
ἐνθαῦτα εἰκοστῷ μηνὶ Ζωπύρῳ τῷ Μεγαβύζου , τούτου ὃς τῶν ἑπτὰ ἀνδρῶν ἐγένετο τῶν τὸν Μάγον κατελόντων , τούτῳ τῷ Μεγαβύζου παιδὶ Ζωπύρῳ ἐγένετο τέρας τόδε ·
But in the twentieth month of the siege a marvellous thing befell Zopyrus, son of that Megabyzus who was one of the seven destroyers of the Magus:


3.153.1
4036
τῶν οἱ σιτοφόρων ἡμιόνων μία ἔτεκε .
one of his food-carrying mules gave birth.


3.153.1
4037
ὡς δέ οἱ ἐξαγγέλθη καὶ ὑπὸ ἀπιστίης αὐτὸς ὁ Ζώπυρος εἶδε τὸ βρέφος , ἀπείπας τοῖσι ἰδοῦσι μηδενὶ φράζειν τὸ γεγονὸς ἐβουλεύετο .
Zopyrus would not believe the news; but when he saw the foal for himself, he told those who had seen it to tell no one;


3.153.2
4038
καί οἱ πρὸς τὰ τοῦ Βαβυλωνίου ῥήματα , ὃς κατ’ ἀρχὰς ἔφησε , ἐπεάν περ ἡμίονοι τέκωσι , τότε τὸ τεῖχος ἁλώσεσθαι , πρὸς ταύτην τὴν φήμην Ζωπύρῳ ἐδόκεε εἶναι ἁλώσιμος ἡ Βαβυλών ·
Then reflecting he recalled the Babylonian's word at the beginning of the siege — that the city would be taken when mules gave birth — and having this utterance in mind he conceived that Babylon might be taken;


3.153.2
4039
σὺν γὰρ θεῷ ἐκεῖνόν τε εἰπεῖν καὶ ἑωυτῷ τεκεῖν τὴν ἡμίονον .
for the hand of heaven, he supposed, was in the man's word and the birth from his own mule.


3.154.1
4040
ὡς δέ οἱ ἐδόκεε μόρσιμον εἶναι ἤδη τῇ Βαβυλῶνι ἁλίσκεσθαι , προσελθὼν Δαρείου ἀπεπυνθάνετο εἰ περὶ πολλοῦ κάρτα ποιέεται τὴν Βαβυλῶνα ἑλεῖν .
As soon as he thought that it was Babylon's fate to fall, he came and inquired of Darius if taking Babylon were very important to him;


3.154.1
4041
πυθόμενος δὲ ὡς πολλοῦ τιμῷτο , ἄλλο ἐβουλεύετο , ὅκως αὐτός τε ἔσται ὁ ἑλὼν αὐτὴν καὶ ἑωυτοῦ τὸ ἔργον ἔσται ·
and when he was assured that it was, he then cast about for a plan by which the city's fall would be accomplished by him alone;


3.154.1
4042
κάρτα γὰρ ἐν τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι αἱ ἀγαθοεργίαι ἐς τὸ πρόσω μεγάθεος τιμῶνται .
for good service among the Persians is very much esteemed, and rewarded by high preferment.


3.154.2
4043
ἄλλῳ μέν νυν οὐκ ἐφράζετο ἔργῳ δυνατὸς εἶναί μιν ὑποχειρίην ποιῆσαι , εἰ δ’ ἑωυτὸν λωβησάμενος αὐτομολήσειε ἐς αὐτούς .
He could think of no other way to bring the city down than to mutilate himself and then desert to the Babylonians.


3.154.2
4044
ἐνθαῦτα ἐν ἐλαφρῷ ποιησάμενος ἑωυτὸν λωβᾶται λώβην ἀνήκεστον ·
So, making light of it, he mutilated himself beyond repair,


3.154.2
4045
ἀποταμὼν γὰρ ἑωυτοῦ τὴν ῥῖνα καὶ τὰ ὦτα καὶ τὴν κόμην κακῶς περικείρας καὶ μαστιγώσας ἦλθε παρὰ Δαρεῖον .
and after cutting off his nose and ears and cropping his hair as a disfigurement and scourging himself, he came before Darius.


3.155.1
4046
Δαρεῖος δὲ κάρτα βαρέως ἤνεικε ἰδὼν ἄνδρα δοκιμώτατον λελωβημένον , ἔκ τε τοῦ θρόνου ἀναπηδήσας ἀνέβωσέ τε καὶ εἴρετό μιν ὅστις εἴη ὁ λωβησάμενος καὶ ὅ τι ποιήσαντα .
The king reacted very violently to seeing a man so well-respected mutilated, and springing from the throne he uttered a cry and asked Zopyrus who it was who had mutilated him and why.


3.155.2
4047
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " οὐκ ἔστι οὗτος ὡνήρ , ὅτι μὴ σύ , τῷ ἐστὶ δύναμις τοσαύτη ἐμὲ δὴ ὧδε διαθεῖναι ·
“There is no man,” he said, “except you, who has enough power to do this to me,


3.155.2
4048
οὐδέ τις ἀλλοτρίων ὦ βασιλεῦ τάδε ἔργασται , ἀλλ’ αὐτὸς ἐγὼ ἐμεωυτόν , δεινόν τι ποιεύμενος Ἀσσυρίους Πέρσῃσι καταγελᾶν " .
and no one but I myself did this, O King, because I felt it terribly that Assyrians were laughing at Persians.”


3.155.3
4049
ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο " ὦ σχετλιώτατε ἀνδρῶν , ἔργῳ τῷ αἰσχίστῳ οὔνομα τὸ κάλλιστον ἔθευ , φὰς διὰ τοὺς πολιορκεομένους σεωυτὸν ἀνηκέστως διαθεῖναι .
Darius answered, “Unfeeling man, you give a pretty name to an ugly act if you say that it was on account of those besieged that you did for yourself past cure.


3.155.3
4050
τί δ’ , ὦ μάταιε , λελωβημένου σεῦ θᾶσσον οἱ πολέμιοι παραστήσονται ;
Why, you poor fool, will the enemy surrender sooner because you mutilated yourself?


3.155.3
4051
κῶς οὐκ ἐξέπλωσας τῶν φρενῶν σεωυτὸν διαφθείρας " ;
How could you not have been out of your mind to disfigure yourself?”


3.155.4
4052
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " εἰ μέν τοι ὑπερετίθεα τὰ ἔμελλον ποιήσειν , οὐκ ἄν με περιεῖδες ·
“Had I told you,” said Zopyrus, “what I intended to do, you would not have let me;


3.155.4
4053
νῦν δ’ ἐπ’ ἐμεωυτοῦ βαλόμενος ἔπρηξα .
but now I have done it on my own.


3.155.4
4054
ἤδη ὦν ἢν μὴ τῶν σῶν δεήσῃ , αἱρέομεν Βαβυλῶνα .
Now, then, if you do your part we shall take Babylon.


3.155.4
4055
ἐγὼ μὲν γὰρ ὡς ἔχω αὐτομολήσω ἐς τὸ τεῖχος καὶ φήσω πρὸς αὐτοὺς ὡς ὑπὸ σεῦ τάδε ἔπαθον ·
I shall desert to the city as I am, and I shall say to them that I suffered this at your hands;


3.155.4
4056
καὶ δοκέω , πείσας σφέας ταῦτα ἔχειν οὕτω , τεύξεσθαι στρατιῆς .
and I think that I shall persuade them, and thus gain a command.


3.155.5
4057
σὺ δέ , ἀπ’ ἧς ἂν ἡμέρης ἐγὼ ἐσέλθω ἐς τὸ τεῖχος , ἀπὸ ταύτης ἐς δεκάτην ἡμέρην τῆς σεωυτοῦ στρατιῆς , τῆς οὐδεμία ἔσται ὤρη ἀπολλυμένης , ταύτης χιλίους τάξον κατὰ τὰς Σεμιράμιος καλεομένας πύλας ·
Now, on the tenth day after I enter the city, take a thousand men from the part of your army about which you will least care if it is lost, and post them before the gate called the gate of Semiramis;


3.155.5
4058
μετὰ δὲ αὖτις ἀπὸ τῆς δεκάτης ἐς ἑβδόμην ἄλλους μοι τάξον δισχιλίους κατὰ τὰς Νινίων καλεομένας πύλας ·
on the seventh day after that, post two thousand more before the gate called the gate of the Ninevites;


3.155.5
4059
ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ἑβδόμης διαλείπειν εἴκοσι ἡμέρας , καὶ ἔπειτα ἄλλους κάτισον ἀγαγὼν κατὰ τὰς Χαλδαίων καλεομένας πύλας , τετρακισχιλίους .
and when twenty days are past after that seventh, lead out four thousand more and post them before the Chaldean gate, as they call it;


3.155.5
4060
ἐχόντων δὲ μήτε οἱ πρότεροι μηδὲν τῶν ἀμυνεύντων μήτε οὗτοι , πλὴν ἐγχειριδίων ·
allow neither these, nor the others that go before them, to carry any weapons except daggers;


3.155.5
4061
τοῦτο δὲ ἐᾶν ἔχειν .
leave them these.


3.155.6
4062
μετὰ δὲ τὴν εἰκοστὴν ἡμέρην ἰθέως τὴν μὲν ἄλλην στρατιὴν κελεύειν πέριξ προσβάλλειν πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος , Πέρσας δέ μοι τάξον κατά τε τὰς Βηλίδας καλεομένας καὶ Κισσίας πύλας .
But immediately after the twentieth day command the rest of your army to assault the whole circuit of the walls, and post the Persians before the gate of Belus and the gate called Cissian. 


3.155.6
4063
ὡς γὰρ ἐγὼ δοκέω , ἐμέο μεγάλα ἔργα ἀποδεξαμένου , τά τε ἄλλα ἐπιτρέψονται ἐμοὶ Βαβυλώνιοι καὶ δὴ καὶ τῶν πυλέων τὰς βαλανάγρας ·
For I think that once I have done conspicuous things the Babylonians will give me, among other things, the keys of their gates; 


3.155.6
4064
τὸ δὲ ἐνθεῦτεν ἐμοί τε καὶ Πέρσῃσι μελήσει τὰ δεῖ ποιέειν " .
then it will depend on me and on the Persians to do what is necessary.”


3.156.1
4065
ταῦτα ἐντειλάμενος ἤιε ἐπὶ τὰς πύλας , ἐπιστρεφόμενος ὡς δὴ ἀληθέως αὐτόμολος .
Having given these instructions, he went to the gates, turning and looking back as though he were in fact a deserter.


3.156.1
4066
ὁρῶντες δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν πύργων οἱ κατὰ τοῦτο τεταγμένοι κατέτρεχον κάτω καὶ ὀλίγον τι παρακλίναντες τὴν ἑτέρην πύλην εἰρώτων τίς τε εἴη καὶ ὅτευ δεόμενος ἥκοι .
When the watch posted on the towers saw him, they ran down, and opening half the gate a little asked him who he was and why he came;


3.156.1
4067
ὁ δέ σφι ἠγόρευε ὡς εἴη τε Ζώπυρος καὶ αὐτομολέοι ἐς ἐκείνους .
he told them that he was Zopyrus and was deserting to them.


3.156.2
4068
ἦγον δή μιν οἱ πυλουροί , ταῦτα ὡς ἤκουσαν , ἐπὶ τὰ κοινὰ τῶν Βαβυλωνίων ·
When they heard this, the gatekeepers brought him before the general assembly of the Babylonians,


3.156.2
4069
καταστὰς δὲ ἐπ’ αὐτὰ κατοικτίζετο , φὰς ὑπὸ Δαρείου πεπονθέναι τὰ ἐπεπόνθεε ὑπ’ ἑωυτοῦ , παθεῖν δὲ ταῦτα διότι συμβουλεῦσαι οἱ ἀπανιστάναι τὴν στρατιήν , ἐπείτε δὴ οὐδεὶς πόρος ἐφαίνετο τῆς ἁλώσιος .
where he made a pitiful sight, saying that he had suffered at the hands of Darius what he had suffered at his own because he had advised the king to lead his army away, since they could find no way to take the city.


3.156.3
4070
" νῦν τε " ἔφη λέγων " ἐγὼ ὑμῖν ὦ Βαβυλώνιοι ἥκω μέγιστον ἀγαθόν , Δαρείῳ δὲ καὶ τῇ στρατιῇ καὶ Πέρσῃσι μέγιστον κακόν ·
“Now,” he said in his speech to them, “I come as a great boon to you, men of Babylon, and as a great bane to Darius and to his army and to the Persians;


3.156.3
4071
οὐ γὰρ δὴ ἐμέ γε ὧδε λωβησάμενος καταπροΐξεται ·
for he shall not get away with having mutilated me so;


3.156.3
4072
ἐπίσταμαι δ’ αὐτοῦ πάσας τὰς διεξόδους τῶν βουλευμάτων " .
and I know all the issues of his plans.”


3.156.3
4073
τοιαῦτα ἔλεγε .
This was what he said.


3.157.1
4074
οἳ δὲ Βαβυλώνιοι ὁρῶντες ἄνδρα τὸν ἐν Πέρσῃσι δοκιμώτατον ῥινός τε καὶ ὤτων ἐστερημένον , μάστιξί τε καὶ αἵματι ἀναπεφυρμένον , πάγχυ ἐλπίσαντες λέγειν μιν ἀληθέα καί σφι ἥκειν σύμμαχον , ἐπιτρέπεσθαι ἕτοιμοι ἦσαν τῶν ἐδέετο σφέων ·
When the Babylonians saw the most well-respected man in Persia without his nose and ears and all lurid with blood from the scourging, they were quite convinced that he was telling them the truth and came as their ally, and were ready to give him all that he asked;


3.157.1
4075
ἐδέετο δὲ στρατιῆς .
and he asked for a command.


3.157.2
4076
ὁ δὲ ἐπείτε αὐτῶν τοῦτο παρέλαβε , ἐποίεε τά περ τῷ Δαρείῳ συνεθήκατο ·
When he got this from them, he did exactly as he had arranged with Darius.


3.157.2
4077
ἐξαγαγὼν γὰρ τῇ δεκάτῃ ἡμέρῃ τὴν στρατιὴν τῶν Βαβυλωνίων καὶ κυκλωσάμενος τοὺς χιλίους , τοὺς πρώτους ἐνετείλατο Δαρείῳ τάξαι , τούτους κατεφόνευσε .
On the tenth day he led out the Babylonian army, surrounded and slaughtered the thousand whom he had instructed Darius to put in the field first.


3.157.3
4078
μαθόντες δέ μιν οἱ Βαβυλώνιοι τοῖσι ἔπεσι τὰ ἔργα παρεχόμενον ὅμοια , πάγχυ περιχαρέες ἐόντες πᾶν δὴ ἕτοιμοι ἦσαν ὑπηρετέειν .
Seeing that he produced works equal to his words, the Babylonians were overjoyed and ready to serve him in every way.


3.157.3
4079
ὁ δὲ διαλιπὼν ἡμέρας τὰς συγκειμένας , αὖτις ἐπιλεξάμενος τῶν Βαβυλωνίων ἐξήγαγε καὶ κατεφόνευσε τῶν Δαρείου στρατιωτέων τοὺς δισχιλίους .
When the agreed number of days was past, he led out once more a chosen body of Babylonians, and slaughtered the two thousand men of Darius' army.


3.157.4
4080
ἰδόντες δὲ καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον οἱ Βαβυλώνιοι πάντες Ζώπυρον εἶχον ἐν στόμασι αἰνέοντες .
When the Babylonians saw this work too, the praise of Zopyrus was on everyone's lips.


3.157.4
4081
ὁ δὲ αὖτις διαλιπὼν τὰς συγκειμένας ἡμέρας ἐξήγαγε ἐς τὸ προειρημένον , καὶ κυκλωσάμενος κατεφόνευσε τοὺς τετρακισχιλίους .
The agreed number of days once again passing, he led out his men to the place he had named, where he surrounded the four thousand and slaughtered them.


3.157.4
4082
ὡς δὲ καὶ τοῦτο κατέργαστο , πάντα δὴ ἦν ἐν τοῖσι Βαβυλωνίοισι Ζώπυρος , καὶ στρατάρχης τε οὗτός σφι καὶ τειχοφύλαξ ἀπεδέδεκτο .
And when he had done this, Zopyrus was the one man for Babylon: he was made the commander of their armies and guard of the walls.


3.158.1
4083
προσβολὴν δὲ Δαρείου κατὰ τὰ συγκείμενα ποιευμένου πέριξ τὸ τεῖχος , ἐνθαῦτα δὴ πάντα τὸν δόλον ὁ Ζώπυρος ἐξέφαινε .
So when Darius assaulted the whole circuit of the walls, according to the agreed plan, then Zopyrus' treason was fully revealed.


3.158.1
4084
οἱ μὲν γὰρ Βαβυλώνιοι ἀναβάντες ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος ἠμύνοντο τὴν Δαρείου στρατιὴν προσβάλλουσαν , ὁ δὲ Ζώπυρος τάς τε Κισσίας καὶ Βηλίδας καλεομένας πύλας ἀναπετάσας ἐσῆκε τοὺς Πέρσας ἐς τὸ τεῖχος .
For while the townsmen were on the wall defending it against Darius' assault, he opened the gates called Cissian and Belian, and let the Persians inside the walls.


3.158.2
4085
τῶν δὲ Βαβυλωνίων οἳ μὲν εἶδον τὸ ποιηθέν , οὗτοι μὲν ἔφευγον ἐς τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ Βήλου τὸ ἱρόν ·
Those Babylonians who saw what he did fled to the temple of that Zeus whom they call Belus;


3.158.2
4086
οἳ δὲ οὐκ εἶδον , ἔμενον ἐν τῇ ἑωυτοῦ τάξι ἕκαστος , ἐς ὃ δὴ καὶ οὗτοι ἔμαθον προδεδομένοι .
those who had not seen it remained in position, until they too discovered how they had been betrayed.


3.159.1
4087
Βαβυλὼν μέν νυν οὕτω τὸ δεύτερον αἱρέθη .
Thus Babylon was taken a second time,


3.159.1
4088
Δαρεῖος δὲ ἐπείτε ἐκράτησε τῶν Βαβυλωνίων , τοῦτο μὲν σφέων τὸ τεῖχος περιεῖλε καὶ τὰς πύλας πάσας ἀπέσπασε ·
and when Darius was master of the Babylonians, he destroyed their walls and tore away all their gates,


3.159.1
4089
τὸ γὰρ πρότερον ἑλὼν Κῦρος τὴν Βαβυλῶνα ἐποίησε τούτων οὐδέτερον ·
neither of which Cyrus had done at the first taking of Babylon;


3.159.1
4090
τοῦτο δὲ ὁ Δαρεῖος τῶν ἀνδρῶν τοὺς κορυφαίους μάλιστα ἐς τρισχιλίους ἀνεσκολόπισε , τοῖσι δὲ λοιποῖσι Βαβυλωνίοισι ἀπέδωκε τὴν πόλιν οἰκέειν .
moreover he impaled about three thousand men that were prominent among them; as for the rest, he gave them back their city to live in.


3.159.2
4091
ὡς δ’ ἕξουσι γυναῖκας οἱ Βαβυλώνιοι ἵνα σφι γενεὴ ὑπογίνηται , τάδε Δαρεῖος προϊδὼν ἐποίησε ·
Further, as the Babylonians, fearing for their food, had strangled their own women, as I described above,


3.159.2
4092
τὰς γὰρ ἑωυτῶν , ὡς καὶ κατ’ ἀρχὰς δεδήλωται , ἀπέπνιξαν οἱ Βαβυλώνιοι τοῦ σίτου προορέοντες ·
Darius provided wives to give them a posterity by appointing that each of the neighboring nations should send a certain number of women to Babylon;


3.159.2
4093
ἐπέταξε τοῖσι περιοίκοισι ἔθνεσι γυναῖκας ἐς Βαβυλῶνα κατιστάναι , ὅσας δὴ ἑκάστοισι ἐπιτάσσων , ὥστε πέντε μυριάδων τὸ κεφαλαίωμα τῶν γυναικῶν συνῆλθε ·
the sum of the women thus collected was fifty thousand: these were the mothers of those who now inhabit the city.


3.159.2
4094
ἐκ τουτέων δὲ τῶν γυναικῶν οἱ νῦν Βαβυλώνιοι γεγόνασι .
Further, as the Babylonians, fearing for their food, had strangled their own women, as I described above,


3.160.1
4095
Ζωπύρου δὲ οὐδεὶς ἀγαθοεργίην Περσέων ὑπερεβάλετο παρὰ Δαρείῳ κριτῇ οὔτε τῶν ὕστερον γενομένων οὔτε τῶν πρότερον , ὅτι μὴ Κῦρος μοῦνος ·
There never was in Darius' judgment any Persian before or after who did better service than Zopyrus, except Cyrus, with whom no Persian could compare himself.


3.160.1
4096
τούτῳ γὰρ οὐδεὶς Περσέων ἠξίωσέ κω ἑωυτὸν συμβαλεῖν .
Many times Darius is said to have declared that he would rather Zopyrus were free of disfigurement than have twenty Babylons on top of the one he had.


3.160.1
4097
πολλάκις δὲ Δαρεῖον λέγεται γνώμην τήνδε ἀποδέξασθαι , ὡς βούλοιτο ἂν Ζώπυρον εἶναι ἀπαθέα τῆς ἀεικείης μᾶλλον ἢ Βαβυλῶνάς οἱ εἴκοσι πρὸς τῇ ἐούσῃ προσγενέσθαι .
Many times Darius is said to have declared that he would rather Zopyrus were free of disfigurement than have twenty Babylons on top of the one he had.


3.160.2
4098
ἐτίμησε δέ μιν μεγάλως ·
He honored him very much;


3.160.2
4099
καὶ γὰρ δῶρά οἱ ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος ἐδίδου ταῦτα τὰ Πέρσῃσι ἐστὶ τιμιώτατα , καὶ τὴν Βαβυλῶνά οἱ ἔδωκε ἀτελέα νέμεσθαι μέχρι τῆς ἐκείνου ζόης , καὶ ἄλλα πολλὰ ἐπέδωκε .
every year he sent him such gifts as the Persians hold most precious, and let him govern Babylon all his life with no tribute to pay, giving him many other things besides.


3.160.2
4100
Ζωπύρου δὲ τούτου γίνεται Μεγάβυζος , ὃς ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἀντία Ἀθηναίων καὶ τῶν συμμάχων ἐστρατήγησε ·
This Zopyrus was the father of Megabyzus, who was general of an army in Egypt against the Athenians and their allies;


3.160.2
4101
Μεγαβύζου δὲ τούτου γίνεται Ζώπυρος , ὃς ἐς Ἀθήνας ηὐτομόλησε ἐκ Περσέων .
and Megabyzus' son was that Zopyrus who deserted from the Persians to Athens.



4.1.1
4102
μετὰ δὲ τὴν Βαβυλῶνος αἵρεσιν ἐγένετο ἐπὶ Σκύθας αὐτοῦ Δαρείου ἔλασις ·
After taking Babylon, Darius himself marched against the Scythians.


4.1.1
4103
ἀνθεύσης γὰρ τῆς Ἀσίης ἀνδράσι καὶ χρημάτων μεγάλων συνιόντων , ἐπεθύμησε ὁ Δαρεῖος τίσασθαι Σκύθας , ὅτι ἐκεῖνοι πρότεροι ἐσβαλόντες ἐς τὴν Μηδικὴν καὶ νικήσαντες μάχῃ τοὺς ἀντιουμένους ὑπῆρξαν ἀδικίης .
For since Asia was bursting with men and vast revenues were coming in, Darius desired to punish the Scythians for the wrong they had begun when they invaded Media first and defeated those who opposed them in battle.


4.1.2
4104
τῆς γὰρ ἄνω Ἀσίης ἦρξαν , ὡς καὶ πρότερον μοι εἴρηται , Σκύθαι ἔτεα δυῶν δέοντα τριήκοντα .
For the Scythians, as I have said before, ruled upper Asia for twenty-eight years;


4.1.2
4105
Κιμμερίους γὰρ ἐπιδιώκοντες ἐσέβαλον ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην , καταπαύσαντες τῆς ἀρχῆς Μήδους ·
they invaded Asia in their pursuit of the Cimmerians, and ended the power of the Medes,


4.1.2
4106
οὗτοι γὰρ πρὶν ἢ Σκύθας ἀπικέσθαι ἦρχον τῆς Ἀσίης .
who were the rulers of Asia before the Scythians came.


4.1.3
4107
τοὺς δὲ Σκύθας ἀποδημήσαντας ὀκτὼ καὶ εἴκοσι ἔτεα καὶ διὰ χρόνου τοσούτου κατιόντας ἐς τὴν σφετέρην ἐξεδέξατο οὐκ ἐλάσσων πόνος τοῦ Μηδικοῦ ·
But when the Scythians had been away from their homes for twenty-eight years and returned to their country after so long an absence, as much trouble as their Median war awaited them.


4.1.3
4108
εὗρον γὰρ ἀντιουμένην σφίσι στρατιήν οὐκ ὀλίγην .
They found themselves opposed by a great force;


4.1.3
4109
αἱ γὰρ τῶν Σκυθέων γυναῖκες , ὥς σφι οἱ ἄνδρες ἀπῆσαν χρόνον πολλόν , ἐφοίτεον παρὰ τοὺς δούλους .
for the Scythian women, when their husbands were away for so long, turned to their slaves.


4.2.1
4110
τοὺς δὲ δούλους οἱ Σκύθαι πάντας τυφλοῦσι τοῦ γάλακτος εἵνεκεν τοῦ πίνουσι ποιεῦντες ὧδε .
Now the Scythians blind all their slaves, because of the milk they drink;


4.2.1
4111
ἐπεάν φυσητῆρας λάβωσι ὀστεΐνους αὐλοῖσι προσεμφερεστάτους , τούτους ἐσθέντες ἐς τῶν θηλέων ἵππων τά ἄρθρα φυσῶσι τοῖσι στόμασι , ἄλλοι δὲ ἄλλων φυσώντων ἀμέλγουσι .
and this is how they get it: taking tubes of bone very much like flutes, they insert these into the genitalia of the mares and blow into them, some blowing while others milk.


4.2.1
4112
φασὶ δὲ τοῦδε εἵνεκα τοῦτο ποιέειν ·
According to them, their reason for doing this is that


4.2.1
4113
τὰς φλέβας τε πίμπλασθαι φυσωμένας τῆς ἵππου καὶ τὸ οὖθαρ κατίεσθαι .
blowing makes the mare’s veins swell and her udder drop.


4.2.2
4114
ἐπεὰν δὲ ἀμέλξωσι τὸ γάλα , ἐσχέαντες ἐς ξύλινα ἀγγήια κοῖλα καὶ περιστίξαντες κατὰ τὰ ἀγγήια τοὺς τυφλοὺς δονέουσι τὸ γάλα , καὶ τὸ μὲν αὐτοῦ ἐπιστάμενον ἀπαρύσαντες ἡγεῦνται εἶναι τιμιώτερον , τό δ’ ὑπιστάμενον ἧσσον τοῦ ἑτέρου .
When done milking, they pour the milk into deep wooden buckets, and make their slaves stand around the buckets and shake the milk;


4.2.2
4115
τούτων μὲν εἵνεκα ἅπαντα τὸν ἂν λάβωσι οἱ Σκύθαι ἐκτυφλοῦσι .
they draw off what stands on the surface and value this most; what lies at the bottom is less valued.


4.2.2
4116
οὐ γὰρ ἀρόται εἰσὶ ἀλλὰ νομάδες .
This is why the Scythians blind all prisoners whom they take: for they do not cultivate the soil, but are nomads.


4.3.1
4117
ἐκ τούτων δὴ ὦν σφι τῶν δούλων καὶ τῶν γυναικῶν ἐτράφη νεότης ·
So it came about that a younger generation grew up, born of these slaves and the women;


4.3.1
4118
οἳ ἐπείτε ἔμαθον τὴν σφετέρην γένεσιν , ἠντιοῦντο αὐτοῖσι κατιοῦσι ἐκ τῶν Μήδων .
and when the youths learned of their parentage, they came out to fight the Scythians returning from Media.


4.3.2
4119
καὶ πρῶτα μὲν τὴν χώρην ἀπετάμοντο , τάφρον ὀρυξάμενοι εὐρέαν κατατείνουσαν ἐκ τῶν Ταυρικῶν ὀρέων ἐς τὴν Μαιῆτιν λίμνην , τῇ περ ἐστὶ μεγίστη ·
First they barred the way to their country by digging a wide trench from the Tauric mountains to the broadest part of the Maeetian lake;


4.3.2
4120
μετά γε πειρωμένοισι ἐσβάλλειν τοῖσι Σκύθῃσι ἀντικατιζόμενοι ἐμάχοντο .
and then, when the Scythians tried to force a passage, they camped opposite them and engaged them in battle.


4.3.3
4121
γινομένης δὲ μάχης πολλάκις καί οὐ δυναμένων οὐδὲν πλέον ἔχειν τῶν Σκυθέων τῇ μάχῃ , εἷς αὐτῶν ἔλεξε τάδε .
There were many fights, and the Scythians could gain no advantage; at last one of them said,


4.3.3
4122
" οἷα ποιεῦμεν , ἄνδρες Σκύθαι ·
“Men of Scythia, look at what we are doing!


4.3.3
4123
δούλοισι τοῖσι ἡμετέροισι μαχόμενοι αὐτοί τε κτεινόμενοι ἐλάσσονες γινόμεθα καὶ ἐκείνους κτείνοντες ἐλασσόνων τὸ λοιπὸν ἄρξομεν .
We are fighting our own slaves; they kill us, and we grow fewer; we kill them, and shall have fewer slaves.


4.3.4
4124
νῦν ὦν μοι δοκέει αἰχμὰς μὲν καὶ τόξα μετεῖναι , λαβόντα δὲ ἕκαστον τοῦ ἵππου τὴν μάστιγα ἰέναι ἆσσον αὐτῶν .
Now, then, my opinion is that we should drop our spears and bows, and meet them with horsewhips in our hands.


4.3.4
4125
μέχρι μὲν γὰρ ὥρων ἡμέας ὅπλα ἔχοντας , οἳ δὲ ἐνόμιζον ὅμοιοί τε καί ἐξ ὁμοίων ἡμῖν εἶναι ·
As long as they see us armed, they imagine that they are our equals and the sons of our equals;


4.3.4
4126
ἐπεὰν δὲ ἴδωνται μάστιγας ἀντὶ ὅπλων ἔχοντας , μαθόντες ὡς εἰσὶ ἡμέτεροι δοῦλοι καὶ συγγνόντες τοῦτο .
let them see us with whips and no weapons,


4.3.4
4127
οὐκ ὑπομενέουσι " .
and they will perceive that they are our slaves; and taking this to heart they will not face our attack.”


4.4.1
4128
ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες οἱ Σκύθαι ἐποίευν ἐπιτελέα ·
The Scythians heard this and acted on it;


4.4.1
4129
οἳ δὲ ἐκπλαγέντες τῷ γινομένῳ τῆς μάχης τε ἐπελάθοντο καὶ ἔφευγον .
and their enemies, stunned by what they saw, did not think of fighting, but fled.


4.4.1
4130
οὕτω οἱ Σκύθαι τῆς τε Ἀσίης ἧρξαν καὶ ἐξελασθέντες αὖτις ὑπὸ Μήδων κατῆλθον τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ ἐς τὴν σφετέρην .
Thus, the Scythians ruled Asia and were driven out again by the Medes, and returned to their own country in such a way.


4.4.1
4131
τῶνδε εἵνεκα ὁ Δαρεῖυς τίσασθαι βουλόμενος συνήγειρε ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς στράτευμα .
Desiring to punish them for what they had done, Darius assembled an army against them.


4.5.1
4132
ὣς δὲ Σκύθαι λέγουσι , νεώτατον πάντων ἐθνέων εἶναι τὸ σφέτερον , τοῦτο δὲ γενέσθαι ὧδε .
The Scythians say that their nation is the youngest in the world, and that it came into being in this way.


4.5.1
4133
ἄνδρα γενέσθαι πρῶτον ἐν τῇ γῆ ταύτῃ ἐούσῃ ἐρήμῳ τῳ οὔνομα εἶναι Ταργιτάον ·
A man whose name was Targitaüs appeared in this country, which was then desolate.


4.5.1
4134
τοῦ δὲ Ταργιτάου τούτου τοὺς τοκέας λέγουσι εἶναι , ἐμοὶ μὲν οὐ πιστὰ λέγοντες , λέγουσι δ’ ὦν , Δία τε καὶ Βορυσθένεος τοῦ ποταμοῦ θυγατέρα .
They say that his parents were Zeus and a daughter of the Borysthenes river (I do not believe the story, but it is told).


4.5.2
4135
γένεος μὲν τοιούτου δὴ τινος γενέσθαι τὸν Ταργιτάον , τούτου δὲ γενέσθαι παῖδας τρεῖς , Λιπόξαϊν καὶ Ἀρπόξαϊν καὶ νεώτατον Κολάξαιν .
Such was Targitaüs' lineage; and he had three sons: Lipoxaïs, Arpoxaïs, and Colaxaïs, youngest of the three.


4.5.3
4136
ἐπὶ τούτων ἀρχόντων ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ φερομένα χρύσεα ποιήματα , ἄροτρόν τε καὶ ζυγόν καὶ σάγαριν καὶ φιάλην , πεσεῖν ἐς τὴν Σκυθικήν ·
In the time of their rule (the story goes) certain implements — namely, a plough, a yoke, a sword, and a flask, all of gold — fell down from the sky into Scythia.


4.5.3
4137
καὶ τῶν ἰδόντα πρῶτον τὸν πρεσβύτατον ἆσσον ἰέναι βουλόμενον αὐτὰ λαβεῖν , τὸν δὲ χρυσόν ἐπιόντος καίεσθαι .
The eldest of them, seeing these, approached them meaning to take them; but the gold began to burn as he neared, and he stopped.


4.5.4
4138
ἀπαλλαχθέντος δὲ τούτου προσιέναι τὸν δεύτερον , καὶ τὸν αὖτις τ- αὐτὰ ποιέειν .
Then the second approached, and the gold did as before.


4.5.4
4139
τοὺς μὲν δὴ καιόμενον τὸν χρυσὸν ἀπώσασθαι , τρίτῳ δὲ τῷ νεωτάτῳ ἐπελθόντι κατασβῆναι , καὶ μιν ἐκεῖνον κομίσαι ἐς ἑωυτοῦ ·
When these two had been driven back by the burning gold, the youngest brother approached and the burning stopped, and he took the gold to his own house.


4.5.4
4140
καὶ τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους ἀδελφεοὺς πρὸς ταῦτα συγγνόντας τὴν βασιληίην πᾶσαν παραδοῦναι τῷ νεωτάτῳ .
In view of this, the elder brothers agreed to give all the royal power to the youngest.


4.6.1
4141
ἀπὸ μὲν δὴ Λιποξάιος γεγονέναι τούτους τῶν Σκυθέων οἳ Αὐχάται γένος καλέονται , ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ μέσου Ἀρποξάιος οἳ Κατίαροί τε καὶ Τράσπιες καλέονται , ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ νεωτάτου αὐτῶν τοῦ βασιλέος οἳ καλέονται Παραλάται ·
Lipoxaïs, it is said, was the father of the Scythian clan called Auchatae; Arpoxaïs, the second brother, of those called Katiari and Traspians; the youngest, who was king, of those called Paralatae.


4.6.2
4142
σύμπασι δὲ εἶναι οὔνομα Σκολότους , τοῦ βασιλέος ἐπωνυμίην .
All these together bear the name of Skoloti, after their king;


4.6.2
4143
Σκύθας δὲ Ἕλληνες ὠνόμασαν .
“Scythians” is the name given them by Greeks. This, then, is the Scythians’ account of their origin,


4.7.1
4144
γεγονέναι μέν νυν σφέας ὧδε λέγουσι οἱ Σκύθαι , ἔτεα δὲ σφίσι ἐπείτε γεγόνασι τὰ σύμπαντα λέγουσι εἶναι ἀπὸ τοῦ πρώτου βασιλέος Ταργιτάου ἐς τὴν Δαρείου διάβασιν τὴν ἐπὶ σφέας χιλίων οὐ πλέω ἀλλὰ τοσαῦτα .
and they say that neither more nor less than a thousand years in all passed from the time of their first king Targitaüs to the entry of Darius into their country.


4.7.1
4145
τὸν δὲ χρυσόν τοῦτον τὸν ἱρὸν φυλάσσουσι οἱ βασιλέες ἐς τὰ μάλιστα , καὶ θυσίῃσι μεγάλῃσι ἱλασκόμενοι μετέρχονται ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος .
The kings guard this sacred gold very closely, and every year offer solemn sacrifices of propitiation to it.


4.7.2
4146
ὃς δ’ ἂν ἔχων τὸν χρυσὸν τὸν ἱρὸν ἐν τῇ ὁρτῇ ὑπαίθριος κατακοιμηθῇ , οὗτος λέγεται ὑπὸ Σκυθέων οὐ διενιαυτίζειν .
Whoever falls asleep at this festival in the open air, having the sacred gold with him, is said by the Scythians not to live out the year;


4.7.2
4147
δίδοσθαι δέ οἱ διὰ τοῦτο ὅσα ἂν ἵππω ἐν ἡμέρῃ μιῇ περιελάσῃ αὐτὸς .
for which reason (they say) as much land as he can ride round in one day is given to him.


4.7.2
4148
τῆς δὲ χώρης ἐούσης μεγάλης τριφασίας τὰς βασιληίας τοῖσι παισὶ τοῖσι ἑωυτοῦ καταστήσασθαι Κολάξαιν , καὶ τουτέων μίαν ποιῆσαι μεγίστην , ἐν τῇ τὸν χρυσὸν φυλάσσεσθαι .
Because of the great size of the country, the lordships that Colaxaïs established for his sons were three, one of which, where they keep the gold, was the greatest.


4.7.3
4149
τὰ δὲ κατύπερθε πρὸς βορέην λέγουσι ἄνεμον τῶν ὑπεροίκων τῆς χώρης οὐκ οἷὰ τε εἶναι ἔτι προσωτέρω οὔτε ὁρᾶν οὔτε διεξιέναι ὑπὸ πτερῶν κεχυμένων ·
Above and north of the neighbors of their country no one (they say) can see or travel further, because of showers of feathers;


4.7.3
4150
πτερῶν γὰρ καὶ τήν γῆν καὶ τὸν ἠέρα εἶναι πλέον , καὶ ταῦτα εἶναι τὰ ἀποκληίοντα τὴν ὄψιν .
for earth and sky are full of feathers, and these hinder sight.


4.8.1
4151
Σκύθαι μὲν ὧδε ὕπερ σφέων τε αὐτῶν καὶ τῆς χώρης τῆς κατύπερθε λέγουσι , Ἑλλήνων δὲ οἱ τὸν Πόντον οἰκέοντες ὧδε .
This is what the Scythians say about themselves and the country north of them.


4.8.1
4152
Ἡρακλέα ἐλαύνοντα τὰς Γηρυόνεω βοῦς ἀπικέσθαι ἐς γῆν ταύτην ἐοῦσαν ἐρήμην , ἥντινα νῦν Σκύθαι νέμονται .
But the story told by the Greeks who live in Pontus is as follows. Heracles, driving the cattle of Geryones, came to this land, which was then desolate, but is now inhabited by the Scythians.


4.8.2
4153
Γηρυόνεα δὲ οἰκέειν ἔξω τοῦ Πόντου , κατοικημένον τὴν Ἕλληνές λέγουσι Ἐρύθειαν νῆσον τὴν πρὸς Γαδείροισι τοῖσι ἔξω Ἡρακλέων στηλέων ἐπὶ τῷ Ὠκεανῷ .
Geryones lived west of the Pontus, settled in the island called by the Greeks Erythea, on the shore of Ocean near Gadira, outside the pillars of Heracles.


4.8.2
4154
τὸν δὲ Ὠκεανὸν λόγῳ μὲν λέγουσι ἀπὸ ἡλίου ἀνατολέων ἀρξάμενον γῆν περὶ πᾶσαν ῥέειν , ἔργῳ δὲ οὐκ ἀποδεικνῦσι .
As for Ocean, the Greeks say that it flows around the whole world from where the sun rises, but they cannot prove that this is so.


4.8.3
4155
ἐνθεῦτεν τόν Ἡρακλέα ἀπικέσθαι ἐς τὴν νῦν Σκυθίην χώρην καλεομένην , καὶ καταλαβεῖν γὰρ αὐτὸν χειμῶνα τε καὶ κρυμὸν , ἐπειρυσάμενον τὴν λεοντέην κατυπνῶσαι , τὰς δὲ οἱ ἵππους τὰς ὑπὸ τοῦ ἅρματος νεμομένας ἐν τούτῳ τῳ χρόνῳ ἀφανισθῆναι θείη τύχῃ .
Heracles came from there to the country now called    Scythia   , where, encountering wintry and frosty weather, he drew his lion's skin over him and fell asleep, and while he slept his mares, which were grazing yoked to the chariot, were spirited away by divine fortune.


4.9.1
4156
ὥς δ’ ἐγερθῆναι τὸν Ἡρακλέα , δίζησθαι , πάντα δὲ τῆς χώρης ἐπεξελθόντα τέλος ἀπικέσθαι ἐς τὴν Ὑλαίην καλεομένην γῆν ·
When Heracles awoke, he searched for them, visiting every part of the country, until at last he came to the land called the Woodland,


4.9.1
4157
ἐνθαῦτα δὲ αὐτὸν εὑρεῖν ἐν ἄντρῳ μιξοπάρθενον τινά , ἔχιδναν διφυέα , τῆς τὰ μὲν ἄνω ἀπὸ τῶν γλουτῶν εἶναι γυναικός , τὰ δὲ ἔνερθε ὄφιος .
and there he found in a cave a creature of double form that was half maiden and half serpent; above the buttocks she was a woman, below them a snake.


4.9.2
4158
ἰδόντα δὲ καὶ θωμάσαντα ἐπειρέσθαι μιν εἴ κου ἴδοι ἵππους πλανωμένας ·
When he saw her he was astonished, and asked her if she had seen his mares straying;


4.9.2
4159
τὴν δὲ φάναι ἑωυτήν ἔχειν καὶ οὐκ ἀποδώσειν ἐκείνῳ πρὶν ἢ οἱ μιχθῇ ·
she said that she had them, and would not return them to him before he had intercourse with her;


4.9.2
4160
τό δὲ Ἡρακλέα μιχθῆναι ἐπὶ τῷ μισθῷ τούτῳ .
Heracles did, in hope of this reward.


4.9.3
4161
κείνην τε δὴ ὑπερβάλλεσθαι τὴν ἀπόδοσιν τῶν ἵππων , βουλομένην ὡς πλεῖστον χρόνον συνεῖναι τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ , καὶ τὸν κομισάμενον ἐθέλειν ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι ·
But though he was anxious to take the horses and go, she delayed returning them, so that she might have Heracles with her for as long as possible;


4.9.3
4162
τέλος δὲ ἀποδιδοῦσαν αὐτὴν εἰπεῖν Ἵππους μὲν δὴ ταύτας ἀπικομένας ἐνθάδε ἔσωσα τοὶ ἐγώ , σῶστρά τε σὺ παρέσχες ·
at last she gave them back, telling him, “These mares came, and I kept them safe here for you, and you have paid me for keeping them,


4.9.3
4163
ἐγὼ γὰρ ἐκ σεῦ τρεῖς παῖδας ἔχω .
for I have three sons by you.


4.9.4
4164
τούτους , ἐπεὰν γένωνται τρόφιες , ὃ τι χρὴ ποιέειν , ἐξηγέο σύ , εἴτε αὐτοῦ κατοικίζω ( χώρης γὰρ τῆσδε ἔχω τὸ κράτος αὕτη ) εἴτε ἀποπέμπω παρὰ σέ .
Now tell me what I am to do when they are grown up: shall I keep them here (since I am queen of this country), or shall I send them away to you?”


4.9.4
4165
τὴν μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἐπειρωτᾶν , τὸν δὲ λέγουσι πρὸς ταῦτα εἰπεῖν " ἐπεὰν ἀνδρωθέντας ἴδῃ τοὺς παῖδας , τάδε ποιεῦσα οὐκ ἂν ἁμαρτάνοις ·
Thus she inquired, and then (it is said) Heracles answered:


4.9.5
4166
τὸν μὲν ἂν ὁρᾷς αὐτῶν τόδε τὸ τόξον ὧδε διατεινόμενον καὶ τῳ ζωστῆρι τῷδε κατὰ τάδε ζωννύμενον , τοῦτον μὲν τῆσδε τῆς χώρης οἰκήτορα ποιεῦ ·
“When you see the boys are grown up, do as follows and you will do rightly: whichever of them you see bending this bow and wearing this belt so, make him an inhabitant of this land;


4.9.5
4167
ὃς δ’ ἂν τούτων τῶν ἔργων τῶν ἐντέλλομαι λείπηται , ἔκπεμπε ἐκ τῆς χώρης .
but whoever falls short of these accomplishments that I require, send him away out of the country.


4.9.5
4168
καὶ ταῦτα ποιεῦσα αὐτή τε εὐφρανέαι καὶ τὰ ἐντεταλμένα ποιήσεις " .
Do so and you shall yourself have comfort, and my will shall be done.”


4.10.1
4169
τὸν μὲν δὴ εἰρύσαντα τῶν τόξων τὸ ἕτερον ( δύο γὰρ δὴ φορέειν τέως Ἡρακλέα ) καὶ τὸν ζωστῆρα προδέξαντα , παραδοῦναι τὸ τόξον τε καὶ τὸν ζωστῆρα ἔχοντα ἐπ’ ἄκρης τῆς συμβολῆς φιάλην χρυσέην , δόντα δὲ ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι .
So he drew one of his bows (for until then Heracles always carried two), and showed her the belt, and gave her the bow and the belt, that had a golden vessel on the end of its clasp; and, having given them, he departed.


4.10.1
4170
τὴν δ’ , ἐπεὶ οἱ γενομένους τοὺς παῖδας ἀνδρωθῆναι , τοῦτο μὲν σφι οὐνόματα θέσθαι , τῷ μὲν Ἀγάθυρσον αὐτῶν , τῷ δ’ ἑπομένῳ Γελωνόν , Σκύθην δὲ τῷ νεωτάτῳ , τοῦτο δὲ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς μεμνημένην αὐτὴν ποιῆσαι τά ἐντεταλμένα .
But when the sons born to her were grown men, she gave them names, calling one of them Agathyrsus and the next Gelonus and the youngest Scythes; furthermore, remembering the instructions, she did as she was told.


4.10.2
4171
καὶ δὴ δύο μὲν οἱ τῶν παίδων , τόν τε Ἀγάθυρσον καὶ τὸν Γελωνόν , οὐκ οἵους τε γενομένους ἐξικέσθαι πρὸς τὸν προκείμενον ἄεθλον , οἴχεσθαι ἐκ τῆς χώρης ἐκβληθέντας ὑπὸ τῆς γειναμένης , τὸν δὲ νεώτατον αὐτῶν Σκύθην ἐπιτελέσαντα καταμεῖναι ἐν τῇ χωρῇ .
Two of her sons, Agathyrsus and Gelonus, were cast out by their mother and left the country, unable to fulfill the requirements set; but Scythes, the youngest, fulfilled them and so stayed in the land.


4.10.3
4172
καὶ ἀπὸ μὲν Σκύθεω τοῦ Ἡρακλέος γενέσθαι τοὺς αἰεὶ βασιλέας γινομένους Σκυθέων , ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς φιάλης ἔτι καὶ ἐς τόδε φιάλας ἐκ τῶν ζωστήρων φορέειν Σκύθας ·
From Scythes son of Heracles comes the whole line of the kings of Scythia;


4.10.3
4173
τὸ δὴ μοῦνον μηχανήσασθαι τὴν μητέρα Σκύθῃ .
and it is because of the vessel that the Scythians carry vessels on their belts to this day.


4.10.3
4174
ταῦτα δὲ Ἑλλήνων οἱ τὸν Πόντον οἰκέοντες λέγουσι .
This alone his mother did for Scythes. This is what the Greek dwellers in Pontus say.


4.11.1
4175
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλος λόγος ἔχων ὧδε , τῷ μάλιστα λεγομένῳ αὐτός πρόσκειμαι , Σκύθας τοὺς νομάδας οἰκέοντας ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ , πολέμῳ πιεσθέντας ὑπὸ Μασσαγετέων , οἴχεσθαι διαβάντας ποταμὸν Ἀράξην ἐπὶ γῆν τὴν Κιμμερίην ( τὴν γὰρ νῦν νέμονται Σκύθαι , αὕτη λέγεται τὸ παλαιὸν εἶναι Κιμμερίων ) , τοὺς δὲ Κιμμερίους ἐπιόντων Σκυθέων βουλεύεσθαι ὡς στρατοῦ ἐπιόντος μεγάλου , καὶ δὴ τὰς γνώμας σφέων κεχωρισμένας , ἐντόνους μὲν ἀμφοτέρας , ἀμείνω δὲ τὴν τῶν βασιλέων ·
There is yet another story, to which account I myself especially incline. It is to this effect. The nomadic Scythians inhabiting    Asia   , when hard pressed in war by the Massagetae, fled across the Araxes river to the Cimmerian country (for the country which the Scythians now inhabit is said to have belonged to the Cimmerians before),


4.11.2
4176
τὴν μὲν γὰρ δὴ τοῦ δήμου φέρειν γνώμην ὡς ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι πρῆγμα εἴη μηδὲ πρὸ σποδοῦ μένοντας κινδυνεύειν , τὴν δὲ τῶν βασιλέων διαμάχεσθαι περὶ τῆς χώρης τοῖσι ἐπιοῦσι .
and the Cimmerians, at the advance of the Scythians, deliberated as men threatened by a great force should. Opinions were divided; both were strongly held, but that of the princes was the more honorable; for the people believed that their part was to withdraw and that there was no need to risk their lives for the dust of the earth; but the princes were for fighting to defend their country against the attackers.


4.11.3
4177
οὔκων δὴ ἐθέλειν πείθεσθαι οὔτε τοῖσι βασιλεῦσι τὸν δῆμον οὔτε τῷ δήμῳ τοὺς βασιλέας ·
Neither side could persuade the other, neither the people the princes nor the princes the people;


4.11.3
4178
τοὺς μὲν δὴ ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι βουλεύεσθαι ἀμαχητὶ τὴν χωρῆν παραδόντας τοῖσι ἐπιοῦσι ·
the one party planned to depart without fighting and leave the country to their enemies,


4.11.3
4179
τοῖσι δὲ βασιλεῦσι δόξαι ἐν τῇ ἑωυτῶν κεῖσθαι ἀποθανόντας μηδὲ συμφεύγειν τῷ δήμῳ , λογισαμένους ὅσα τε ἀγαθὰ πεπόνθασι καὶ ὅσα φεύγοντας ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος κακὰ ἐπίδοξα καταλαμβάνειν .
but the princes were determined to lie dead in their own country and not to flee with the people, for they considered how happy their situation had been and what ills were likely to come upon them if they fled from their native land.


4.11.4
4180
ὡς δὲ δόξαι σφι ταῦτα , διαστάντας καὶ ἀριθμὸν ἴσους γενομένους μάχεσθαι πρὸς ἀλλήλους .
Having made up their minds, the princes separated into two equal bands and fought with each other until they were all killed by each other's hands;


4.11.4
4181
καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἀποθανόντας πάντας ὑπ’ ἑωυτῶν θάψαι τὸν δῆμον τῶν Κιμμερίων παρὰ ποταμὸν Τύρην ( καί σφεων ἔτι δῆλος ἐστὶ ὁ τάφος ) , θάψαντας δὲ οὕτω τὴν ἔξοδον ἐκ τῆς χώρης ποιέεσθαι ·
then the Cimmerian people buried them by the Tyras river, where their tombs are still to be seen, and having buried them left the land;


4.11.4
4182
Σκύθας δὲ ἐπελθόντας λαβεῖν τὴν χώρην ἐρήμην .
and the Scythians came and took possession of the country left empty.


4.12.1
4183
καὶ νῦν ἔστι μὲν ἐν τῇ Σκυθικῇ Κιμμέρια τείχεα , ἔστι δὲ πορθμήια Κιμμέρια , ἔστι δὲ καὶ χωρῇ οὔνομα Κιμμερίη , ἔστι δὲ Βόσπορος Κιμμέριος καλεόμενος ·
And to this day there are Cimmerian walls in    Scythia   , and a Cimmerian ferry, and there is a country Cimmeria and a strait named Cimmerian.


4.12.2
4184
φαίνονται δὲ οἱ Κιμμέριοι φεύγοντες ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην τοὺς Σκύθας καὶ τὴν χερσόνησον κτίσαντες , ἐν τῇ νῦν Σινώπη πόλις Ἑλλὰς οἴκισται .
Furthermore, it is evident that the Cimmerians in their flight from the Scythians into Asia also made a colony on the peninsula where the Greek city of Sinope has since been founded;


4.12.2
4185
φανεροὶ δὲ εἰσὶ καὶ οἱ Σκύθαι διώξαντες αὐτοὺς καὶ ἐσβαλόντες ἐς γῆν τὴν Μηδικὴν , ἁμαρτόντες τῆς ὁδοῦ ·
and it is clear that the Scythians pursued them and invaded Media, missing their way;


4.12.3
4186
οἱ μὲν γὰρ Κιμμέριοι αἰεὶ τὴν παρὰ θάλασσαν ἔφευγον , οἱ δὲ Σκύθαι ἐν δεξιῇ τὸν Καύκασον ἔχοντες ἐδίωκον ἐς οὗ ἐσέβαλον ἐς γῆν τὴν Μηδικήν , ἐς μεσόγαιαν τῆς ὁδοῦ τραφθέντες .
for the Cimmerians always fled along the coast, and the Scythians pursued with the Caucasus on their right until they came into the Median land, turning inland on their way.


4.12.3
4187
οὗτος δὲ ἄλλος ξυνὸς Ἑλλήνων τε καὶ βαρβάρων λεγόμενος λόγος εἴρηται .
That is the other story current among Greeks and foreigners alike.


4.13.1
4188
ἔφη δὲ Ἀριστέης ὁ Καϋστροβίου ἀνὴρ Προκοννήσιος ποιέων ἔπεα , ἀπικέσθαι ἐς Ἰσσηδόνας φοιβόλαμπτος γενόμενος , Ἰσσηδόνων δὲ ὑπεροικέειν Ἀριμασποὺς ἄνδρας μουνοφθάλμους ὕπερ δὲ τούτων τοὺς χρυσοφύλακας γρῦπας , τούτων δὲ τοὺς Ὑπερβορέους κατήκοντας ἐπὶ θάλασσαν .
There is also a story related in a poem by Aristeas son of Caüstrobius, a man of    Proconnesus   . This Aristeas, possessed by Phoebus, visited the Issedones; beyond these (he said) live the one-eyed Arimaspians, beyond whom are the griffins that guard gold, and beyond these again the Hyperboreans, whose territory reaches to the sea.


4.13.2
4189
τούτους ὦν πάντας πλὴν Ὑπερβορέων , ἀρξάντων Ἀριμασπῶν , αἰεὶ τοῖσι πλησιοχώροισι ἐπιτίθεσθαι , καὶ ὑπὸ μὲν Ἀριμασπῶν ἐξωθέεσθαι ἐκ τῆς χώρης Ἰσσηδόνας , ὑπὸ δὲ Ἰσσηδόνων Σκύθας , Κιμμερίους δὲ οἰκέοντας ἐπὶ τῇ νοτίῃ θαλάσσῃ ὑπὸ Σκυθέων πιεζομένους ἐκλείπειν τὴν χώρην .
Except for the Hyperboreans, all these nations (and first the Arimaspians) are always at war with their neighbors; the Issedones were pushed from their lands by the Arimaspians, and the Scythians by the Issedones, and the Cimmerians, living by the southern sea, were hard pressed by the Scythians and left their country.


4.13.2
4190
οὕτω οὐδὲ οὗτος συμφέρεται περὶ τῆς χώρης ταύτης Σκύθῃσι .
Thus Aristeas' story does not agree with the Scythian account about this country.


4.14.1
4191
καὶ ὅθεν μὲν ἦν Ἀριστέης ὁ ταῦτα εἴπας , εἴρηκα , τὸν δὲ περὶ αὐτοῦ ἤκουον λόγον ἐν Προκοννήσῳ καί Κυζίκῳ , λέξω .
Where Aristeas who wrote this came from, I have already said; I will tell the story that I heard about him at Proconnesus and Cyzicus.


4.14.1
4192
Ἀριστέην γὰρ λέγουσι , ἐόντα τῶν ἀστῶν οὐδενὸς γένος ὑποδεέστερον , ἐσελθόντα ἐς κναφήιον ἐν Προκοννήσῳ ἀποθανεῖν , καὶ τόν κναφέα κατακληίσαντα τὸ ἐργαστήριον οἴχεσθαι ἀγγελέοντα τοῖσι προσήκουσι τῷ νεκρῷ .
It is said that this Aristeas, who was as well-born as any of his townsfolk, went into a fuller's shop at Proconnesus and there died; the owner shut his shop and went away to tell the dead man's relatives,


4.14.2
4193
ἐσκεδασμένου δὲ ἤδη τοῦ λόγου ἀνὰ τὴν πόλιν ὡς τεθνεώς εἴη ὁ Ἀριστέης , ἐς ἀμφισβασίας τοῖσι λέγουσι ἀπικνέεσθαι ἄνδρα Κυζικηνὸν ἥκοντα ἐξ Ἀρτάκης πόλιος , φάντα συντυχεῖν τε οἱ ἰόντι ἐπὶ Κυζίκου καὶ ἐς λόγους ἀπικέσθαι .
and the report of Aristeas' death being spread about in the city was disputed by a man of Cyzicus, who had come from the town of Artace, and said that he had met Aristeas going toward Cyzicus and spoken with him.


4.14.2
4194
καὶ τοῦτον μὲν ἐντεταμένως ἀμφισβατέειν , τοὺς δὲ προσήκοντας τῷ νεκρῷ ἐπὶ τὸ κναφήιον παρεῖναι ἔχοντας τὰ πρόσφορα ὡς ἀναιρησομένους ·
While he argued vehemently, the relatives of the dead man came to the fuller's shop with all that was necessary for burial;


4.14.3
4195
ἀνοιχθέντος δὲ τοῦ οἰκήματος οὔτε τεθνεῶτα οὔτε ζῶντα φαίνεσθαι Ἀριστέην .
but when the place was opened, there was no Aristeas there, dead or alive.


4.14.3
4196
μετὰ δὲ ἑβδόμῳ ἔτει φανέντα αὐτὸν ἐς Προκόννησον ποιῆσαι τὰ ἔπεα ταῦτα τὰ νῦν ὑπ’ Ἑλλήνων Ἀριμάσπεα καλέεται , ποιήσαντα δὲ ἀφανισθῆναι τὸ δεύτερον .
But in the seventh year after that, Aristeas appeared at Proconnesus and made that poem which the Greeks now call the Arimaspea, after which he vanished once again.


4.15.1
4197
ταῦτα μὲν αἱ πόλιες αὗται λέγουσι , τάδε δὲ οἶδα Μεταποντίνοισι τοῖσι ἐν Ἰταλίῃ συγκυρήσαντα μετὰ τὴν ἀφάνισιν τὴν δευτέρην Ἀριστέω ἔτεσι τεσσεράκοντα καὶ διηκοσίοισι , ὡς ἐγὼ συμβαλλόμενος ἐν Προκοννήσῳ τε καὶ Μεταποντίῳ εὕρισκον .
Such is the tale told in these two towns. But this, I know, happened to the Metapontines in    Italy   , two hundred and forty years after the second disappearance of Aristeas, as reckoning made at    Proconnesus    and    Metapontum    shows me:


4.15.2
4198
Μεταποντῖνοι φασὶ αὐτὸν Ἀριστέην φανέντα σφι ἐς τὴν χώρην κελεῦσαι βωμὸν Ἀπόλλωνος ἱδρύσασθαι καὶ Ἀριστέω τοῦ Προκοννησίου ἐπωνυμίην ἔχοντα ἀνδριάντα πὰρ’ αὐτὸν ἱστάναι ·
Aristeas, so the Metapontines say, appeared in their country and told them to set up an altar to Apollo, and set beside it a statue bearing the name of Aristeas the Proconnesian;


4.15.2
4199
φάναι γὰρ σφι τὸν Ἀπόλλωνα Ἰταλιωτέων μούνοισι δὴ ἀπικέσθαι ἐς τὴν χώρην , καὶ αὐτὸς οἱ ἕπεσθαι ὁ νῦν ἐὼν Ἀριστέης ·
for, he said,  Apollo had come to their country alone of all Italian lands, and he had come with him — the man who was now Aristeas.


4.15.2
4200
τότε δὲ , ὅτε εἵπετο τῷ θεῷ , εἶναι κόραξ .
 Then, however, when he followed the god he had been a crow.


4.15.3
4201
καὶ τὸν μὲν εἰπόντα ταῦτα ἀφανισθῆναι , σφέας δὲ Μεταποντῖνοι λέγουσι ἐς Δελφοὺς πέμψαντας τὸν θεὸν ἐπειρωτᾶν ὃ τι τὸ φάσμα τοῦ ἀνθρώπου εἴη .
After saying this, he vanished. The Metapontines, so they say, sent to Delphi and asked the god what the vision of the man could mean;


4.15.3
4202
τὴν δὲ Πυθίην σφέας κελεύειν πείθεσθαι τῷ φάσματι , πειθομένοισι δὲ ἄμεινον συνοίσεσθαι .
and the Pythian priestess told them to obey the vision, saying that their fortune would be better.


4.15.3
4203
καὶ σφέας δεξαμένους ταῦτα ποιῆσαι ἐπιτελέα .
They did as instructed.


4.15.4
4204
καὶ νῦν ἔστηκε ἀνδριὰς ἐπωνυμίην ἔχων Ἀριστέω παρ’ αὐτῷ τῷ ἀγάλματι τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος , πέριξ δὲ αὐτὸν δάφναι ἑστᾶσι ·
And now there stands beside the image of Apollo a statue bearing the name of Aristeas; a grove of bay-trees surrounds it;


4.15.4
4205
τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα ἐν τῇ ἀγορῇ ἵδρυται .
the image is set in the marketplace.


4.15.4
4206
Ἀριστέω μέν νυν πέρι τοσαῦτα εἰρήσθω .
Let it suffice that I have said this much about Aristeas.


4.16.1
4207
τῆς δὲ γῆς , τῆς πέρι ὅδε ὁ λόγος ὅρμηται λέγεσθαι , οὐδεὶς οἶδε ἀτρεκέως ὃ τι τὸ κατύπερθε ἐστί ·
As for the land of which my history has begun to speak, no one exactly knows what lies north of it;


4.16.1
4208
οὐδενὸς γὰρ δὴ αὐτόπτεω εἰδέναι φαμένου δύναμαι πυθέσθαι ·
for I can find out from no one who claims to know as an eyewitness.


4.16.1
4209
οὐδὲ γὰρ οὐδὲ Ἀριστέης , τοῦ περ ὀλίγῳ πρότερον τούτων μνήμην ἐποιεύμην , οὐδὲ οὗτος προσωτέρω Ἰσσηδόνων ἐν αὐτοῖσι τοῖσι ἔπεσι ποιέων ἔφησε ἀπικέσθαι , ἀλλὰ τὰ κατύπερθε ἔλεγε ἀκοῇ , φασ’ Ἰσσηδόνας εἶναι τοὺς ταῦτα λέγοντας .
For even Aristeas, whom I recently mentioned — even he did not claim to have gone beyond the Issedones, even though a poet; but he spoke by hearsay of what lay north, saying that the Issedones had told him.


4.16.2
4210
ἀλλ’ ὅσον μὲν ἡμεῖς ἀτρεκέως ἐπὶ μακρότατον οἷοι τε ἐγενόμεθα ἀκοῇ ἐξικέσθαι , πᾶν εἰρήσεται .
But all that we have been able to learn for certain by report of the farthest lands shall be told.


4.17.1
4211
ἀπὸ τοῦ Βορυσθενειτέων ἐμπορίου ( τοῦτο γὰρ τῶν παραθαλασσίων μεσαίτατον ἐστὶ πάσης τῆς Σκυθίης ) , ἀπὸ τούτου πρῶτοι Καλλιππίδαι νέμονται ἐόντες Ἕλληνές Σκύθαι , ὕπερ δὲ τούτων ἄλλο ἔθνος οἳ Ἀλαζόνες καλέονται .
North of the port of the Borysthenites, which lies midway along the coast of Scythia, the first inhabitants are the Callippidae, who are Scythian Greeks; and beyond them another tribe called Alazones;


4.17.1
4212
οὗτοι δὲ καὶ οἱ Καλλιππίδαι τὰ μὲν ἄλλα κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ Σκύθῃσι ἐπασκέουσι , σῖτον δὲ καὶ σπείρουσι καὶ σιτέονται , καὶ κρόμμυα καὶ σκόροδα καὶ φακούς καὶ κέγχρους .
these and the Callippidae, though in other ways they live like the Scythians, plant and eat grain, onions, garlic, lentils, and millet.


4.17.2
4213
ὕπερ δὲ Ἀλαζόνων οἰκέουσι Σκύθαι ἀροτῆρες , οἳ οὐκ ἐπὶ σιτήσι σπείρουσι τὸν σῖτον ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ πρήσι .
Above the Alazones live Scythian farmers, who plant grain not to eat but to sell;


4.17.2
4214
τούτων δὲ κατύπερθε οἰκέουσι Νευροί .
north of these, the Neuri;


4.17.2
4215
Νευρῶν δὲ τὸ πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον ἔρημον ἀνθρώπων , ὅσον ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν .
north of the Neuri, the land is uninhabited so far as we know.


4.18.1
4216
ταῦτα μὲν παρὰ τὸν Ὕπανιν ποταμὸν ἐστι ἔθνεα πρὸς ἑσπέρης τοῦ Βορυσθένεος ·
These are the tribes by the Hypanis river, west of the Borysthenes.


4.18.1
4217
ἀτὰρ διαβάντι τὸν Βορυσθένεα ἀπὸ θαλάσσης πρῶτον μὲν ᾗ Ὑλαίη , ἀπὸ δὲ ταύτης ἄνω ἰόντι οἰκέουσι Σκύθαι γεωργοί , τοὺς Ἕλληνές οἱ οἰκέοντες ἐπὶ τῷ Ὑπάνι ποταμῷ καλέουσι Βορυσθενεΐτας , σφέας δὲ αὐτοὺς Ὀλβιοπολίτας .
But on the other side of the Borysthenes, the tribe nearest to the sea is the tribe of the Woodlands; and north of these live Scythian farmers, whom the Greek colonists on the Hypanis river (who call themselves Olbiopolitae) call Borystheneïtae.


4.18.2
4218
οὗτοι ὦν οἱ γεωργοὶ Σκύθαι νέμονται τὸ μὲν πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ ἐπὶ τρεῖς ἡμέρας ὁδοῦ , κατήκοντες ἐπὶ ποταμὸν τῷ οὔνομα κεῖται Παντικάπης , τὸ δὲ πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον πλόον ἀνὰ τὸν Βορυσθένεα ἡμερέων ἕνδεκα .
These farming Scythians inhabit a land stretching east a three days' journey to a river called Panticapes, and north as far as an eleven days' voyage up the Borysthenes;


4.18.2
4219
ἤδη δὲ κατύπερθε τούτων ᾗ ἔρημος ἐστὶ ἐπὶ πολλὸν .
and north of these the land is desolate for a long way;


4.18.3
4220
μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἔρημον Ἀνδροφάγοι οἰκέουσι , ἔθνος ἐὸν ἴδιον καὶ οὐδαμῶς Σκυθικόν .
after the desolation is the country of the Man-eaters, who are a nation apart and by no means Scythian;


4.18.3
4221
τὸ δὲ τούτων κατύπερθε ἔρημον ἤδη ἀληθέως καὶ ἔθνος ἀνθρώπων οὐδέν , ὅσον ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν .
and beyond them is true desolation, where no nation of men lives, as far as we know.


4.19.1
4222
τὸ δὲ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ τῶν γεωργῶν τούτων Σκυθέων , διαβάντι τὸν Παντικάπην ποταμόν , νομάδες ἤδη Σκύθαι νέμονται , οὔτε τι σπείροντες οὐδέν οὔτε ἀροῦντες ·
But to the east of these farming Scythians, across the Panticapes river, you are in the land of nomadic Scythians, who plant nothing, nor plough;


4.19.1
4223
ψιλή δέ δενδρέων ἡ πᾶσα αὕτη πλήν τῆς Ὑλαίης .
and all these lands except the Woodlands are bare of trees.


4.19.1
4224
οἱ δὲ νομάδες οὗτοι τὸ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ ἡμερέων τεσσέρων καὶ δέκα ὁδὸν νέμονται χώρην κατατείνουσαν ἐπὶ ποταμὸν Γέρρον .
These nomads inhabit a country to the east that stretches fourteen days' journey to the Gerrus river.


4.20.1
4225
πέρην δὲ τοῦ Γέρρου ταῦτα δὴ τὰ καλεύμενα βασιλήια ἐστὶ καὶ Σκύθαι οἱ ἄριστοί τε καὶ πλεῖστοι καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους νομίζοντες Σκύθας δούλους σφετέρους εἶναι ·
Across the Gerrus are those lands called Royal, where the best and most numerous of the Scythians are, who consider all other Scythians their slaves;


4.20.1
4226
κατήκουσι δὲ οὗτοι τὸ μὲν πρὸς μεσαμβρίην ἐς τὴν Ταυρικήν , τὸ δὲ πρὸς ἠῶ ἐπί τε τάφρον , τὴν δὴ οἱ ἐκ τῶν τυφλῶν γενόμενοι ὤρυξαν , καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς λίμνης τῆς Μαιήτιδος τὸ ἐμπόριον τὸ καλέεται Κρημνοί ·
their territory stretches south to the Tauric land, and east to the trench that was dug by the sons of the blind men, and to the port called The Cliffs on the Maeetian lake; and


4.20.1
4227
τὰ δὲ αὐτῶν κατήκουσι ἐπὶ ποταμὸν Τάναϊν .
part of it stretches to the Tanaïs river.


4.20.2
4228
τὰ δὲ κατύπερθε πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον τῶν βασιληίων Σκυθέων οἰκέουσι Μελάγχλαινοι , ἄλλο ἔθνος καὶ οὐ Σκυθικὸν .
North of the Royal Scythians live the Blackcloaks, who are of another and not a Scythian stock;


4.20.2
4229
Μελαγχλαίνων δὲ τὸ κατύπερθε λίμναι καὶ ἔρημος ἐστὶ ἀνθρώπων , κατ’ ὅσον ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν .
and beyond the Blackcloaks the land is all marshes and uninhabited by men, so far as we know.


4.21.1
4230
Τάναϊν δὲ ποταμὸν διαβάντι οὐκέτι Σκυθική , ἀλλ’ ἡ μὲν πρώτη τῶν λαξίων Σαυροματέων ἐστί , οἳ ἐκ τοῦ μυχοῦ ἀρξάμενοι τῆς Μαιήτιδος λίμνης νέμονται τὸ πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον ἡμερέων πεντεκαίδεκα ὁδόν , πᾶσαν ἐοῦσαν ψιλὴν καὶ ἀγρίων καὶ ἡμέρων δενδρέων ·
Across the Tanaïs it is no longer Scythia; the first of the districts belongs to the Sauromatae, whose country begins at the inner end of the Maeetian lake and stretches fifteen days' journey north, and is quite bare of both wild and cultivated trees.


4.21.1
4231
ὑπεροικέουσι δὲ τούτων δευτέρην λάξιν ἔχοντες Βουδῖνοι , γῆν νεμόμενοι πᾶσαν δασέαν ὕλη παντοίῃ .
Above these in the second district, the Budini inhabit a country thickly overgrown with trees of all kinds.


4.22.1
4232
Βουδίνων δὲ κατύπερθε πρὸς βορέην ἐστὶ πρώτη μὲν ἔρημος ἐπ’ ἡμερέων ἑπτὰ ὁδόν , μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἔρημον ἀποκλίνοντι μᾶλλον πρὸς ἀπηλιώτην ἄνεμον νέμονται Θυσσαγέται , ἔθνος πολλὸν καὶ ἴδιον ·
North of the Budini the land is uninhabited for seven days' journey; after this desolation, and somewhat more toward the east wind, live the Thyssagetae, a numerous and a separate nation, who live by hunting.


4.22.1
4233
ζῶσι δὲ ἀπὸ θήρης .
These nomads inhabit a country to the east that stretches fourteen days' journey to the Gerrus river.


4.22.2
4234
συνεχέες δὲ τούτοισι ἐν τοῖσι αὐτοῖσι τόποισι κατοικημένοι εἰσὶ τοῖσι οὔνομα κεῖται Ἰύρκαι , καὶ οὗτοι ἀπὸ θήρης ζῶντες τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
Adjoining these and in the same country live the people called Iyrkae; these also live by hunting, in the way that I will describe.


4.22.2
4235
λοχᾷ ἐπὶ δένδρεον ἀναβάς , τὰ δὲ ἐστὶ πυκνὰ ἀνὰ πᾶσαν τὴν χώρην ·
The hunter climbs a tree, and sits there concealed; for trees grow thickly all over the land;


4.22.2
4236
ἵππος δὲ ἑκάστῳ δεδιδαγμένος ἐπὶ γαστέρα κεῖσθαι ταπεινότητος εἵνεκα ἕτοιμος ἐστὶ καὶ κύων ·
and each man has his horse at hand, trained to flatten on its belly for the sake of lowness, and his dog;


4.22.2
4237
ἐπεὰν δὲ ἀπίδῃ τὸ θηρίον ἀπὸ τοῦ δενδρέου , τοξεύσας ἐπιβὰς ἐπὶ τὸν ἵππον διώκει , καὶ ὁ κύων ἔχεται , ὑπὲρ δὲ τούτων τὸ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ ἀποκλίνοντι οἰκέουσι Σκύθαι ἄλλοι , ἀπὸ τῶν βασιληίων Σκυθέων ἀποστάντες καὶ οὕτω ἀπικόμενοι ἐς τοῦτον τὸν χῶρον .
and when he sees the quarry from the tree, he shoots with the bow and mounts his horse and pursues it, and the dog follows close behind.


4.23.1
4238
μέχρι μὲν δὴ τῆς τούτων τῶν Σκυθέων χώρης ἐστὶ ἡ καταλεχθεῖσα πᾶσα πεδιάς τε γῆ καὶ βαθύγαιος , τὸ δ’ ἀπὸ τούτου λιθώδης τ’ ἐστὶ καὶ τρηχέα .
As for the countryside of these Scythians, all the land mentioned up to this point is level and its soil deep; but thereafter it is stony and rough.


4.23.2
4239
διεξελθόντι δὲ καὶ τῆς τρηχέης χώρης πολλὸν οἰκέουσι ὑπώρεαν ὀρέων ὑψηλῶν ἄνθρωποι λεγόμενοι εἶναι πάντες φαλακροὶ ἐκ γενετῆς γινόμενοι , καὶ ἔρσενες καὶ θήλεαι ὁμοίως , καὶ σιμοὶ καὶ γένεια ἔχοντες μεγάλα , φωνὴν δὲ ἰδίην ἱέντες , ἐσθῆτι δὲ χρεώμενοι Σκυθικῇ , ζῶντες δὲ ἀπὸ δενδρέων .
After a long journey through this rough country, there are men inhabiting the foothills of high mountains, who are said to be bald from birth (male and female alike) and snub-nosed and with long beards; they speak their own language, and wear Scythian clothing, and their food comes from trees.


4.23.3
4240
ποντικὸν μὲν οὔνομα τῷ δενδρέῳ ἀπ’ οὗ ζῶσι , μέγαθος δὲ κατὰ συκέην μάλιστά κῃ .
The tree by which they live is called “Pontic”; it is about the size of a fig-tree,


4.23.3
4241
καρπὸν δὲ φορέει κυάμῳ ἴσον , πυρῆνα δὲ ἔχει .
and bears a fruit as big as a bean, with a stone in it.


4.23.3
4242
τοῦτο ἐπεὰν γένηται πέπον , σακκέουσι ἱματίοισι , ἀπορρέει δὲ ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ παχὺ καὶ μέλαν ·
When this fruit is ripe, they strain it through cloth, and a thick black liquid comes from it,


4.23.3
4243
οὔνομα δὲ τῷ ἀπορρέοντι ἐστὶ ἄσχυ ·
which they call “aschu”;


4.23.3
4244
τοῦτο καὶ λείχουσι καὶ γάλακτι συμμίσγοντες πίνουσι , καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς παχύτητος αὐτοῦ τῆς τρυγὸς παλάθας συντιθεῖσι καὶ ταύτας σιτέονται .
they lick this up or drink it mixed with milk, and from the thickest lees of it they make cakes, and eat them.


4.23.4
4245
πρόβατα γάρ σφι οὐ πολλά ἐστι .
They have few cattle,


4.23.4
4246
οὐ γάρ τι σπουδαῖαι αἱ νομαὶ αὐτόθι εἰσί .
for the pasture in their land is not good.


4.23.4
4247
ὑπὸ δενδρέῳ δὲ ἕκαστος κατοίκηται , τὸν μὲν χειμῶνα ἐπεὰν τὸ δένδρεον περικαλύψῃ πίλῳ στεγνῷ λευκῷ , τὸ δὲ θέρος ἄνευ πίλου .
They each live under a tree, covering it in winter with a white felt cloth, but using no felt in summer.


4.23.5
4248
τούτους οὐδεὶς ἀδικέει ἀνθρώπων ·
These people are wronged by no man,


4.23.5
4249
ἱροὶ γὰρ λέγονται εἶναι ·
for they are said to be sacred;


4.23.5
4250
οὐδέ τι ἀρήιον ὅπλον ἐκτέαται .
nor have they any weapon of war.


4.23.5
4251
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν τοῖσι περιοικέουσι οὗτοι εἰσὶ οἱ τὰς διαφορὰς διαιρέοντες , τοῦτο δὲ ὃς ἂν φεύγων καταφύγῃ ἐς τούτους , ὑπ’ οὐδενὸς ἀδικέεται ·
They judge the quarrels between their neighbors; furthermore, whatever banished man has taken refuge with them is wronged by no one.


4.23.5
4252
οὔνομα δέ σφι ἐστὶ Ἀργιππαῖοι .
They are called Argippeans.


4.24.1
4253
μέχρι μέν νυν τῶν φαλακρῶν τούτων πολλὴ περιφανείη τῆς χώρης ἐστὶ καὶ τῶν ἔμπροσθε ἐθνέων ·
Now as far as the land of these bald men, we have full knowledge of the country and the nations on the near side of them;


4.24.1
4254
καὶ γὰρ Σκυθέων τινὲς ἀπικνέονται ἐς αὐτούς , τῶν οὐ χαλεπόν ἐστι πυθέσθαι καὶ Ἑλλήνων τῶν ἐκ Βορυσθένεος τε ἐμπορίου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ποντικῶν ἐμπορίων ·
for some of the Scythians make their way to them, from whom it is easy to get knowledge, and from some of the Greeks, too, from the Borysthenes port and the other ports of Pontus;


4.24.1
4255
Σκυθέων δὲ οἳ ἂν ἔλθωσι ἐς αὐτούς , δι’ ἑπτὰ ἑρμηνέων καὶ δι’ ἑπτὰ γλωσσέων διαπρήσσονται .
such Scythians as visit them transact their business with seven interpreters and in seven languages.


4.25.1
4256
μέχρι μὲν δὴ τούτων γινώσκεται , τὸ δὲ τῶν φαλακρῶν κατύπερθε οὐδεὶς ἀτρεκέως οἶδε φράσαι .
Now as far as these men this country is known, then, but what lies north of the bald men no one can say with exact knowledge;


4.25.1
4257
ὄρεα γὰρ ὑψηλὰ ἀποτάμνει ἄβατα καὶ οὐδείς σφεα ὑπερβαίνει .
for high and impassable mountains bar the way, and no one crosses them.


4.25.1
4258
οἱ δὲ φαλακροὶ οὗτοι λέγουσι , ἐμοὶ μὲν οὐ πιστὰ λέγοντες , οἰκέειν τὰ ὄρεα αἰγίποδας ἄνδρας , ὑπερβάντι δὲ τούτους ἀνθρώπους ἄλλους οἳ τὴν ἑξάμηνον κατεύδουσι .
These bald men say (although I do not believe them) that the mountains are inhabited by men with goats' feet, and that beyond these are men who sleep for six months of the twelve.


4.25.1
4259
τοῦτο δὲ οὐκ ἐνδέκομαι τὴν ἀρχήν , ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν πρὸς ἠῶ τῶν φαλακρῶν γινώσκεται ἀτρεκέως ὑπὸ Ἰσσηδόνων οἰκεόμενον , τὸ μέντοι κατύπερθε πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον οὐ γινώσκεται οὔτε τῶν φαλακρῶν οὔτε τῶν Ἰσσηδόνων , εἰ μὴ ὅσα αὐτῶν τούτων λεγόντων .
This I cannot accept as true at all.


4.26.1
4260
νόμοισι δὲ Ἰσσηδόνες τοῖσιδε λέγονται χρᾶσθαι .
It is said to be the custom of the Issedones that, whenever a man's father dies, all the nearest of kin bring beasts of the flock


4.26.1
4261
ἐπεὰν ἀνδρὶ ἀποθάνῃ πατήρ , οἱ προσήκοντες πάντες προσάγουσι πρόβατα , καὶ ἔπειτα ταῦτα θύσαντες καὶ καταταμόντες τὰ κρέα κατατάμνουσι καὶ τὸν τοῦ δεκομένου τεθνεῶτα γονέα , ἀναμίξαντες δὲ πάντα τὰ κρέα δαῖτα προτίθενται ·
and, having killed these and cut up the flesh, they also cut up the dead father of their host, and set out all the flesh mixed together for a feast.


4.26.2
4262
τὴν δὲ κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ ψιλώσαντες καὶ ἐκκαθήραντες καταχρυσοῦσι καὶ ἔπειτα ἅτε ἀγάλματι χρέωνται , θυσίας μεγάλας ἐπετείους ἐπιτελέοντες .
As for his head, they strip it bare and clean and gild it, and keep it for a sacred relic, to which they offer solemn sacrifice yearly.


4.26.2
4263
παῖς δὲ πατρὶ τοῦτο ποιέει , κατά περ Ἕλληνες τὰ γενέσια .
Every son does this for his father, just like the Greeks in their festivals in honor of the dead.


4.26.2
4264
ἄλλως δὲ δίκαιοι καὶ οὗτοι λέγονται εἶναι , ἰσοκρατέες δὲ ὁμοίως αἱ γυναῖκες τοῖσι ἀνδράσι .
In other respects, these are said to be a law-abiding people, too, and the women to have equal power with the men.


4.27.1
4265
γινώσκονται μὲν δὴ καὶ οὗτοι , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτων τὸ κατύπερθε Ἰσσηδόνες εἰσὶ οἱ λέγοντες μουνοφθάλμους ἀνθρώπους καὶ χρυσοφύλακας γρῦπας εἶναι ·
Of these too, then, we have knowledge; but as for what is north of them, it is from the Issedones that the tale comes of the one-eyed men and the griffins that guard gold;


4.27.1
4266
παρὰ δὲ τούτων Σκύθαι παραλαβόντες λέγουσι , παρὰ δὲ Σκυθέων ἡμεῖς οἱ ἄλλοι νενομίκαμεν καὶ ὀνομάζομεν αὐτοὺς σκυθιστὶ Ἀριμασπούς ·
this is told by the Scythians, who have heard it from them; and we have taken it as true from the Scythians, and call these people by the Scythian name, Arimaspians;


4.27.1
4267
ἄριμα γὰρ ἓν καλέουσι Σκύθαι , σποῦ δὲ ὀφθαλμόν .
for in the Scythian tongue “arima” is one, and “spou” is the eye.


4.28.1
4268
δυσχείμερος δὲ αὕτη ἡ καταλεχθεῖσα πᾶσα χώρη οὕτω δή τι ἐστί , ἔνθα τοὺς μὲν ὀκτὼ τῶν μηνῶν ἀφόρητος οἷος γίνεται κρυμός , ἐν τοῖσι ὕδωρ ἐκχέας πηλὸν οὐ ποιήσεις , πῦρ δὲ ἀνακαίων ποιήσεις πηλόν ·ἡ δὲ θάλασσα πήγνυται καὶ ὁ Βόσπορος πᾶς ὁ Κιμμέριος , καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ κρυστάλλου οἱ ἐντὸς τάφρου Σκύθαι κατοικημένοι στρατεύονται καὶ τὰς ἁμάξας ἐπελαύνουσι πέρην ἐς τοὺς Σίνδους .
All the aforesaid country is exceedingly cold: for eight months of every year there is unbearable frost, and during these you do not make mud by pouring out water but by lighting a fire; the sea freezes, as does all the  Cimmerian Bosporus; and the Scythians living on this side of the trench lead armies over the ice, and drive their wagons across to the land of the  Sindi.


4.28.2
4269
οὕτω μὲν δὴ τοὺς ὀκτὼ μῆνας διατελέει χειμὼν ἐών , τοὺς δ’ ἐπιλοίπους τέσσερας ψύχεα αὐτόθι ἐστί .
Thus, winter lasts for eight months, and for the remaining four months it is cold there.


4.28.2
4270
κεχώρισται δὲ οὗτος ὁ χειμὼν τοὺς τρόπους πᾶσι τοῖσι ἐν ἄλλοισι χωρίοισι γινομένοισι χειμῶσι , ἐν τῷ τὴν μὲν ὡραίην οὐκ ὕει λόγου ἄξιον οὐδέν , τὸ δὲ θέρος ὕων οὐκ ἀνιεῖ ·
This winter is different in character from winters in any other place: for in the summer it does not rain, while in winter it rains without stopping.


4.28.3
4271
βρονταί τε ἦμος τῇ ἄλλῃ γίνονται , τηνικαῦτα μὲν οὐ γίνονται , θέρεος δὲ ἀμφιλαφέες ·
and when there are thunderstorms in other lands, here there are none, but in summer there are plenty of them;


4.28.3
4272
ἢν δὲ χειμῶνος βροντὴ γένηται , ὡς τέρας νενόμισται θωμάζεσθαι .
if there is a thunderstorm in winter they are apt to wonder at it as at a portent.


4.28.3
4273
ὣς δὲ καὶ ἢν σεισμὸς γένηται ἤν τε θέρεος ἤν τε χειμῶνος ἐν τῇ Σκυθικῇ , τέρας νενόμισται .
And so, too, if there is an earthquake summer or winter, it is considered a portent in Scythia.


4.28.4
4274
ἵπποι δὲ ἀνεχόμενοι φέρουσι τὸν χειμῶνα τοῦτον , ἡμίονοι δὲ οὐδὲ ὄνοι οὐκ ἀνέχονται ἀρχήν ·
Horses have the endurance to bear the Scythian winter;


4.28.4
4275
τῇ δὲ ἄλλῃ ἵπποι μὲν ἐν κρυμῷ ἑστεῶτες ἀποσφακελίζουσι , ὄνοι δὲ καὶ ἡμίονοι ἀνέχονται .
mules and asses cannot bear it at all; and yet in other lands, while asses and mules can endure frost, horses that stand in it are frostbitten.


4.29.1
4276
δοκέει δέ μοι καὶ τὸ γένος τῶν βοῶν τὸ κόλον διὰ ταῦτα οὐ φύειν κέρεα αὐτόθι ·
And in my opinion it is for this reason that the hornless kind of cattle grow no horns in Scythia.


4.29.1
4277
μαρτυρέει δέ μοι τῇ γνώμῃ καὶ Ὁμήρου ἔπος ἐν Ὀδυσσείῃ ἔχον ὧδε , καὶ Λιβύην , ὅθι τ’ ἄρνες ἄφαρ κεραοὶ τελέθουσι , ὀρθῶς εἰρημένον , ἐν τοῖσι θερμοῖσι ταχὺ παραγίνεσθαι τὰ κέρεα , ἐν δὲ τοῖσι ἰσχυροῖσι ψύχεσι ἢ οὐ φύειν κέρεα τὰ κτήνεα ἀρχὴν ἡ φύοντα φύειν μόγις .
A verse of Homer in the Odyssey attests to my opinion: "Libya, the land where lambs are born with horns on their foreheads," (Hom. Od. 4.85) in which it is correctly observed that in hot countries the horns grow quickly, whereas in very cold countries beasts hardly grow horns, or not at all.


4.30.1
4278
ἐνθαῦτα μέν νυν διὰ τὰ ψύχεα γίνεται ταῦτα .
In Scythia, then, this happens because of the cold.


4.30.1
4279
θωμάζω δέ ( προσθήκας γὰρ δή μοι ὁ λόγος ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐδίζητο ) ὅτι ἐν τῇ Ἠλείῃ πάσῃ χώρῃ οὐ δυνέαται γίνεσθαι ἡμίονοι , οὔτε ψυχροῦ τοῦ χώρου ἐόντος οὔτε ἄλλου φανεροῦ αἰτίου οὐδενός .
But I think it strange (for it was always the way of my history to investigate excurses) that in the whole of Elis no mules can be conceived although the country is not cold, nor is there any evident cause.


4.30.1
4280
φασὶ δὲ αὐτοὶ Ἠλεῖοι ἐκ κατάρης τευ οὐ γίνεσθαι σφίσι ἡμιόνους , ἀλλ’ ἐπεὰν προσίῃ ἡ ὥρη κυΐσκεσθαι τὰς ἵππους , ἐξελαύνουσι ἐς τοὺς πλησιοχώρους αὐτάς , καὶ ἔπειτά σφι ἐν τῇ τῶν πέλας ἐπιεῖσι τοὺς ὄνους , ἐς οὗ ἂν σχῶσι αἱ ἵπποι ἐν γαστρί ·
The Eleans themselves say that it is because of a curse that mules cannot be conceived among them;


4.30.2
4281
ἔπειτα δὲ ἀπελαύνουσι .
but whenever the season is at hand for the mares to conceive, they drive them into the countries of their neighbors, and then send the asses after them, until the mares are pregnant, and then they drive them home again.


4.31.1
4282
περὶ δὲ τῶν πτερῶν τῶν Σκύθαι λέγουσι ἀνάπλεον εἶναι τὸν ἠέρα , καὶ τούτων εἵνεκα οὐκ οἷοί τε εἶναι οὔτε ἰδεῖν τὸ πρόσω τῆς ἠπείρου οὔτε διεξιέναι , τήνδε ἔχω περὶ αὐτῶν γνώμην ·
But regarding the feathers of which the Scythians say that the air is full, so thickly that no one can see or traverse the land beyond,


4.31.1
4283
τὰ κατύπερθε ταύτης τῆς χώρης αἰεὶ νίφεται , ἐλάσσονι δὲ τοῦ θέρεος ἢ τοῦ χειμῶνος , ὥσπερ καὶ οἰκός .
I have this opinion. North of that country snow falls continually, though less in summer than in winter, as is to be expected.


4.31.2
4284
ἤδη ὦν ὅστις ἀγχόθεν χιόνα ἁδρὴν πίπτουσαν εἶδε οἶδε τὸ λέγω ·
Whoever has seen snow falling thickly near him knows himself my meaning;


4.31.2
4285
ἔοικε γὰρ ἡ χιὼν πτεροῖσι καὶ διὰ τὸν χειμῶνα τοῦτον ἐόντα τοιοῦτον ἀνοίκητα τὰ πρὸς βορέην ἐστὶ τῆς ἠπείρου ταύτης .
for snow is like feathers; and because of the winter, which is as I have said, the regions to the north of this continent are uninhabited.


4.31.2
4286
τὰ ὦν πτερὰ εἰκάζοντας τὴν χιόνα τοὺς Σκύθας τε καὶ τοὺς περιοίκους δοκέω λέγειν .
I think therefore that in this story of feathers the Scythians and their neighbors only speak of snow figuratively.


4.31.2
4287
ταῦτα μέν νυν τὰ λέγεται μακρότατα εἴρηται .
So, then, I have spoken of those parts that are said to be most distant.


4.32.1
4288
Ὑπερβορέων δὲ πέρι ἀνθρώπων οὔτε τι Σκύθαι λέγουσι οὐδὲν οὔτε τινὲς ἄλλοι τῶν ταύτῃ οἰκημένων , εἰ μὴ ἄρα Ἰσσηδόνες .
Concerning the Hyperborean people, neither the Scythians nor any other inhabitants of these lands tell us anything, except perhaps the Issedones.


4.32.1
4289
ὡς δὲ ἐγὼ δοκέω , οὐδ’ οὗτοι λέγουσι οὐδέν ·
And, I think, even they say nothing;


4.32.1
4290
ἔλεγον γὰρ ἂν καὶ Σκύθαι , ὡς περὶ τῶν μουνοφθάλμων λέγουσι .
for if they did, then the Scythians, too, would have told, just as they tell of the one-eyed men.


4.32.1
4291
ἀλλ’ Ἡσιόδῳ μὲν ἐστὶ περὶ Ὑπερβορέων εἰρημένα , ἔστι δὲ καὶ Ὁμήρῳ ἐν Ἐπιγόνοισι , εἰ δὴ τῷ ἐόντι γε Ὅμηρος ταῦτα τὰ ἔπεα ἐποίησε .
But Hesiod speaks of Hyperboreans, and Homer too in his poem The Heroes' Sons, if that is truly the work of Homer.


4.33.1
4292
πολλῷ δέ τι πλεῖστα περὶ αὐτῶν Δήλιοι λέγουσι , φάμενοι ἱρὰ ἐνδεδεμένα ἐν καλάμῃ πυρῶν ἐξ Ὑπερβορέων φερόμενα ἀπικνέεσθαι ἐς Σκύθας , ἀπὸ δὲ Σκυθέων ἤδη δεκομένους αἰεὶ τοὺς πλησιοχώρους ἑκάστους κομίζειν αὐτὰ τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρης ἑκαστάτω ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀδρίην , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ πρὸς μεσαμβρίην προπεμπόμενα πρώτους Δωδωναίους Ἑλλήνων δέκεσθαι , ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων καταβαίνειν ἐπὶ τὸν Μηλιέα κόλπον καὶ διαπορεύεσθαι ἐς Εὔβοιαν , πόλιν τε ἐς πόλιν πέμπειν μέχρι Καρύστου , τὸ δ’ ἀπὸ ταύτης ἐκλιπεῖν Ἄνδρον ·
But the Delians say much more about them than any others do. They say that offerings wrapped in straw are brought from the Hyperboreans to  Scythia; when these have passed  Scythia, each nation in turn receives them from its neighbors until they are carried to the  Adriatic sea, which is the most westerly limit of their journey;


4.33.2
4293
Καρυστίους γὰρ εἶναι τοὺς κομίζοντας ἐς Τῆνον , Τηνίους δὲ ἐς Δῆλον .
from there, they are brought on to the south, the people of  Dodona being the first Greeks to receive them. From  Dodona they come down to the Melian gulf, and are carried across to  Euboea, and one city sends them on to another until they come to Carystus; after this,  Andros is left out of their journey, for Carystians carry them to  Tenos, and Tenians to  Delos.


4.33.3
4294
ἀπικνέεσθαι μέν νυν οὕτω ταῦτα τὰ ἱρὰ λέγουσι ἐς Δῆλον ·
Thus (they say) these offerings come to Delos.


4.33.3
4295
πρῶτον δὲ τοὺς Ὑπερβορέους πέμψαι φερούσας τὰ ἱρὰ δὺο κόρας , τὰς ὀνομάζουσι Δήλιοι εἶναι Ὑπερόχην τε καὶ Λαοδίκην ·
But on the first journey, the Hyperboreans sent two maidens bearing the offerings, to whom the Delians give the names Hyperoche and Laodice,


4.33.3
4296
ἅμα δὲ αὐτῇσι ἀσφαλείης εἵνεκεν πέμψαι τοὺς Ὑπερβορέους τῶν ἀστῶν ἄνδρας πέντε πομπούς , τούτους οἳ νῦν Περφερέες καλέονται τιμὰς μεγάλας ἐν Δήλῳ ἔχοντες .
and five men of their people with them as escort for safe conduct, those who are now called Perpherees and greatly honored at Delos.


4.33.4
4297
ἐπεὶ δὲ τοῖσι Ὑπερβορέοισι τοὺς ἀποπεμφθέντας ὀπίσω οὐκ ἀπονοστέειν , δεινὰ ποιευμένους εἰ σφέας αἰεὶ καταλάμψεται ἀποστέλλοντας μὴ ἀποδέκεσθαι , οὕτω δὴ φέροντας ἐς τοὺς οὔρους τὰ ἱρὰ ἐνδεδεμένα ἐν πυρῶν καλάμῃ τοὺς πλησιοχώρους ἐπισκήπτειν κελεύοντας προπέμπειν σφέα ἀπὸ ἑωυτῶν ἐς ἄλλο ἔθνος .
But when those whom they sent never returned, they took it amiss that they should be condemned always to be sending people and not getting them back, and so they carry the offerings, wrapped in straw, to their borders, and tell their neighbors to send them on from their own country to the next;


4.33.5
4298
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν οὕτω προπεμπόμενα ἀπικνέεσθαι λέγουσι ἐς Δῆλον .
and the offerings, it is said, come by this conveyance to Delos.


4.33.5
4299
οἶδα δὲ αὐτὸς τούτοισι τοῖσι ἱροῖσι τόδε ποιεύμενον προσφερές , τὰς Θρηικίας καὶ τὰς Παιονίδας γυναῖκας , ἐπεὰν θύωσι τῇ Ἀρτέμιδι τῇ βασιλείῃ , οὐκ ἄνευ πυρῶν καλάμης ἐχούσας τὰ ἱρά .
I can say of my own knowledge that there is a custom like these offerings; namely, that when the Thracian and Paeonian women sacrifice to the Royal Artemis, they have straw with them while they sacrifice.


4.34.1
4300
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν δὴ ταύτας οἶδα ποιεύσας ·
I know that they do this.


4.34.1
4301
τῇσι δὲ παρθένοισι ταύτῃσι τῇσι ἐξ Ὑπερβορέων τελευτησάσῃσι ἐν Δήλῳ κείρονται καὶ αἱ κόραι καὶ οἱ παῖδες οἱ Δηλίων ·
The Delian girls and boys cut their hair in honor of these Hyperborean maidens, who died at Delos;


4.34.1
4302
αἱ μὲν πρὸ γάμου πλόκαμον ἀποταμνόμεναι καὶ περὶ ἄτρακτον εἱλίξασαι ἐπὶ τὸ σῆμα τιθεῖσι ( τὸ δὲ σῆμα ἐστὶ ἔσω ἐς τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον ἐσιόντι ἀριστερῆς χειρός , ἐπιπέφυκε δέ οἱ ἐλαίη ) , ὅσοι δὲ παῖδες τῶν Δηλίων , περὶ χλόην τινὰ εἱλίξαντες τῶν τριχῶν τιθεῖσι καὶ οὗτοι ἐπὶ τὸ σῆμα .
the girls before their marriage cut off a tress and lay it on the tomb, wound around a spindle.


4.35.1
4303
αὗται μὲν δὴ ταύτην τιμὴν ἔχουσι πρὸς τῶν Δήλου οἰκητόρων .
In this way, then, these maidens are honored by the inhabitants of Delos.


4.35.1
4304
φασὶ δὲ οἱ αὐτοὶ οὗτοι καὶ τὴν Ἄργην τε καὶ τὴν Ὦπιν ἐούσας παρθένους ἐξ Ὑπερβορέων κατὰ τοὺς αὐτοὺς τούτους ἀνθρώπους πορευομένας ἀπικέσθαι ἐς Δῆλον ἔτι πρότερον Ὑπερόχης τε καὶ Λαοδίκης .
These same Delians relate that two virgins, Arge and Opis, came from the Hyperboreans by way of the aforesaid peoples to Delos earlier than Hyperoche and Laodice;


4.35.2
4305
ταύτας μέν νυν τῇ Εἰλειθυίῃ ἀποφερούσας ἀντὶ τοῦ ὠκυτόκου τὸν ἐτάξαντο φόρον ἀπικέσθαι , τὴν δὲ Ἄργην τε καὶ τὴν Ὦπιν ἅμα αὐτοῖσι θεοῖσι ἀπικέσθαι λέγουσι καὶ σφι τιμὰς ἄλλας δεδόσθαι πρὸς σφέων ·
these latter came to bring to Eileithyia the tribute which they had agreed to pay for easing child-bearing; but Arge and Opis, they say, came with the gods themselves, and received honors of their own from the Delians.


4.35.3
4306
καὶ γὰρ ἀγείρειν σφι τὰς γυναῖκας ἐπονομαζούσας τὰ οὐνόματα ἐν τῷ ὕμνῳ τόν σφι Ὠλὴν ἀνὴρ Λύκιος ἐποίησε , παρὰ δὲ σφέων μαθόντας νησιώτας τε καὶ Ἴωνας ὑμνέειν Ὦπίν τε καὶ Ἄργην ὀνομάζοντάς τε καὶ ἀγείροντας ( οὗτος δὲ ὁ Ὠλὴν καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς παλαιοὺς ὕμνους ἐποίησε ἐκ Λυκίης ἐλθὼν τοὺς ἀειδομένους ἐν Δήλῳ ) , καὶ τῶν μηρίων καταγιζομένων ἐπὶ τῷ βωμῷ τὴν σποδὸν ταύτην ἐπὶ τὴν θήκην τῆς Ὤπιός τε καὶ Ἄργης ἀναισιμοῦσθαι ἐπιβαλλομένην .
For the women collected gifts for them, calling upon their names in the hymn made for them by  Olen of  Lycia; it was from  Delos that the islanders and Ionians learned to sing hymns to Opis and Arge, calling upon their names and collecting gifts (this  Olen, after coming from  Lycia, also made the other and ancient hymns that are sung at  Delos).


4.35.4
4307
ἡ δὲ θήκη αὐτέων ἐστὶ ὄπισθε τοῦ Ἀρτεμισίου , πρὸς ἠῶ τετραμμένη , ἀγχοτάτω τοῦ Κηίων ἱστιητορίου .
Furthermore, they say that when the thighbones are burnt in sacrifice on the altar, the ashes are all cast on the burial-place of Opis and Arge, behind the temple of Artemis, looking east, nearest the refectory of the people of  Ceos.


4.36.1
4308
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν Ὑπερβορέων πέρι εἰρήσθω ·
I have said this much of the Hyperboreans, and let it suffice;


4.36.1
4309
τὸν γὰρ περὶ Ἀβάριος λόγον τοῦ λεγομένου εἶναι Ὑπερβορέου οὐ λέγω , ὡς τὸν ὀιστὸν περιέφερε κατὰ πᾶσαν γῆν οὐδὲν σιτεόμενος .
for I do not tell the story of that Abaris, alleged to be a Hyperborean, who carried the arrow over the whole world, fasting all the while.


4.36.1
4310
εἰ δὲ εἰσὶ ὑπερβόρεοι τινὲς ἄνθρωποι , εἰσὶ καὶ ὑπερνότιοι ἄλλοι .
But if there are men beyond the north wind, then there are others beyond the south.


4.36.2
4311
γελῶ δὲ ὁρέων γῆς περιόδους γράψαντας πολλοὺς ἤδη καὶ οὐδένα νοονεχόντως ἐξηγησάμενον ·
And I laugh to see how many have before now drawn maps of the world, not one of them reasonably;


4.36.2
4312
οἳ Ὠκεανόν τε ῥέοντα γράφουσι πέριξ τὴν γῆν ἐοῦσαν κυκλοτερέα ὡς ἀπὸ τόρνου , καὶ τὴν Ἀσίην τῇ Εὐρώπῃ ποιεύντων ἴσην .
for they draw the world as round as if fashioned by compasses, encircled by the Ocean river, and Asia and Europe of a like extent.


4.36.2
4313
ἐν ὀλίγοισι γὰρ ἐγὼ δηλώσω μέγαθός τε ἑκάστης αὐτέων καὶ οἵη τις ἐστὶ ἐς γραφὴν ἑκάστη .
For myself, I will in a few words indicate the extent of the two, and how each should be drawn.


4.37.1
4314
Πέρσαι οἰκέουσι κατήκοντες ἐπὶ τὴν νοτίην θάλασσαν τὴν , Ἐρυθρὴν καλεομένην , τούτων δὲ ὑπεροικέουσι πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον Μῆδοι , Μήδων δὲ Σάσπειρες , Σασπείρων δὲ Κόλχοι κατήκοντες ἐπὶ τὴν βορηίην θάλασσαν , ἐς τὴν Φᾶσις ποταμὸς ἐκδιδοῖ .
The land where the Persians live extends to the southern sea which is called Red;


4.37.1
4315
ταῦτα τέσσερα ἔθνεα οἰκέει ἐκ θαλάσσης ἐς θάλασσαν .
beyond these to the north are the Medes, and beyond the Medes the Saspires, and beyond the Saspires the Colchians, whose country extends to the northern sea into which the Phasis river flows; so these four nations live between the one sea and the other.


4.38.1
4316
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρης ἀκταὶ διφάσιαι ἀπ’ αὐτῆς κατατείνουσι ἐς θάλασσαν , τὰς ἐγὼ ἀπηγήσομαι ·
But west of this region two peninsulas stretch out from it into the sea, which I will now describe.


4.38.2
4317
ἔνθεν μὲν ἡ ἀκτὴ ἡ ἑτέρη τὰ πρὸς βορέην ἀπὸ Φάσιος ἀρξαμένη παρατέταται ἐς θάλασσαν παρά τε τὸν Πόντον καὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον μέχρι Σιγείου τοῦ Τρωικοῦ ·
On the north side one of the peninsulas begins at the Phasis and stretches seaward along the Pontus and the Hellespont, as far as Sigeum in the Troad;


4.38.2
4318
τὰ δὲ πρὸς νότου ἡ αὐτὴ αὕτη ἀκτὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ Μυριανδικοῦ κόλπου τοῦ πρὸς Φοινίκῃ κειμένου τείνει τὰ ἐς θάλασσαν μέχρι Τριοπίου ἄκρης .
on the south side, the same peninsula has a seacoast beginning at the Myriandric gulf that is near Phoenicia, and stretching seaward as far as the Triopian headland.


4.38.2
4319
οἰκέει δὲ ἐν τῇ ἀκτῇ ταύτῃ ἔθνεα ἀνθρώπων τριήκοντα .
On this peninsula live thirty nations.


4.39.1
4320
αὕτη μέν νυν ἡ ἑτέρη τῶν ἀκτέων , ἡ δὲ δὴ ἑτέρη ἀπὸ Περσέων ἀρξαμένη παρατέταται ἐς τὴν Ἐρυθρὴν θάλασσαν , ἥ τε Περσικὴ καὶ ἀπὸ ταύτης ἐκδεκομένη ἡ Ἀσσυρίη καὶ ἀπὸ Ἀσσυρίης ἡ Ἀραβίη ·
This is the first peninsula. But the second, beginning with Persia, stretches to the Red Sea, and is Persian land;


4.39.1
4321
λήγει δὲ αὕτη , οὐ λήγουσα εἰ μὴ νόμῳ , ἐς τὸν κόλπον τὸν Ἀράβιον , ἐς τὸν Δαρεῖος ἐκ τοῦ Νείλου διώρυχα ἐσήγαγε .
and next, the neighboring land of Assyria; and after Assyria, Arabia; this peninsula ends (not truly but only by common consent) at the Arabian Gulf, to which Darius brought a canal from the Nile.


4.39.2
4322
μέχρι μέν νυν Φοινίκης ἀπὸ Περσέων χῶρος πλατὺς καὶ πολλός ἐστι ·
Now from the Persian country to Phoenicia there is a wide and vast tract of land;


4.39.2
4323
τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ Φοινίκης παρήκει διὰ τῆσδε τῆς θαλάσσης ἡ ἀκτὴ αὕτη παρά τε Συρίην τὴν Παλαιστίνην καὶ Αἴγυπτον , ἐς τὴν τελευτᾷ ·
and from Phoenicia this peninsula runs beside our sea by way of the Syrian Palestine and Egypt, which is at the end of it;


4.39.2
4324
ἐν τῇ ἔθνεα ἐστὶ τρία μοῦνα .
in this peninsula there are just three nations.


4.40.1
4325
ταῦτα μὲν ἀπὸ Περσέων τὰ πρὸς ἑσπέρην τῆς Ἀσίης ἔχοντα ἐστί ·
So much for the parts of Asia west of the Persians.


4.40.1
4326
τὰ δὲ κατύπερθε Περσέων καὶ Μήδων καὶ Σασπείρων καὶ Κόλχων , τὰ πρὸς ἠῶ τε καὶ ἥλιον ἀνατέλλοντα , ἔνθεν μὲν ἡ Ἐρυθρὴ παρήκει θάλασσα , πρὸς βορέω δὲ ἡ Κασπίη τε θάλασσα καὶ ὁ Ἀράξης ποταμός , ῥέων πρὸς ἥλιον ἀνίσχοντα .
But what is beyond the Persians, and Medes, and Saspires, and Colchians, east and toward the rising sun, this is bounded on the one hand by the Red Sea, and to the north by the Caspian Sea and the Araxes river, which flows toward the sun's rising.


4.40.2
4327
μέχρι δὲ τῆς Ἰνδικῆς οἰκέεται Ἀσίη ·
As far as India, Asia is an inhabited land;


4.40.2
4328
τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ ταύτης ἔρημος ἤδη τὸ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ , οὐδὲ ἔχει οὐδεὶς φράσαι οἷον δή τι ἐστί .
but thereafter, all to the east is desolation, nor can anyone say what kind of land is there.


4.41.1
4329
τοιαύτη μὲν καὶ τοσαύτη ἡ Ἀσίη ἐστί , ἡ δὲ Λιβύη ἐν τῇ ἀκτῇ τῇ ἑτέρῃ ἐστί ·
Such is Asia, and such its extent.


4.41.1
4330
ἀπὸ γὰρ Αἰγύπτου Λιβύη ἤδη ἐκδέκεται .
But Libya is on this second peninsula; for Libya comes next after Egypt.


4.41.1
4331
κατὰ μέν νυν Αἴγυπτον ἡ ἀκτὴ αὕτη στεινή ἐστι ·
The Egyptian part of this peninsula is narrow;


4.41.1
4332
ἀπὸ γὰρ τῆσδε τῆς θαλάσσης ἐς τὴν Ἐρυθρὴν θάλασσαν δέκα μυριάδες εἰσὶ ὀργυιέων , αὗται δ’ ἂν εἶεν χίλιοι στάδιοι ·
for from our sea to the Red Sea it is a distance of a hundred and twenty-five miles; that is, a thousand stades;


4.41.1
4333
τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ στεινοῦ τούτου κάρτα πλατέα τυγχάνει ἐοῦσα ἡ ἀκτὴ ἥτις Λιβύη κέκληται .
but after this narrow part, the peninsula which is called Libya is very broad.


4.42.1
4334
θωμάζω ὦν τῶν διουρισάντων καὶ διελόντων Λιβύην τε καὶ Ἀσίην καὶ Εὐρώπην ·
I wonder, then, at those who have mapped out and divided the world into Libya, Asia, and Europe;


4.42.1
4335
οὐ γὰρ σμικρὰ τὰ διαφέροντα αὐτέων ἐστί ·
for the difference between them is great,


4.42.1
4336
μήκεϊ μὲν γὰρ παρ’ ἀμφοτέρας παρήκει ἡ Εὐρώπη , εὔρεος δὲ πέρι οὐδὲ συμβάλλειν ἀξίη φαίνεταί μοι εἶναι .
seeing that in length Europe stretches along both the others together, and it appears to me to be wider beyond all comparison.


4.42.2
4337
Λιβύη μὲν γὰρ δηλοῖ ἑωυτὴν ἐοῦσα περίρρυτος , πλὴν ὅσον αὐτῆς πρὸς τὴν Ἀσίην οὐρίζει , Νεκῶ τοῦ Αἰγυπτίων βασιλέος πρώτου τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν καταδέξαντος ·
For Libya shows clearly that it is bounded by the sea, except where it borders on Asia. Necos king of Egypt first discovered this and made it known.


4.42.2
4338
ὃς ἐπείτε τὴν διώρυχα ἐπαύσατο ὀρύσσων τὴν ἐκ τοῦ Νείλου διέχουσαν ἐς τὸν Ἀράβιον κόλπον , ἀπέπεμψε Φοίνικας ἄνδρας πλοίοισι , ἐντειλάμενος ἐς τὸ ὀπίσω δι’ Ἡρακλέων στηλέων ἐκπλέειν ἕως ἐς τὴν βορηίην θάλασσαν καὶ οὕτω ἐς Αἴγυπτον ἀπικνέεσθαι .
When he had finished digging the canal which leads from the Nile to the Arabian Gulf, he sent Phoenicians in ships, instructing them to sail on their return voyage past the Pillars of Heracles until they came into the northern sea and so to Egypt.


4.42.3
4339
ὁρμηθέντες ὦν οἱ Φοίνικες ἐκ τῆς Ἐρυθρῆς θαλάσσης ἔπλεον τὴν νοτίην θάλασσαν ·
So the Phoenicians set out from the Red Sea and sailed the southern sea;


4.42.3
4340
ὅκως δὲ γίνοιτο φθινόπωρον προσσχόντες ἂν σπείρεσκον τὴν γῆν , ἵνα ἑκάστοτε τῆς Λιβύης πλέοντες γινοίατο , καὶ μένεσκον τὸν ἄμητον ·
whenever autumn came they would put in and plant the land in whatever part of Libya they had reached, and there await the harvest;


4.42.4
4341
θερίσαντες δ’ ἂν τὸν σῖτον ἔπλεον , ὥστε δύο ἐτέων διεξελθόντων τρίτῳ ἔτεϊ κάμψαντες Ἡρακλέας στήλας ἀπίκοντο ἐς Αἴγυπτον .
then, having gathered the crop, they sailed on, so that after two years had passed, it was in the third that they rounded the pillars of Heracles and came to Egypt.


4.42.4
4342
καὶ ἔλεγον ἐμοὶ μὲν οὐ πιστά , ἄλλῳ δὲ δή τεῳ , ὡς περιπλώοντες τὴν Λιβύην τὸν ἥλιον ἔσχον ἐς τὰ δεξιά .
There they said (what some may believe, though I do not) that in sailing around Libya they had the sun on their right hand.


4.43.1
4343
οὕτω μὲν αὕτη ἐγνώσθη τὸ πρῶτον , μετὰ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι εἰσὶ οἱ λέγοντες ·
Thus was the first knowledge of Libya gained.


4.43.1
4344
ἐπεὶ Σατάσπης γε ὁ Τεάσπιος ἀνὴρ Ἀχαιμενίδης οὐ περιέπλωσε Λιβύην , ἐπ’ αὐτὸ τοῦτο πεμφθείς , ἀλλὰ δείσας τό τε μῆκος τοῦ πλόου καὶ τὴν ἐρημίην ἀπῆλθε ὀπίσω , οὐδ’ ἐπετέλεσε τὸν ἐπέταξε οἱ ἡ μήτηρ ἄεθλον .
The next story is that of the Carthaginians: for as for Sataspes son of Teaspes, an Achaemenid, he did not sail around Libya, although he was sent for that purpose; but he feared the length and loneliness of the voyage and so returned without accomplishing the task laid upon him by his mother.


4.43.2
4345
θυγατέρα γὰρ Ζωπύρου τοῦ Μεγαβύζου ἐβιήσατο παρθένον ·
For he had raped the virgin daughter of Zopyrus son of Megabyzus;


4.43.2
4346
ἔπειτα μέλλοντος αὐτοῦ διὰ ταύτην τὴν αἰτίην ἀνασκολοπιεῖσθαι ὑπὸ Ξέρξεω βασιλέος , ἡ μήτηρ τοῦ Σατάσπεος ἐοῦσα Δαρείου ἀδελφεὴ παραιτήσατο , φᾶσά οἱ αὐτὴ μέζω ζημίην ἐπιθήσειν ἤ περ ἐκεῖνον ·
and when on this charge he was to be impaled by King Xerxes, Sataspes' mother, who was Darius' sister, interceded for his life, saying that she would impose a heavier punishment on him than Xerxes;


4.43.3
4347
Λιβύην γάρ οἱ ἀνάγκην ἔσεσθαι περιπλώειν , ἐς ὃ ἂν ἀπίκηται περιπλέων αὐτὴν ἐς τὸν Ἀράβιον κόλπον .
for he would be compelled to sail around Libya, until he completed his voyage and came to the Arabian Gulf.


4.43.3
4348
συγχωρήσαντος δὲ Ξέρξεω ἐπὶ τούτοισι , ὁ Σατάσπης ἀπικόμενος ἐς Αἴγυπτον καὶ λαβὼν νέα τε καὶ ναύτας παρὰ τούτων ἔπλεε ἐπὶ Ἡρακλέας στήλας ·
Xerxes agreed to this, and Sataspes went to Egypt where he received a ship and a crew from the Egyptians, and sailed past the Pillars of Heracles.


4.43.4
4349
διεκπλώσας δὲ καὶ κάμψας τὸ ἀκρωτήριον τῆς Λιβύης τῷ οὔνομα Σολόεις ἐστί , ἔπλεε πρὸς μεσαμβρίην ·
Having sailed out beyond them, and rounded the Libyan promontory called Solois, he sailed south;


4.43.4
4350
περήσας δὲ θάλασσαν πολλὴν ἐν πολλοῖσι μησί , ἐπείτε τοῦ πλεῦνος αἰεὶ ἔδεε , ἀποστρέψας ὀπίσω ἀπέπλεε ἐς Αἴγυπτον .
but when he had been many months sailing over the sea, and always more before him, he turned back and made sail for Egypt.


4.43.5
4351
ἐκ δὲ ταύτης ἀπικόμενος παρὰ βασιλέα Ξέρξεα ἔλεγε φὰς τὰ προσωτάτω ἀνθρώπους μικροὺς παραπλέειν ἐσθῆτι φοινικηίῃ διαχρεωμένους , οἳ ὅκως σφεῖς καταγοίατο τῇ νηὶ φεύγεσκον πρὸς τὰ ὄρεα λείποντες τὰς πόλιας ·
Coming to King Xerxes from there, he related in his narrative that, when he was farthest distant, he sailed by a country of little men, who wore palm-leaf clothing;


4.43.5
4352
αὐτοὶ δὲ ἀδικέειν οὐδὲν ἐσιόντες , βρωτὰ δὲ μοῦνα ἐξ αὐτέων λαμβάνειν .
these, whenever he and his men put in to land with their ship, left their towns and fled to the hills; he and his men did no harm when they landed, and took nothing from the people except cattle.


4.43.6
4353
τοῦ δὲ μὴ περιπλῶσαι Λιβύην παντελέως αἴτιον τόδε ἔλεγε , τὸ πλοῖον τὸ πρόσω οὐ δυνατὸν ἔτι εἶναι προβαίνειν ἀλλ’ ἐνίσχεσθαι .
As to his not sailing completely around Libya, the reason (he said) was that the ship could move no farther, but was stopped.


4.43.6
4354
Ξέρξης δὲ οὔ οἱ συγγινώσκων λέγειν ἀληθέα οὐκ ἐπιτελέσαντά τε τὸν προκείμενον ἄεθλον ἀνεσκολόπισε , τὴν ἀρχαίην δίκην ἐπιτιμῶν .
But Xerxes did not believe that Sataspes spoke the truth, and, as the task appointed was unfulfilled, he impaled him, punishing him on the charge first brought against him.


4.43.7
4355
τούτου δὲ τοῦ Σατάσπεος εὐνοῦχος ἀπέδρη ἐς Σάμον , ἐπείτε ἐπύθετο τάχιστα τὸν δεσπότεα τετελευτηκότα , ἔχων χρήματα μεγάλα , τὰ Σάμιος ἀνὴρ κατέσχε , τοῦ ἐπιστάμενος τὸ οὔνομα ἑκὼν ἐπιλήθομαι .
This Sataspes had a eunuch, who as soon as he heard of his master's death escaped to  Samos, with a great hoard of wealth, of which a man of  Samos got possession. I know the man's name but deliberately omit it.


4.44.1
4356
τῆς δὲ Ἀσίης τὰ πολλὰ ὑπὸ Δαρείου ἐξευρέθη , ὃς βουλόμενος Ἰνδὸν ποταμόν , ὃς κροκοδείλους δεύτερος οὗτος ποταμῶν πάντων παρέχεται , τοῦτον τὸν ποταμὸν εἰδέναι τῇ ἐς θάλασσαν ἐκδιδοῖ , πέμπει πλοίοισι ἄλλους τε τοῖσι ἐπίστευε τὴν ἀληθείην ἐρέειν καὶ δὴ καὶ Σκύλακα ἄνδρα Καρυανδέα .
But as to  Asia, most of it was discovered by Darius. There is a river,  Indus, second of all rivers in the production of crocodiles. Darius, desiring to know where this  Indus empties into the sea, sent ships manned by Scylax, a man of Caryanda, and others whose word he trusted;


4.44.2
4357
οἳ δὲ ὁρμηθέντες ἐκ Κασπατύρου τε πόλιος καὶ τῆς Πακτυικῆς γῆς ἔπλεον κατὰ ποταμὸν πρὸς ἠῶ τε καὶ ἡλίου ἀνατολὰς ἐς θάλασσαν , διὰ θαλάσσης δὲ πρὸς ἑσπέρην πλέοντες τριηκοστῷ μηνὶ ἀπικνέονται ἐς τοῦτον τὸν χῶρον ὅθεν ὁ Αἰγυπτίων βασιλεὺς τοὺς Φοίνικας τοὺς πρότερον εἶπα ἀπέστειλε περιπλώειν Λιβύην .
these set out from the city of Caspatyrus and the Pactyic country, and sailed down the river toward the east and the sunrise until they came to the sea; and voyaging over the sea west, they came in the thirtieth month to that place from which the Egyptian king sent the above-mentioned Phoenicians to sail around  Libya.


4.44.3
4358
μετὰ δὲ τούτους περιπλώσαντας Ἰνδούς τε κατεστρέψατο Δαρεῖος καὶ τῇ θαλάσσῃ ταύτῃ ἐχρᾶτο .
After this circumnavigation, Darius subjugated the Indians and made use of this sea.


4.44.3
4359
οὕτω καὶ τῆς Ἀσίης , πλὴν τὰ πρὸς ἥλιον ἀνίσχοντα , τὰ ἄλλα ἀνεύρηται ὃμοια παρεχομένη τῇ Λιβύῃ .
Thus it was discovered that Asia, except the parts toward the rising sun, was in other respects like Libya.


4.45.1
4360
ἡ δὲ Εὐρώπη πρὸς οὐδαμῶν φανερή ἐστι γινωσκομένη , οὔτε τὰ πρὸς ἥλιον ἀνατέλλοντα οὔτε τὰ πρὸς βορέην , εἰ περίρρυτος ἐστί ·
But it is plain that none have obtained knowledge of Europe's eastern or northern regions, so as to be able say if it is bounded by seas;


4.45.1
4361
μήκεϊ δὲ γινώσκεται παρ’ ἀμφοτέρας παρήκουσα .
its length is known to be enough to stretch along both Asia and Libya.


4.45.2
4362
οὐδ’ ἔχω συμβαλέσθαι ἐπ’ ὅτευ μιῇ ἐούσῃ γῇ οὐνόματα τριφάσια κέεται ἐπωνυμίας ἔχοντα γυναικῶν , καὶ οὐρίσματα αὐτῇ Νεῖλός τε ὁ Αἰγύπτιος ποταμὸς ἐτέθη καὶ Φᾶσις ὁ Κόλχος ( οἳ δὲ Τάναιν ποταμὸν τὸν Μαιήτην καὶ πορθμήια τὰ Κιμμέρια λέγουσι ) , οὐδὲ τῶν διουρισάντων τὰ οὐνόματα πυθέσθαι , καὶ ὅθεν ἔθεντο τὰς ἐπωνυμίας .
I cannot guess for what reason the earth, which is one, has three names, all women's, and why the boundary lines set for it are the Egyptian Nile river and the Colchian Phasis river (though some say that the Maeetian Tanaïs river and the Cimmerian Ferries are boundaries); and I cannot learn the names of those who divided the world, or where they got the names which they used.


4.45.3
4363
ἤδη γὰρ Λιβύη μὲν ἐπὶ Λιβύης λέγεται ὑπὸ τῶν πολλῶν Ἑλλήνων ἔχειν τὸ οὔνομα γυναικὸς αὐτόχθονος , ἡ δὲ Ἀσίη ἐπὶ τῆς Προμηθέος γυναικὸς τὴν ἐπωνυμίην .
For Libya is said by most Greeks to be named after a native woman of that name, and Asia after the wife of Prometheus;


4.45.3
4364
καὶ τούτου μὲν μεταλαμβάνονται τοῦ οὐνόματος Λυδοί , φάμενοι ἐπὶ Ἀσίεω τοῦ Κότυος τοῦ Μάνεω κεκλῆσθαι τὴν Ἀσίην , ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἐπὶ τῆς Προμηθέος Ἀσίης .
yet the Lydians claim a share in the latter name, saying that Asia was not named after Prometheus' wife Asia, but after Asies, the son of Cotys, who was the son of Manes,


4.45.3
4365
ἀπ’ ὅτευ καὶ τὴν ἐν Σάρδισι φυλὴν κεκλῆσθαι Ἀσιάδα .
and that from him the Asiad clan at Sardis also takes its name.


4.45.4
4366
ἡ δὲ δὴ Εὐρώπη οὔτε εἰ περίρρυτος ἐστὶ γινώσκεται πρὸς οὐδαμῶν ἀνθρώπων , οὔτε ὁκόθεν τὸ οὔνομα ἔλαβε τοῦτο , οὔτε ὅστις οἱ ἦν ὁ θέμενος φαίνεται , εἰ μὴ ἀπὸ τῆς Τυρίης φήσομεν Εὐρώπης λαβεῖν τὸ οὔνομα τὴν χώρην ·
But as for Europe, no men have any knowledge whether it is bounded by seas or not, or where it got its name, nor is it clear who gave the name, unless we say that the land took its name from the Tyrian Europa.


4.45.4
4367
πρότερον δὲ ἦν ἄρα ἀνώνυμος ὥσπερ αἱ ἕτεραι .
It was (it would seem) before then nameless like the rest.


4.45.5
4368
ἀλλ’ αὕτη γε ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης τε φαίνεται ἐοῦσα καὶ οὐκ ἀπικομένη ἐς τὴν γῆν ταύτην ἥτις νῦν ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων Εὐρώπη καλέεται , ἀλλ’ ὅσον ἐκ Φοινίκης ἐς Κρήτην , ἐκ Κρήτης δὲ ἐς Λυκίην .
But it is plain that this woman was of Asiatic birth, and never came to this land which the Greeks now call Europe, but only from Phoenicia to Crete and from Crete to Lycia.


4.45.5
4369
ταῦτα μέν νυν ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον εἰρήσθω ·
Thus much I have said of these matters, and let it suffice;


4.45.5
4370
τοῖσι γὰρ νομιζομένοισι αὐτῶν χρησόμεθα .
we will use the names established by custom.


4.46.1
4371
ὁ δὲ Πόντος ὁ Εὔξεινος , ἐπ’ ὃν ἐστρατεύετο ὁ Δαρεῖος , χωρέων πασέων παρέχεται ἔξω τοῦ Σκυθικοῦ ἔθνεα ἀμαθέστατα .
Nowhere are men so ignorant as in the lands by the Euxine Pontus (excluding the Scythian nation) into which Darius led his army.


4.46.1
4372
οὔτε γὰρ ἔθνος τῶν ἐντὸς τοῦ Πόντου οὐδὲν ἔχομεν προβαλέσθαι σοφίης πέρι οὔτε ἄνδρα λόγιον οἴδαμεν γενόμενον , πάρεξ τοῦ Σκυθικοῦ ἔθνεος καὶ Ἀναχάρσιος .
For we cannot show that any nation within the region of the Pontus has any cleverness, nor do we know of (overlooking the Scythian nation and Anacharsis) any notable man born there.


4.46.2
4373
τῷ δὲ Σκυθικῶ γένει ἓν μὲν τὸ μέγιστον τῶν ἀνθρωπηίων πρηγμάτων σοφώτατα πάντων ἐξεύρηται τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν , τὰ μέντοι ἄλλα οὐκ ἄγαμαι ·
But the Scythian race has made the cleverest discovery that we know in what is the most important of all human affairs; I do not praise the Scythians in all respects,


4.46.2
4374
τὸ δὲ μέγιστον οὕτω σφι ἀνεύρηται ὥστε ἀποφυγεῖν τε μηδένα ἐπελθόντα ἐπὶ σφέας , μὴ βουλομένους τε ἐξευρεθῆναι καταλαβεῖν μὴ οἷον τε εἶναι .
but in this, the most important: that they have contrived that no one who attacks them can escape, and no one can catch them if they do not want to be found.


4.46.3
4375
τοῖσι γὰρ μήτε ἄστεα μήτε τείχεα ἡ ἐκτισμένα , ἀλλὰ φερέοικοι ἐόντες πάντες ἔωσι ἱπποτοξόται , ζῶντες μὴ ἀπ’ ἀρότου ἀλλ’ ἀπὸ κτηνέων , οἰκήματα τε σφι ᾖ ἐπὶ ζευγέων , κῶς οὐκ ἂν εἴησαν οὗτοι ἄμαχοί τε καὶ ἄποροι προσμίσγειν ;
For when men have no established cities or forts, but are all nomads and mounted archers, not living by tilling the soil but by raising cattle and carrying their dwellings on wagons, how can they not be invincible and unapproachable?


4.47.1
4376
ἐξεύρηται δέ σφι ταῦτα τῆς τε γῆς ἐούσης ἐπιτηδέης καὶ τῶν ποταμῶν ἐόντων σφι συμμάχων .
They have made this discovery in a land that suits their purpose and has rivers that are their allies;


4.47.1
4377
ἥ τε γὰρ γῆ ἐοῦσα πεδιὰς αὕτη ποιώδης τε καὶ εὔυδρος ἐστί , ποταμοί τε δι’ αὐτῆς ῥέουσι οὐ πολλῷ τεῳ ἀριθμὸν ἐλάσσονες τῶν ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ διωρύχων .
for their country is flat and grassy and well-watered, and rivers run through it not very many fewer in number than the canals of Egypt.


4.47.2
4378
ὅσοι δὲ ὀνομαστοί τε εἰσὶ αὐτῶν καὶ προσπλωτοὶ ἀπὸ θαλάσσης , τούτους ὀνομανέω G? Ἴστρος μὲν πεντάστομος , μετὰ δὲ Τύρης τε καὶ Ὕπανις καὶ Βορυσθένης καὶ Παντικάπης καὶ Ὑπάκυρις καὶ Γέρρος καὶ Τάναϊς .
As many of them as are famous and can be entered from the sea, I shall name. There is the Ister, which has five mouths, and the Tyras, and Hypanis, and Borysthenes, and Panticapes, and Hypacuris, and Gerrhus, and Tanaïs.


4.47.2
4379
ῥέουσι δὲ οἵδε κατὰ τάδε .
Their courses are as I shall indicate.


4.48.1
4380
Ἴστρος μέν , ἐὼν μέγιστος ποταμῶν πάντων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν , ἴσος αἰεὶ αὐτὸς ἑωυτῷ ῥέει καὶ θέρεος καὶ χειμῶνος , πρῶτος δὲ τὸ ἀπ’ ἑσπέρης τῶν ἐν τῇ Σκυθικῇ ῥέων κατὰ τοιόνδε μέγιστος γέγονε ·
The Ister, the greatest of all rivers which we know, flows with the same volume in summer and winter; it is the most westerly Scythian river of all, and the greatest because other rivers are its tributaries.


4.48.1
4381
ποταμῶν καὶ ἄλλων ἐς αὐτὸν ἐκδιδόντων εἰσὶ δὴ οἵδε οἱ μέγαν αὐτὸν ποιεῦντες , διὰ μέν γε τῆς Σκυθικῆς χώρης πέντε μὲν οἱ ῥέοντες , τὸν τε Σκύθαι Πόρατα καλέουσι Ἑλλήνες δὲ Πυρετόν , καὶ ἄλλος Τιάραντος καὶ Ἄραρος τε καὶ Νάπαρις καὶ Ὀρδησσός .
These are the native-born Scythian rivers that help to swell it; but the Maris river, which commingles with the Ister, flows from the Agathyrsi. The Atlas, Auras, and Tibisis, three other great rivers that pour into it, flow north from the heights of Haemus.


4.48.3
4382
ὁ μὲν πρῶτος λεχθεὶς τῶν ποταμῶν μέγας καὶ πρὸς ἠῶ ῥέων ἀνακοινοῦται τῷ Ἴστρῳ τὸ ὕδωρ , ὁ δὲ δεύτερος λεχθεὶς Τιάραντος πρὸς ἑσπέρης τε μᾶλλον καὶ ἐλάσσων , ὁ δὲ δὴ Ἄραρός τε καὶ ὁ Νάπαρις καὶ ὁ Ὀρδησσὸς καὶ μέσου τούτων ἰόντες ἐσβάλλουσι ἐς τὸν Ἴστρον .
The first-named of these rivers is a great stream flowing east and uniting its waters with the Ister; the second, the Tiarantus, is more westerly and smaller; the Ararus, Naparis, and Ordessus flow between these two and pour their waters into the Ister.


4.49.1
4383
οὗτοι μὲν αὐθιγενέες Σκυθικοὶ ποταμοὶ συμπληθύουσι αὐτόν , ἐκ δὲ Ἀγαθύρσων Μάρις ποταμὸς ῥέων συμμίσγεται τῷ Ἴστρῳ , ἐκ δὲ τοῦ Αἵμου τῶν κορυφέων τρεῖς ἄλλοι μεγάλοι ῥέοντες πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον ἐσβάλλουσι ἐς αὐτόν , Ἄτλας καὶ Αὔρας καὶ Τίβισις .
The Athrys, the Noes, and the Artanes flow into the Ister from the country of the Crobyzi in Thrace; the Cius river, which cuts through the middle of Haemus, from the Paeonians and the mountain range of Rhodope.


4.49.1
4384
διὰ δὲ Θρηίκης καὶ Θρηίκων τῶν Κροβύζων ῥέοντες Ἄθρυς καὶ Νόης καὶ Ἀρτάνης ἐκδιδοῦσι ἐς τὸν Ἴστρον ·
From Illyria, the Angrus river flows northward into the Triballic plain and the Brongus river, and the Brongus into the Ister, which receives these two great rivers into itself.


4.49.1
4385
ἐκ δὲ Παιόνων καὶ ὄρεος Ῥοδόπης Κίος ποταμὸς μέσον σχίζων τὸν Αἷμον ἐκδιδοῖ ἐς αὐτόν .
The Carpis and another river called Alpis also flow northward, from the country north of the Ombrici, to flow into it.


4.49.2
4386
ἐξ Ἰλλυριῶν δὲ ῥέων πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον Ἄγγρος ποταμὸς ἐσβάλλει ἐς πεδίον τὸ Τριβαλλικὸν καὶ ἐς ποταμὸν Βρόγγον , ὁ δὲ Βρόγγος ἐς τὸν Ἴστρον ·
For the Ister traverses the whole of Europe, rising among the Celts, who are the most westerly dwellers in Europe, except for the Cynetes, and flowing thus clean across Europe it issues forth along the borders of Scythia.


4.49.2
4387
οὕτω ἀμφοτέρους ἐόντας μεγάλους ὁ Ἴστρος δέκεται .
With these rivers aforesaid, and many others, too, as its tributaries, the Ister becomes the greatest river of all, while river for river the Nile surpasses it in volume, since that owes its volume of water to no tributary river or spring.


4.49.2
4388
ἐκ δὲ τῆς κατύπερθε χώρης Ὀμβρικῶν Κάρπις ποταμὸς καὶ ἄλλος Ἄλπις ποταμὸς πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον καὶ οὗτοι ῥέοντες ἐκδιδοῦσι ἐς αὐτόν ·
But the Ister is always the same height in summer and winter, the reason for which, I think, is this. In winter it is of its customary size, or only a little greater than is natural to it, for in that country in winter there is very little rain, but snow everywhere.


4.49.3
4389
ῥέει γὰρ δὴ διὰ πάσης τῆς Εὐρώπης ὁ Ἴστρος , ἀρξάμενος ἐκ Κελτῶν , οἳ ἔσχατοι πρὸς ἡλίου δυσμέων μετὰ Κύνητας οἰκέουσι τῶν ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπη ·
for the Ister traverses the whole of  Europe, rising among the Celts, who are the most westerly dwellers in  Europe, except for the Cynetes,


4.49.3
4390
ῥέων δὲ διὰ πάσης τῆς Εὐρώπης ἐς τὰ πλάγια τῆς Σκυθίης ἐσβάλλει .
and flowing thus clean across  Europe it issues forth along the borders of  Scythia.


4.50.1
4391
τούτων ὦν τῶν καταλεχθέντων καὶ ἄλλων πολλῶν συμβαλλομένων τὸ σφέτερον ὕδωρ γίνεται ὁ Ἴστρος ποταμῶν μέγιστος , ἐπεὶ ὕδωρ γε ἓν πρὸς ἓν συμβάλλειν ὁ Νεῖλος πλήθει ἀποκρατέει .
With these rivers aforesaid, and many others, too, as its tributaries, the Ister becomes the greatest river of all, while the Nile surpasses it in volume,


4.50.1
4392
ἴσος δὲ γὰρ δὴ τοῦτον οὔτε ποταμὸς οὔτε κρήνη οὐδεμία ἐσδιδοῦσα ἐς πλῆθός οἱ συμβάλλεται .
since that owes its volume of water to no tributary river or spring.


4.50.2
4393
ἴσος δὲ αἰεὶ ῥέει ἐν τε θέρει καὶ χειμῶνι ὁ Ἴστρος κατὰ τοιόνδε τι , ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέει ·
But the Ister is always the same height in summer and winter, the reason for which, I think, is this.


4.50.2
4394
τοῦ μὲν χειμῶνος ἐστὶ ὅσος περ ἐστι , ὀλίγῳ τε μέζων τῆς ἑωυτοῦ φύσιος γίνεται ·
In winter it is of its customary size, or only a little greater than is natural to it,


4.50.2
4395
ὕεται γὰρ ἡ γῆ αὕτη τοῦ χειμῶνος πάμπαν ὀλίγῳ , νιφετῷ δὲ πάντα χρᾶται ·
for in that country in winter there is very little rain, but snow everywhere.


4.50.3
4396
τοῦ δὲ θέρεος ἡ χιὼν ἡ ἐν τῷ χειμῶνι πεσοῦσα , ἐοῦσα ἀμφιλαφής , τηκομένη πάντοθεν ἐσδιδοῖ ἐς τὸν Ἴστρον .
In the summer, the abundant snow that has fallen in winter melts and pours from all sides into the Ister;


4.50.3
4397
αὕτη τε δὴ ἡ χιὼν ἐσδιδοῦσα ἐς αὐτὸν συμπληθύει καὶ ὄμβροι πολλοί τε καὶ λάβροι σὺν αὐτῇ ·
so this snow-melt pours into the river and helps to swell it.


4.50.3
4398
ὕει γὰρ δὴ τὸ θέρος .
There is much violent rain besides, as the summer is the season of rain.


4.50.4
4399
ὅσω δὲ πλέον ἐπ’ ἑωυτὸν ὕδωρ ὁ ἥλιος ἐπέλκεται ἐν τῶ θέρει ἢ ἐν τῷ χειμῶνι , τοσούτῳ τὰ συμμισγόμενα τῷ Ἴστρῳ πολλαπλήσια ἐστὶ τοῦ θέρεος ἤ περ τοῦ χειμῶνος ·
And in proportion as the sun draws to itself more water in summer than in winter, the water that commingles with the Ister is many times more abundant in summer than it is in winter;


4.50.4
4400
ἀντιτιθέμενα δὲ ταῦτα ἀντισήκωσις γίνεται , ὥστε ἴσον μιν αἰεὶ φαίνεσθαι ἐόντα .
these opposites keep the balance true, so that the volume of the river appears always the same.


4.51.1
4401
εἷς μὲν δὴ τῶν ποταμῶν τοῖσι Σκύθῃσι ἐστὶ ὁ Ἴστρος , μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον Τύρης , ὃς ἀπὸ βορέω μὲν ἀνέμου ὁρμᾶται , ἄρχεται δὲ ῥέων ἐκ λίμνης μεγάλης ἣ οὐρίζει τήν τε Σκυθικὴν καὶ Νευρίδα γῆν .
One of the rivers of the Scythians, then, is the Ister. The next is the Tyras; this comes from the north, flowing at first out of a great lake, which is the boundary between the Scythian and the Neurian countries;


4.51.1
4402
ἐπὶ δὲ τῷ στόματι αὐτοῦ κατοίκηνται Ἕλληνες οἳ Τυρῖται καλέονται .
at the mouth of the river there is a settlement of Greeks, who are called Tyritae.


4.52.1
4403
τρίτος δὲ Ὕπανις ποταμὸς ὁρμᾶται μὲν ἐκ τῆς Σκυθικῆς , ῥέει δὲ ἐκ λίμνης μεγάλης τὴν πέριξ νέμονται ἵπποι ἄγριοι λευκοί ·
The third river is the Hypanis; this comes from Scythia, flowing out of a great lake, around which wild, white horses graze.


4.52.1
4404
καλέεται δὲ ἡ λίμνη αὕτη ὀρθῶς μήτηρ Ὑπάνιος .
This lake is truly called the mother of the Hypanis.


4.52.2
4405
ἐκ ταύτης ὦν ἀνατέλλων ὁ Ὕπανις ποταμὸς ῥέει ἐπὶ μὲν πέντε ἡμερέων πλόον βραχὺς καὶ γλυκύς ἐστι , ἀπὸ δὲ τούτου πρὸς θαλάσσης τεσσέρων ἡμερέων πλόον πικρὸς δεινῶς ·
Here, then, the Hypanis rises; for five days' journey its waters are shallow and still sweet; after that for four days' journey seaward it is amazingly bitter,


4.52.3
4406
ἐκδιδοῖ γὰρ ἐς αὐτὸν κρήνη πικρή , οὕτω δή τι ἐοῦσα πικρή , ἣ μεγάθει σμικρὴ ἐοῦσα κιρνᾷ τὸν Ὕπανιν ἐόντα ποταμὸν ἐν ὀλίγοισι μέγαν .
for a spring runs into it so bitter that although its volume is small its admixture taints the Hypanis, one of the few great rivers of the world.


4.52.3
4407
ἔστι δὲ ἡ κρήνη αὕτη ἐν οὔροισι χώρης τῆς τε ἀροτήρων Σκυθέων καὶ Ἀλαζόνων ·
This spring is on the border between the farming Scythians and the Alazones;


4.52.3
4408
οὔνομα δὲ τῇ κρήνῃ καὶ ὅθεν ῥέει τῷ χώρῳ σκυθιστὶ μὲν Ἐξαμπαῖος , κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἑλλήνων γλῶσσαν Ἱραὶ ὁδοί .
the name of it and of the place where it rises is in Scythian Exampaeus; in the Greek tongue, Sacred Ways.


4.52.4
4409
συνάγουσι δὲ τὰ τέρματα ὅ τε Τύρης καὶ ὁ Ὕπανις κατὰ Ἀλαζόνας , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτου ἀποστρέψας ἑκάτερος ῥέει εὐρύνων τὸ μέσον .
The  Tyras and the Hypanis draw near together in the Alazones' country; after that they flow apart, the intervening space growing wider.


4.53.1
4410
τέταρτος δὲ Βορυσθένης ποταμός , ὃς ἐστί τε μέγιστος μετὰ Ἴστρον τούτων καὶ πολυαρκέστατος κατὰ γνώμας τὰς ἡμετέρας οὔτι μοῦνον τῶν Σκυθικῶν ποταμῶν ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων , πλὴν Νείλου τοῦ Αἰγυπτίου ·
The fourth is the Borysthenes river. This is the next greatest after the Ister, and the most productive, in our judgment, not only of the Scythian but of all rivers, except the Egyptian Nile,


4.53.1
4411
τούτῳ γὰρ οὐκ οἷά τε ἐστὶ συμβαλεῖν ἄλλον ποταμόν ·
with which no other river can be compared.


4.53.2
4412
τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν Βορυσθένης ἐστὶ πολυαρκέστατος , ὃς νομάς τε καλλίστας καὶ εὐκομιδεστάτας κτήνεσι παρέχεται ἰχθύας τε ἀρίστους διακριδὸν καὶ πλείστους , πίνεσθαι τε ἥδιστος ἐστί , ῥέει τε καθαρὸς παρὰ θολεροῖσι , σπόρος τε παρ’ αὐτὸν ἄριστος γίνεται , ποίη τε , τῇ οὐ σπείρεται ἡ χώρη , βαθυτάτη ·
But of the rest, the  Borysthenes is the most productive; it provides the finest and best-nurturing pasture lands for beasts, and the fish in it are beyond all in their excellence and abundance. Its water is most sweet to drink, flowing with a clear current, whereas the other rivers are turbid. There is excellent soil on its banks, and very rich grass where the land is not planted;


4.53.3
4413
ἅλες τε ἐπὶ τῷ στόματι αὐτοῦ αὐτόματοι πήγνυνται ἄπλετοι ·
and self-formed crusts of salt abound at its mouth;


4.53.3
4414
κήτεά τε μεγάλα ἀνάκανθα , τὰ ἀντακαίους καλέουσι , παρέχεται ἐς ταρίχευσιν , ἄλλα τε πολλὰ θωμάσαι ἄξια .
it provides great spineless fish, called sturgeons, for salting, and many other wonderful things besides.


4.53.4
4415
μέχρι μέν νυν Γερρέων χώρου , ἐς τὸν τεσσεράκοντα ἡμερέων πλόος ἐστί , γινώσκεται ῥέων ἀπὸ βορέω ἀνέμου ·
Its course is from the north, and it is known as far as the Gerrhan land; that is, for forty days' voyage;


4.53.4
4416
τὸ δὲ κατύπερθε δι’ ὧν ῥέει ἀνθρώπων οὐδεὶς ἔχει φράσαι ·
beyond that, no one can say through what nations it flows;


4.53.4
4417
φαίνεται δὲ ῥέων δι’ ἐρήμου ἐς τῶν γεωργῶν Σκυθέων τὴν χώρην ·
but it is plain that it flows through desolate country to the land of the farming Scythians,


4.53.4
4418
οὗτοι γὰρ οἱ Σκύθαι παρ’ αὐτὸν ἐπὶ δέκα ἡμερέων πλόον νέμονται .
who live beside it for a ten days' voyage.


4.53.5
4419
μούνου δὲ τούτου τοῦ ποταμοῦ καὶ Νείλου οὐκ ἔχω φράσαι τὰς πηγάς , δοκέω δέ , οὐδὲ οὐδεὶς Ἑλλήνων .
This is the only river, besides the Nile, whose source I cannot identify; nor, I think, can any Greek.


4.53.5
4420
ἀγχοῦ τε δὴ θαλάσσης ὁ Βορυσθένης ῥέων γίνεται καὶ οἱ συμμίσγεται ὁ Ὕπανις ἐς τ- αὐτὸ ἕλος ἐκδιδούς .
When the Borysthenes comes near the sea, the Hypanis mingles with it, running into the same marsh;


4.53.6
4421
τὸ δὲ μεταξὺ τῶν ποταμῶν τούτων , ἐὸν ἔμβολον τῆς χώρης , Ἱππόλεω ἄκρη καλέεται , ἐν δὲ αὐτῷ , ἱρὸν Δήμητρος ἐνίδρυται ·
the land between these rivers, where the land projects like a ship's beak, is called Hippolaus' promontory; a temple of Demeter stands there.


4.53.6
4422
πέρην δὲ τοῦ ἱροῦ ἐπὶ τῷ Ὑπάνι Βορυσθενεῗται κατοίκηνται .
The settlement of the Borystheneïtae is beyond the temple, on the Hypanis.


4.54.1
4423
ταῦτα μὲν τὰ ἀπὸ τούτων τῶν ποταμῶν , μετὰ δὲ τούτους πέμπτος ποταμὸς ἄλλος , τῷ οὔνομα Παντικάπης , ῥέει μὲν καὶ οὗτος ἀπὸ βορέω τε καὶ ἐκ λίμνης , καὶ τὸ μεταξὺ τούτου τε καὶ τοῦ Βορυσθένεος νέμονται οἱ γεωργοὶ Σκύθαι , ἐκδιδοῖ δὲ ἐς τὴν Ὑβλαίην , παραμειψάμενος δὲ ταύτην τῷ Βορυσθένεϊ συμμίσγεται .
This is the produce of these rivers, and after these there is a fifth river called Panticapas; this also flows from the north out of a lake, and the land between it and the  Borysthenes is inhabited by the farming Scythians; it flows into the woodland country, after passing which it mingles with the  Borysthenes.


4.55.1
4424
ἕκτος δὲ Ὑπάκυρις ποταμός , ὃς ὁρμᾶται μὲν ἐκ λίμνης , διὰ μέσων δὲ τῶν νομάδων Σκυθέων ῥέων ἐκδιδοῖ κατὰ Καρκινῖτιν πόλιν , ἐς δεξιὴν ἀπέργων τήν τε Ὑλαίην καὶ τὸν Ἀχιλλήιον δρόμον καλεόμενον .
The sixth is the Hypacuris river, which rises from a lake, and flowing through the midst of the nomadic Scythians flows out near the city of Carcine, bordering on its right the Woodland and the region called the  Racecourse of Achilles  .


4.56.1
4425
ἕβδομος δὲ Γέρρος ποταμὸς ἀπέσχισται μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ Βορυσθένεος κατὰ τοῦτο τῆς χώρης ἐς ὃ γινώσκεται ὁ Βορυσθένης ·
The seventh river, the Gerrhus, separates from the Borysthenes at about the place which is the end of our knowledge of that river;


4.56.1
4426
ἀπέσχισται μέν νυν ἐκ τούτου τοῦ χώρου , οὔνομα δὲ ἔχει τό περ ὁ χῶρος αὐτός , Γέρρος , ῥέων δὲ ἐς θάλασσαν οὐρίζει τήν τε τῶν νομάδων χώρην καὶ τὴν τῶν βασιληίων Σκυθέων , ἐκδιδοῖ δὲ ἐς τὸν Ὑπάκυριν .
at this place it separates, and has the same name as the place itself, Gerrhus; then in its course to the sea it divides the country of the Nomads and the country of the Royal Scythians, and empties into the Hypacuris.


4.57.1
4427
ὄγδοος δὲ δὴ Τάναϊς ποταμός , ὃς ῥέει τ- ἀνέκαθεν ἐκ λίμνης μεγάλης ὁρμώμενος , ἐκδιδοῖ δὲ ἐς μέζω ἔτι λίμνην καλεόμενον Μαιῆτιν , ἣ οὐρίζει Σκύθας τε τοὺς βασιληίους καὶ Σαυρομάτας .
The eighth is the Tanaïs river; in its upper course, this begins by flowing out of a great lake,


4.57.1
4428
ἐς δὲ Τάναϊν τοῦτον ἄλλος ποταμὸς ἐσβάλλει τῷ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Ὕργις .
and enters a yet greater lake called the Maeetian, which divides the Royal Scythians from the Sauromatae; another river, called Hyrgis, is a tributary of this Tanaïs.


4.58.1
4429
τοῖσι μὲν δὴ ὀνομαστοῖσι ποταμοῖσι οὕτω δή τι οἱ Σκύθαι ἐσκευάδαται , τοῖσι δὲ κτήνεσι ἡ ποίη ἀναφυομένη ἐν τῇ Σκυθικῆ ἐστι ἐπιχολωτάτη πασέων ποιέων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν ·
These are the rivers of note with which the Scythians are provided.


4.58.1
4430
ἀνοιγομένοισι δὲ τοῖσι κτήνεσι ἐστὶ σταθμώσασθαι ὅτι τοῦτο οὕτω ἔχει .
For rearing cattle, the grass growing in Scythia is the most productive of bile of all pastures which we know; that this is so can be judged by opening up the bodies of the cattle.


4.59.1
4431
τὰ μὲν δὴ μέγιστα οὕτω σφι εὔπορα ἐστί , τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ νόμαια κατὰ τάδε σφι διακέεται .
The most important things are thus provided them. It remains now to show the customs which are established among them.


4.59.1
4432
θεοὺς μὲν μούνους τούσδε ἱλάσκονται , Ἱστίην μὲν μάλιστα , ἐπὶ δὲ Δία καὶ Γῆν , νομίζοντες τὴν Γῆν τοῦ Διὸς εἶναι γυναῖκα , μετὰ δὲ τούτους , Ἀπόλλωνά τε καὶ οὐρανίην Ἀφροδίτην καὶ Ἡρακλέα καὶ Ἄρεα .
The only gods whom they propitiate are these: Hestia in particular, and secondly Zeus and Earth, whom they believe to be the wife of Zeus; after these, Apollo, and the Heavenly Aphrodite, and Heracles, and Ares.


4.59.1
4433
τούτους μὲν πάντες Σκύθαι νενομίκασι , οἱ δὲ καλεόμενοι βασιλήιοι Σκύθαι καὶ τῷ Ποσειδέωνι θύουσι .
All the Scythians worship these as gods; the Scythians called Royal sacrifice to Poseidon also.


4.59.2
4434
ὀνομάζεται δὲ σκυθιστὶ Ἱστίη μὲν Ταβιτί , Ζεὺς δὲ ὀρθότατα κατὰ γνώμην γε τὴν ἐμὴν καλεόμενος Παπαῖος , Γῆ δὲ Ἀπί .
In the Scythian tongue, Hestia is called Tabiti; Zeus (in my judgment most correctly so called) Papaeus; Earth is Apia;


4.59.2
4435
Ἀπόλλων δὲ Γοιτόσυρος , οὐρανίη δὲ Ἀφροδίτη Ἀργίμπασα , Ποσειδέων δὲ Θαγιμασάδας .
Apollo Goetosyrus; the Heavenly Aphrodite Argimpasa; Poseidon Thagimasadas.


4.59.2
4436
ἀγάλματα δὲ καὶ βωμοὺς καὶ νηοὺς οὐ νομίζουσι ποιέειν πλὴν Ἄρεϊ .
It is their practice to make images and altars and shrines for Ares, but for no other god.


4.59.2
4437
τούτῳ δὲ νομίζουσι .
For this one that is their practice.


4.60.1
4438
θυσίη δὲ ἡ αὐτὴ πᾶσι κατέστηκε περὶ πάντα τὰ ἱρὰ ὁμοίως , ἐρδομένη ὧδε ·
In all their sacred rites they follow the same method of sacrifice; this is how it is offered.


4.60.1
4439
τὸ μὲν ἱρήιον αὐτὸ ἐμπεποδισμένον τοὺς ἐμπροσθίους πόδας ἔστηκε , ὁ δὲ θύων ὄπισθε τοῦ κτήνεος ἑστεὼς σπάσας τὴν ἀρχὴν τοῦ στρόφου καταβάλλει μιν , πίπτοντος δὲ τοῦ ἱρηίου ἐπικαλέει τὸν θεὸν τῷ ἂν θύῃ , καὶ ἔπειτα βρόχῳ περὶ ὦν ἔβαλε τὸν αὐχένα , σκυταλίδα δὲ ἐμβαλὼν περιάγει καὶ ἀποπνίγει , οὔτε πῦρ ἀνακαύσας οὔτε καταρξάμενος οὔτ’ ἐπισπείσας ·
The victim stands with its forefeet shackled together; the sacrificer stands behind the beast, and throws it down by pulling the end of the rope; as it falls, he invokes the god to whom he sacrifices, then throws a noose around its neck and tightens it with a stick, thus strangling the beast without kindling fire or offering first-fruits or pouring libations.


4.60.2
4440
ἀποπνίξας δὲ καὶ ἀποδείρας τρέπεται πρὸς ἕψησιν .
as the victim falls, he invokes whatever god it is to whom he sacrifices. Then, throwing a noose around the beast's neck, he thrusts in a stick and twists it and so strangles the victim, lighting no fire nor offering the first-fruits, nor pouring any libation; and having strangled and skinned the beast, he sets about cooking it.


4.61.1
4441
τῆς δὲ γῆς τῆς Σκυθικῆς αἰνῶς ἀξύλου ἐούσης ὧδε σφι ἐς τὴν ἕψησιν τῶν κρεῶν ἐξεύρηται ·
Now as the Scythian land is quite bare of wood, this is how they contrive to cook the meat.


4.61.1
4442
ἐπειδὰν ἀποδείρωσι τὰ ἱρήια , γυμνοῦσι τὰ ὀστέα τῶν κρεῶν , ἔπειτα ἐσβάλλουσι , ἢν μὲν τύχωσι ἔχοντες , ἐς λέβητας ἐπιχωρίους , μάλιστα Λεσβίοισι κρητῆρσι προσεικέλους , χωρὶς ἢ ὅτι πολλῷ μέζονας ·
When they have skinned the victims, they strip the meat from the bones and throw it into the cauldrons of the country, if they have them: these are most like Lesbian bowls, except that they are much bigger;


4.61.1
4443
ἐς τούτους ἐσβάλλοντες ἕψουσι ὑποκαίοντες τὰ ὀστέα τῶν ἱρηίων .
they throw the meat into these, then, and cook it by lighting a fire beneath with the bones of the victims.


4.61.1
4444
ἢν δὲ μή σφι παρῇ , ὁ λέβης , οἳ δὲ ἐς τὰς γαστέρας τῶν ἱρηίων ἐσβάλλοντες τὰ κρέα πάντα καὶ παραμίξαντες ὕδωρ ὑποκαίουσι τὰ ὀστέα ·
But if they have no cauldron, then they put all the meat into the victims' stomachs, adding water, and make a fire of the bones beneath,


4.61.2
4445
τὰ δὲ αἴθεται κάλλιστα , αἱ δὲ γαστέρες χωρέουσι εὐπετέως τὰ κρέα ἐψιλωμένα τῶν ὀστέων ·
which burn nicely; the stomachs easily hold the meat when it is stripped from the bones;


4.61.2
4446
καὶ οὕτω βοῦς τε ἑωυτὸν ἐξέψει καὶ τ- ἄλλα ἱρήια ἑωυτὸ ἕκαστον .
thus a steer serves to cook itself, and every other victim does likewise.


4.61.2
4447
ἐπεὰν δὲ ἑψηθῇ τὰ κρέα , ὁ θύσας τῶν κρεῶν καὶ τῶν σπλάγχνων ἀπαρξάμενος ῥίπτει ἐς τὸ ἔμπροσθε .
When the flesh is cooked, the sacrificer takes the first-fruits of the flesh and the entrails and casts them before him.


4.61.2
4448
θύουσι δὲ καὶ τὰ ἄλλα πρόβατα καὶ ἵππους μάλιστα .
They use all grazing animals for sacrifice, but mainly horses.


4.62.1
4449
τοῖσι μὲν δὴ ἄλλοισι τῶν θεῶν οὕτω θύουσι καὶ ταῦτα τῶν κτηνέων , τῷ δὲ Ἄρεϊ ὧδε .
This is their way of sacrificing to other gods and these are the beasts offered; but their sacrifices to Ares are of this sort.


4.62.1
4450
κατὰ νομοὺς ἑκάστους τῶν ἀρχέων ἐσίδρυται σφι Ἄρεος ἱρὸν τοιόνδε φρυγάνων φάκελοι συννενέαται ὅσον τ’ ἐπὶ σταδίους τρεῖς μῆκος καὶ εὖρος , ὕψος δὲ ἔλασσον ·
Every district in each of the governments has a structure sacred to Ares; namely, a pile of bundles of sticks three eighths of a mile wide and long, but of a lesser height.


4.62.1
4451
ἄνω δὲ τούτου τετράγωνον ἄπεδον πεποίηται , καὶ τὰ μὲν τρία τῶν κώλων ἐστὶ ἀπότομα , κατὰ δὲ τὸ ἓν ἐπιβατόν .
On the top of this there is a flattened four-sided surface; three of its sides are sheer, but the fourth can be ascended.


4.62.2
4452
ἔτεος δὲ ἑκάστου ἁμάξας πεντήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν ἐπινέουσι φρυγάνων ·
Every year a hundred and fifty wagon-loads of sticks are heaped upon this;


4.62.2
4453
ὑπονοστέει γὰρ δὴ αἰεὶ ὑπὸ τῶν χειμώνων .
for the storms of winter always make it sink down.


4.62.2
4454
ἐπὶ τούτου δὴ τοῦ σηκοῦ ἀκινάκης σιδήρεος ἵδρυται ἀρχαῖος ἑκάστοισι , καὶ τοῦτ’ ἐστὶ τοῦ Ἄρεος τὸ ἄγαλμα .
On this sacred pile an ancient scimitar of iron is set for each people: their image of Ares.


4.62.2
4455
τούτῳ δὲ τῷ ἀκινάκῃ θυσίας ἐπετείους προσάγουσι προβάτων καὶ ἵππων , καὶ δὴ καὶ τοῖσιδ’ ἔτι πλέω θύουσι ἢ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι θεοῖσι ·
They bring yearly sacrifice of sheep and goats and horses to this scimitar, offering to these symbols even more than they do to the other gods.


4.62.3
4456
ὅσους ἂν τῶν πολεμίων ζωγρήσωσι , ἀπὸ τῶν ἑκατὸν ἀνδρῶν ἄνδρα θύουσι τρόπῳ οὐ τῷ αὐτῷ καὶ τὰ πρόβατα , ἀλλ’ ἑτεροίῳ .
Of enemies that they take alive, they sacrifice one man in every hundred, not as they sacrifice sheep and goats, but differently.


4.62.3
4457
ἐπεὰν γὰρ οἶνον ἐπισπείσωσι κατὰ τῶν κεφαλέων , ἀποσφάζουσι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἐς ἄγγος καὶ ἔπειτα ἀνενείκαντες ἄνω ἐπὶ τὸν ὄγκον τῶν φρυγάνων καταχέουσι τὸ αἷμα τοῦ ἀκινάκεω .
They pour wine on the men's heads and cut their throats over a bowl; then they carry the blood up on to the pile of sticks and pour it on the scimitar.


4.62.4
4458
ἄνω μὲν δὴ φορέουσι τοῦτο , κάτω δὲ παρὰ τὸ ἱρὸν ποιεῦσι τάδε ·
They carry the blood up above, but down below by the sacred pile they cut off all the slain men's right arms and hands and throw these into the air,


4.62.4
4459
τῶν ἀποσφαγέντων ἀνδρῶν τοὺς δεξιοὺς ὤμους πάντας ἀποταμόντες σὺν τῇσι χερσὶ ἐς τὸν ἠέρα ἱεῖσι , καὶ ἔπειτα καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ἀπέρξαντες ἱρήια ἀπαλλάσσονται .
and depart when they have sacrificed the rest of the victims;


4.62.4
4460
χεὶρ δὲ τῇ ἂν πέσῃ κέεται , καὶ χωρὶς ὁ νεκρός .
the arm lies where it has fallen, and the body apart from it.


4.63.1
4461
θυσίαι μέν νυν αὗταί σφι κατεστᾶσι .
These then are their established rites of sacrifice;


4.63.1
4462
ὑσὶ δὲ οὗτοι οὐδὲν νομίζουσι , οὐδὲ τρέφειν ἐν τῇ χώρῃ τὸ παράπαν θέλουσι .
but these Scythians make no offerings of swine; nor are they willing for the most part to rear them in their country.


4.64.1
4463
τὰ δ’ ἐς πόλεμον ἔχοντα ὧδέ σφι διακέαται ·
As to war, these are their customs.


4.64.1
4464
ἐπεὰν τὸν πρῶτον ἄνδρα καταβάλῃ ἀνὴρ Σκύθης , τοῦ αἵματος ἐμπίνει , ὅσους δ’ ἂν φονεύσῃ ἐν τῇ μάχῃ , τούτων τὰς κεφαλὰς ἀποφέρει τῷ βασιλέι .
A Scythian drinks the blood of the first man whom he has taken down. He carries the heads of all whom he has slain in the battle to his king;


4.64.1
4465
ἀπενείκας μὲν γὰρ κεφαλὴν τῆς ληίης μεταλαμβάνει τὴν ἂν λάβωσι , μὴ ἐνείκας δὲ οὔ .
for if he brings a head, he receives a share of the booty taken, but not otherwise.


4.64.2
4466
ἀποδείρει δὲ αὐτὴν τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
He scalps the head by making a cut around it by the ears, then grasping the scalp and shaking the head off.


4.64.2
4467
περιταμὼν κύκλῳ περὶ τὰ ὦτα καὶ λαβόμενος τῆς κεφαλῆς ἐκσείει , μετὰ δὲ σαρκίσας βοὸς πλευρῇ δέψει τῇσι χερσί , ὀργάσας δὲ αὐτὸ ἅτε χειρόμακτρον ἔκτηται , ἐκ δὲ τῶν χαλινῶν τοῦ ἵππου τὸν αὐτὸς ἐλαύνει , ἐκ τούτου ἐξάπτει καὶ ἀγάλλεται ·
Then he scrapes out the flesh with the rib of a steer, and kneads the skin with his hands, and having made it supple he keeps it for a hand towel, fastening it to the bridle of the horse which he himself rides, and taking pride in it;


4.64.2
4468
ὃς γὰρ ἂν πλεῖστα δέρματα χειρόμακτρα ἔχῃ , ἀνὴρ ἄριστος οὗτος κέκριται .
for he who has most scalps for hand towels is judged the best man.


4.64.3
4469
πολλοὶ δὲ αὐτῶν ἐκ τῶν ἀποδερμάτων καὶ χλαίνας ἐπείνυσθαι ποιεῦσι , συρράπτοντες κατά περ βαίτας .
Many Scythians even make garments to wear out of these scalps, sewing them together like coats of skin.


4.64.3
4470
πολλοὶ δὲ ἀνδρῶν ἐχθρῶν τὰς δεξιὰς χεῖρας νεκρῶν ἐόντων ἀποδείραντες αὐτοῖσι ὄνυξι καλύπτρας τῶν φαρετρέων ποιεῦνται .
Many too take off the skin, nails and all, from their dead enemies' right hands, and make coverings for their quivers;


4.64.3
4471
δέρμα δὲ ἀνθρώπου καὶ παχὺ καὶ λαμπρὸν ἦν ἄρα , σχεδὸν δερμάτων πάντων λαμπρότατον λευκότητι .
the human skin was, as it turned out, thick and shining, the brightest and whitest skin of all, one might say.


4.64.4
4472
πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ ὅλους ἄνδρας ἐκδείραντες καὶ διατείναντες ἐπὶ ξύλων ἐπ’ ἵππων περιφέρουσι .
Many flay the skin from the whole body, too, and carry it about on horseback stretched on a wooden frame.


4.65.1
4473
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ οὕτω σφι νενόμισται , αὐτὰς δὲ τὰς κεφαλάς , οὔτι πάντων ἀλλὰ τῶν ἐχθίστων , ποιεῦσι τάδε ·
The heads themselves, not all of them but those of their bitterest enemies, they treat this way.


4.65.1
4474
ἀποπρίσας ἕκαστος πᾶν τὸ ἔνερθε τῶν ὀφρύων ἐκκαθαίρει ·
Each saws off all the part beneath the eyebrows, and cleans the rest.


4.65.1
4475
καὶ ἢν μὲν ᾖ πένης , ὁ δὲ ἔξωθεν ὠμοβοέην μούνην περιτείνας οὕτω χρᾶται , ἢν δὲ ᾖ πλούσιος , τὴν μὲν ὠμοβοέην περιτείνει , ἔσωθεν δὲ καταχρυσώσας οὕτω χρᾶται ποτηρίῳ .
If he is a poor man, then he covers the outside with a piece of raw hide, and so makes use of it; but if he is rich, he covers the head with the raw hide, and gilds the inside of it and uses it for a drinking-cup.


4.65.2
4476
ποιεῦσι δὲ τοῦτο καὶ ἐκ τῶν οἰκηίων ἤν σφι διάφοροι γένωνται καὶ ἢν ἐπικρατήσῃ αὐτοῦ παρὰ τῷ βασιλέι , ξείνων δέ οἱ ἐλθόντων τῶν ἂν λόγον ποιέηται , τὰς κεφαλὰς ταύτας παραφέρει καὶ ἐπιλέγει ὡς οἱ ἐόντες οἰκήιοι πόλεμον προσεθήκαντο καί σφεων αὐτὸς ἐπεκράτησε , ταύτην ἀνδραγαθίην λέγοντες .
Such a cup a man also makes out of the head of his own kinsman with whom he has been feuding, and whom he has defeated in single combat before the king; and if guests whom he honors visit him he will serve them with these heads, and show how the dead were his kinsfolk who fought him and were beaten by him; this they call manly valor.


4.66.1
4477
ἅπαξ δὲ τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ ἑκάστου ὁ νομάρχης ἕκαστος ἐν τῷ ἑωυτοῦ νομῷ κιρνᾷ κρητῆρα οἴνου , ἀπ’ οὗ πίνουσι τῶν Σκυθέων τοῖσι ἂν ἄνδρες πολέμιοι ἀραιρημένοι ἔωσι .
Furthermore, once a year each governor of a province brews a bowl of wine in his own province,


4.66.1
4478
τοῖσι δ’ ἂν μὴ κατεργασμένον ᾖ τοῦτο , οὐ γεύονται τοῦ οἴνου τούτου , ἀλλ’ ἠτιμωμένοι ἀποκατέαται ·
which those Scythians who have slain enemies drink; those who have not achieved this do not taste this wine but sit apart dishonored;


4.66.1
4479
ὄνειδος δέ σφι ἐστὶ μέγιστον τοῦτο .
and this they consider a very great disgrace;


4.66.1
4480
ὅσοι δὲ ἂν αὐτῶν καὶ κάρτα πολλοὺς ἄνδρας ἀραιρηκότες ἔωσι , οὗτοι δὲ σύνδυο κύλικας ἔχοντες πίνουσι ὁμοῦ .
but as many as have slain not one but many enemies have two cups apiece and drink out of both.


4.67.1
4481
μάντιες δὲ Σκυθέων εἰσὶ πολλοί , οἳ μαντεύονται ῥάβδοισι ἰτεΐνῃσι πολλῇσι ὧδε ·
There are many diviners among the Scythians, who divine by means of many willow wands as I will show.


4.67.1
4482
ἐπεὰν φακέλους ῥάβδων μεγάλους ἐνείκωνται , θέντες χαμαὶ διεξειλίσσουσι αὐτούς , καὶ ἐπὶ μίαν ἑκάστην ῥάβδον τιθέντες θεσπίζουσι , ἅμα τε λέγοντες ταῦτα συνειλέουσι τὰς ῥάβδους ὀπίσω καὶ αὖτις κατὰ μίαν συντιθεῖσι .
They bring great bundles of wands, which they lay on the ground and unfasten, and utter their divinations as they lay the rods down one by one; and while still speaking, they gather up the rods once more and place them together again;


4.67.2
4483
αὕτη μὲν σφι ἡ μαντικὴ πατρωίη ἐστί .
this manner of divination is hereditary among them.


4.67.2
4484
οἱ δὲ Ἐνάρεες οἱ ἀνδρόγυνοι τὴν Ἀφροδίτην σφίσι λέγουσι μαντικὴν δοῦναι ·
The Enarees, who are hermaphrodites, say that Aphrodite gave them the art of divination,


4.67.2
4485
φιλύρης δ’ ὧν φλοιῷ μαντεύονται ·
which they practise by means of lime-tree bark.


4.67.2
4486
ἐπεὰν τὴν φιλύρην τρίχα σχίσῃ , διαπλέκων ἐν τοῖσι δακτύλοισι τοῖσι ἑωυτοῦ καὶ διαλύων χρᾷ .
They cut this bark into three portions, and prophesy while they braid and unbraid these in their fingers.


4.68.1
4487
ἐπεὰν δὲ βασιλεὺς ὁ Σκυθέων κάμῃ , μεταπέμπεται τῶν μαντίων ἄνδρας τρεῖς τοὺς εὐδοκιμέοντας μάλιστα , οἳ τρόπῳ τῷ εἰρημένῳ μαντεύονται ·
Whenever the king of the Scythians falls ill, he sends for the three most reputable diviners, who prophesy in the aforesaid way;


4.68.1
4488
καὶ λέγουσι οὗτοι ὡς τὸ ἐπίπαν μάλιστα τάδε , ὡς τὰς βασιληίας ἱστίας ἐπιώρκηκε ὃς καὶ ὅς , λέγοντες τῶν ἀστῶν τὸν ἂν δὴ λέγωσι .
and they generally tell him that such and such a man (naming whoever it may be of the people) has sworn falsely by the king's hearth;


4.68.2
4489
τὰς δὲ βασιληίας ἱστίας νόμος Σκύθῃσι τὰ μάλιστα ἐστὶ ὀμνύναι τότε ἐπεὰν τὸν μέγιστον ὅρκον ἐθέλωσι ὀμνύναι .
for when the Scythians will swear their mightiest oath, it is by the king's hearth that they are accustomed to swear.


4.68.2
4490
αὐτίκα δὲ διαλελαμμένος ἄγεται οὗτος τὸν ἂν δὴ φῶσι ἐπιορκῆσαι , ἀπιγμένον δὲ ἐλέγχουσι οἱ μάντιες ὡς ἐπιορκήσας φαίνεται ἐν τῇ μαντικῇ τὰς βασιληίας ἱστίας καὶ διὰ ταῦτα ἀλγέει ὁ βασιλεύς ·
Immediately, the man whom they allege to have sworn falsely is seized and brought in, and when he comes the diviners accuse him, saying that their divination shows him to have sworn falsely by the king's hearth, and that this is the cause of the king's sickness;


4.68.2
4491
ὁ δὲ ἀρνέεται , οὐ φάμενος ἐπιορκῆσαι , καὶ δεινολογέεται .
and the man vehemently denies that he has sworn falsely.


4.68.3
4492
ἀρνεομένου δὲ τούτου ὁ βασιλεὺς μεταπέμπεται ἄλλους διπλησίους μάντιας ·
When he denies it, the king sends for twice as many diviners:


4.68.3
4493
καὶ ἢν μὲν καὶ οὗτοι ἐσορῶντες ἐς τὴν μαντικὴν καταδήσωσι ἐπιορκῆσαι , τοῦ δὲ ἰθέως τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτάμνουσι , καὶ τὰ χρήματα αὐτοῦ διαλαγχάνουσι οἱ πρῶτοι τῶν μαντίων ·
and if they too, consulting their art, prove him guilty of perjury, then he is instantly beheaded, and his goods are divided among the first diviners;


4.68.4
4494
ἢν δὲ οἱ ἐπελθόντες μάντιες ἀπολύσωσι , ἄλλοι πάρεισι μάντιες καὶ μάλα ἄλλοι .
but if the later diviners acquit him, then other diviners come, and yet again others.


4.68.4
4495
ἢν ὦν οἱ πλεῦνες τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἀπολύσωσι , δέδοκται τοῖσι πρώτοισι τῶν μαντίων αὐτοῖσι ἀπόλλυσθαι .
If the greater number of them acquit the man, it is decreed that the first diviners themselves be put to death.


4.69.1
4496
ἀπολλῦσι δῆτα αὐτοὺς τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
And this is how they die.


4.69.1
4497
ἐπεὰν ἅμαξαν φρυγάνων πλήσωσι καὶ ὑποζεύξωσι βοῦς , ἐμποδίσαντες τοὺς μάντιας καὶ χεῖρας ὀπίσω δήσαντες καὶ στομώσαντες κατεργνῦσι ἐς μέσα τὰ φρύγανα , ὑποπρήσαντες δὲ αὐτὰ ἀπιεῖσι φοβήσαντες τοὺς βοῦς .
Men yoke oxen to a wagon laden with sticks and tie the diviners up in these, fettering their legs and binding their hands behind them and gagging them;


4.69.2
4498
πολλοὶ μὲν δὴ συγκατακαίονται τοῖσι μάντισι βόες , πολλοὶ δὲ περικεκαυμένοι ἀποφεύγουσι , ἐπεὰν αὐτῶν ὁ ῥυμὸς κατακαυθῇ .
then they set fire to the sticks and drive the oxen away, stampeding them.


4.69.2
4499
κατακαίουσι δὲ τρόπῳ τῷ εἰρημένω καὶ δι’ ἄλλας αἰτίας τοὺς μάντιας , ψευδομάντιας καλέοντες .
Often the oxen are burnt to death with the diviners, and often the yoke-pole of their wagon is burnt through and the oxen escape with a scorching. They burn their diviners for other reasons, too, in the way described, calling them false prophets.


4.69.3
4500
τοὺς δ’ ἂν ἀποκτείνῃ βασιλεύς , τούτων οὐδὲ τοὺς παῖδας λείπει , ἀλλὰ πάντα τὰ ἔρσενα κτείνει , τὰ δὲ θήλεα οὐκ ἀδικέει .
When the king puts them to death, he does not leave the sons alive either, but kills all the males of the family; the females he does not harm.


4.70.1
4501
ὅρκια δὲ ποιεῦνται Σκύθαι ὧδε πρὸς τοὺς ἂν ποιέωνται ·
As for giving sworn pledges to those who are to receive them, this is the Scythian way:


4.70.1
4502
ἐς κύλικα μεγάλην κεραμίνην οἶνον ἐγχέαντες αἷμα συμμίσγουσι τῶν τὸ ὅρκιον ταμνομένων , τύψαντες ὑπέατι ἡ ἐπιταμόντες μαχαίρῃ σμικρὸν τοῦ σώματος , καὶ ἔπειτα ἀποβάψαντες ἐς τὴν κύλικα ἀκινάκην καὶ ὀιστοὺς καὶ σάγαριν καὶ ἀκόντιον ·
they take blood from the parties to the agreement by making a little cut in the body with an awl or a knife, and pour it mixed with wine into a big earthenware bowl, into which they then dip a scimitar and arrows and an axe and a javelin;


4.70.1
4503
ἐπεὰν δὲ ταῦτα ποιήσωσι , κατεύχονται πολλὰ καὶ ἔπειτα ἀποπίνουσι αὐτοί τε οἱ τὸ ὅρκιον ποιεύμενοι καὶ τῶν ἑπομένων οἱ πλείστου ἄξιοι .
and when this is done those swearing the agreement, and the most honorable of their followers, drink the blood after solemn curses.


4.71.1
4504
ταφαὶ δὲ τῶν βασιλέων ἐν Γέρροισι εἰσὶ ἐς ὃ ὁ Βορυσθένης ἐστὶ προσπλωτός ·ἐνθαῦτα , ἐπεάν σφι ἀποθάνῃ ὁ βασιλεύς , ὄρυγμα γῆς μέγα ὀρύσσουσι τετράγωνον , ἕτοιμον δὲ τοῦτο ποιήσαντες ἀναλαμβάνουσι τὸν νεκρόν , κατακεκηρωμένον μὲν τὸ σῶμα , τὴν δὲ νηδὺν ἀνασχισθεῖσαν καὶ καθαρθεῖσαν , πλέην κυπέρου κεκομμένου καὶ θυμιήματος καὶ σελίνου σπέρματος καὶ ἀννήσου , συνερραμμένην ὀπίσω , καὶ κομίζουσι ἐν ἁμάξῃ ἐς ἄλλο ἔθνος .
The burial-places of the kings are in the land of the Gerrhi, which is the end of the navigation of the  Borysthenes. Whenever their king has died, the Scythians dig a great four-cornered pit in the ground there; when this is ready, they take up the dead man — his body enclosed in wax, his belly cut open and cleaned and filled with cut marsh-plants and frankincense, and parsley and anise seed, and sewn up again — and transport him on a wagon to another tribe.


4.71.2
4505
οἳ δὲ ἂν παραδέξωνται κομισθέντα τὸν νεκρόν , ποιεῦσι τά περ οἱ βασιλήιοι Σκύθαι ·
Then those who receive the dead man on his arrival do the same as do the Royal Scythians:


4.71.2
4506
τοῦ ὠτὸς ἀποτάμνονται , τρίχας περικείρονται , βραχίονας περιτάμνονται , μέτωπον καὶ ῥῖνα καταμύσσονται , διὰ τῆς ἀριστερῆς χειρὸς ὀιστοὺς διαβυνέονται .
that is, they cut off a part of their ears, shave their heads, make cuts around their arms, tear their foreheads and noses, and pierce their left hands with arrows.


4.71.3
4507
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ κομίζουσι ἐν τῇ ἀμάξῃ τοῦ βασιλέος τὸν νέκυν ἐς ἄλλο ἔθνος τῶν ἄρχουσι ·
From there, the escorts transport the king's body on the wagon to another of the tribes that they rule,


4.71.3
4508
οἳ δέ σφι ἕπονται ἐς τοὺς πρότερον ἦλθον .
and those to whom they have already come follow them;


4.71.3
4509
ἐπεὰν δὲ πάντας περιέλθωσι τὸν νέκυν κομίζοντες , ἔν τε Γέρροισι ἔσχατα κατοικημένοισι εἰσὶ τῶν ἐθνέων τῶν ἄρχουσι καὶ ἐν τῇσι ταφῇσι .
and having carried the dead man to all in turn, they are at the place of burial, in the country of the Gerrhi, the farthest distant tribe of all under their rule.


4.71.4
4510
καὶ ἔπειτα , ἐπεὰν θέωσι τὸν νέκυν ἐν τῇσι θήκῃσι ἐπὶ στιβάδος , παραπήξαντες αἰχμὰς ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν τοῦ νεκροῦ ξύλα ὑπερτείνουσι καὶ ἔπειτα ῥιψὶ καταστεγάζουσι , ἐν δὲ τῇ λοιπῇ εὐρυχωρίῃ τῆς θήκης τῶν παλλακέων τε μίαν ἀποπνίξαντες θάπτουσι καὶ τὸν οἰνοχόον καὶ μάγειρον καὶ ἱπποκόμον καὶ διήκονον καὶ ἀγγελιηφόρον καὶ ἵππους καὶ τῶν ἄλλων πάντων ἀπαρχὰς καὶ φιάλας χρυσέας ·
Then, having laid the body on a couch in the tomb, they plant spears on each side of the body and lay wooden planks across them, which they then roof over with braided osiers;


4.71.4
4511
ἀργύρῳ δὲ οὐδὲν οὐδὲ χαλκῷ χρέωνται .
in the open space which is left in the tomb they bury one of the king's concubines, his cupbearer, his cook, his groom, his squire, and his messenger, after strangling them, besides horses, and first-fruits of everything else, and golden cups; for the Scythians do not use silver or bronze.


4.71.5
4512
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσαντες χοῦσι πάντες χῶμα μέγα , ἁμιλλώμενοι καὶ προθυμεόμενοι ὡς μέγιστον ποιῆσαι .
Having done this, they all build a great barrow of earth, vying eagerly with one another to make this as great as possible.


4.72.1
4513
ἐνιαυτοῦ δὲ περιφερομένου αὖτις ποιεῦσι τοιόνδε ·
After a year has past, they next do as follows.


4.72.1
4514
λαβόντες τῶν λοιπῶν θεραπόντων τοὺς ἐπιτηδεοτάτους ( οἳ δὲ εἰσὶ Σκύθαι ἐγγενέες ·
They take the most trusted of the rest of the king's servants (and these are native-born Scythians,


4.72.1
4515
οὗτοι γὰρ θεραπεύουσι τοὺς ἂν αὐτὸς ὁ βασιλεὺς κελεύσῃ ἀργυρώνητοι δὲ οὐκ εἰσί σφι θεράποντες ) , τούτων ὦν τῶν διηκόνων ἐπεὰν ἀποπνίξωσι πεντήκοντα καὶ ἵππους τοὺς καλλίστους πεντήκοντα , ἐξελόντες αὐτῶν τὴν κοιλίην καὶ καθήραντες ἐμπιπλᾶσι ἀχύρων καὶ συρράπτουσι .
for only those whom he tells to do so serve the king, and none of the Scythians have servants bought by money)


4.72.3
4516
ἁψῖδος δὲ ἥμισυ ἐπὶ δύο ξύλα στήσαντες ὕπτιον καὶ τὸ ἕτερον ἥμισυ τῆς ἁψῖδος ἐπ’ ἕτερα δύο , καταπήξαντες τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ πολλὰ ταῦτα , ἔπειτα τῶν ἵππων κατὰ τὰ μήκεα ξύλα παχέα διελάσαντες μέχρι τῶν τραχήλων ἀναβιβάζουσι αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τὰς ἁψῖδας ·
Then they fasten half of a wheel to two posts, the hollow upward, and the other half to another pair of posts, until many posts thus prepared are planted in the ground, and, after driving thick stakes lengthways through the horses' bodies to their necks, they place the horses up on the wheels


4.72.4
4517
τῶν δὲ αἱ μὲν πρότεραι ἀψῖδες ὑπέχουσι τοὺς ὤμους τῶν ἵππων , αἱ δὲ ὄπισθε παρὰ τοὺς μηροὺς τὰς γαστέρας ὑπολαμβάνουσι ·
so that the wheel in front supports the horse's forequarters and the wheel behind takes the weight of the belly by the hindquarters,


4.72.4
4518
σκέλεα δὲ ἀμφότερα κατακρέμαται μετέωρα .
and the forelegs and hindlegs hang free;


4.72.4
4519
χαλινοὺς δὲ καὶ στόμια ἐμβαλόντες ἐς τοὺς ἵππους κατατείνουσι ἐς τὸ πρόσθε αὐτῶν καὶ ἔπειτα ἐκ πασσάλων δέουσι .
and putting bridles and bits in the horses' mouths, they stretch the bridles to the front and fasten them with pegs.


4.72.5
4520
τῶν δὲ δὴ νεηνίσκων τῶν ἀποπεπνιγμένων τῶν πεντήκοντα ἕνα ἕκαστον ἀναβιβάζουσι ἐπὶ τὸν ἵππον , ὧδε ἀναβιβάζοντες , ἐπεὰν νεκροῦ ἑκάστου παρὰ τὴν ἄκανθαν ξύλον ὀρθὸν διελάσωσι μέχρι τοῦ τραχήλου ·
Then they take each one of the fifty strangled young men and mount him on the horse;


4.72.5
4521
κάτωθεν δὲ ὑπερέχει τοῦ ξύλου τούτου τὸ ἐς τόρμον πηγνύουσι τοῦ ἑτέρου ξύλου τοῦ διὰ τοῦ ἵππου .
their way of doing it is to drive an upright stake through each body passing up alongside the spine to the neck leaving enough of the stake projecting below to be fixed in a hole made in the other stake, which passes through the horse.


4.72.5
4522
ἐπιστήσαντες δὲ κύκλῳ τὸ σῆμα ἱππέας τοιούτους ἀπελαύνουσι .
So having set horsemen of this fashion around the tomb, they ride away.


4.73.1
4523
οὕτω μὲν τοὺς βασιλέας θάπτουσι ·
This is the way they bury their kings.


4.73.1
4524
τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους Σκύθας , ἐπεὰν ἀποθάνωσι , περιάγουσι οἱ ἀγχοτάτω προσήκοντες κατὰ τοὺς φίλους ἐν ἀμάξῃσι κειμένους .
All other Scythians, when they die, are laid in wagons and carried about among their friends by their nearest of kin;


4.73.1
4525
τῶν δὲ ἕκαστος ὑποδεκόμενος εὐωχέει τοὺς ἑπομένους , καὶ τῷ νεκρῷ ἁπάντων παραπλησίως παρατίθησι ὅσα τοῖσι ἄλλοισι .
each receives them and entertains the retinue hospitably, setting before the dead man about as much of the fare as he serves to the rest.


4.73.1
4526
ἡμέρας δὲ τεσσεράκοντα οὕτω οἱ ἰδιῶται περιάγονται , ἔπειτα θάπτονται .
All but the kings are carried about like this for forty days and then buried.


4.73.2
4527
θάψαντες δὲ οἱ Σκύψαι καθαίρονται τρόπῳ τοιῷδε .
After the burial the Scythians cleanse themselves as follows:


4.73.2
4528
σμησάμενοι τὰς κεφαλὰς καὶ ἐκπλυνάμενοι ποιεῦσι περὶ τὸ σῶμα τάδε ἐπεὰν ξύλα στήσωσι τρία ἐς ἄλληλα κεκλιμένα , περὶ ταῦτα πίλους εἰρινέους περιτείνουσι , συμφράξαντες δὲ ὡς μάλιστα λίθους ἐκ πυρὸς διαφανέας ἐσβάλλουσι ἐς σκάφην κειμένην ἐν μέσῳ τῶν ξύλων τε καὶ τῶν πίλων .
they anoint and wash their heads and, for their bodies, set up three poles leaning together to a point and cover these over with wool mats; then, in the space so enclosed to the best of their ability, they make a pit in the center beneath the poles and the mats and throw red-hot stones into it.


4.74.1
4529
ἔστι δέ σφι κάνναβις φυομένη ἐν τῇ χώρῃ πλὴν παχύτητος καὶ μεγάθεος τῷ λίνῳ ἐμφερεστάτη ·
They have hemp growing in their country, very like flax, except that the hemp is much thicker and taller.


4.74.1
4530
ταύτῃ δὲ πολλῷ ὑπερφέρει ἡ κάνναβις .
This grows both of itself and also by their cultivation,


4.74.1
4531
αὕτη καὶ αὐτομάτη καὶ σπειρομένη φύεται , καὶ ἐξ αὐτῆς Θρήικες μὲν καὶ εἵματα ποιεῦνται τοῖσι λινέοισι ὁμοιότατα ·
and the Thracians even make garments of it which are very like linen;


4.74.1
4532
οὐδ’ ἄν , ὅστις μὴ κάρτα τρίβων εἴη αὐτῆς , διαγνοίη λίνου ἢ καννάβιος ἐστί ·
no one, unless he were an expert in hemp, could determine whether they were hempen or linen;


4.74.1
4533
ὃς δὲ μὴ εἶδε κω τὴν κανναβίδα , λίνεον δοκήσει εἶναι τὸ εἷμα .
whoever has never seen hemp before will think the garment linen.


4.75.1
4534
ταύτης ὦν οἱ Σκύθαι τῆς καννάβιος τὸ σπέρμα ἐπεὰν λάβωσι , ὑποδύνουσι ὑπὸ τοὺς πίλους , καὶ ἔπειτα ἐπιβάλλουσι τὸ σπέρμα ἐπὶ τοὺς διαφανέας λίθους τῷ πυρί ·
The Scythians then take the seed of this hemp and, crawling in under the mats, throw it on the red-hot stones,


4.75.1
4535
τὸ δὲ θυμιᾶται ἐπιβαλλόμενον καὶ ἀτμίδα παρέχεται τοσαύτην ὥστε Ἑλληνικὴ οὐδεμία ἄν μιν πυρίη ἀποκρατήσειε .
where it smoulders and sends forth such fumes that no Greek vapor-bath could surpass it.


4.75.2
4536
οἱ δὲ Σκύθαι ἀγάμενοι τῇ πυρίῃ ὠρύονται .
The Scythians howl in their joy at the vapor-bath.


4.75.2
4537
τοῦτό σφι ἀντὶ λουτροῦ ἐστι .
This serves them instead of bathing,


4.75.2
4538
οὐ γὰρ δὴ λούονται ὕδατι τὸ παράπαν τὸ σῶμα .
for they never wash their bodies with water.


4.75.3
4539
αἱ δὲ γυναῖκες αὐτῶν ὕδωρ παραχέουσαι κατασώχουσι περὶ λίθον τρηχὺν τῆς κυπαρίσσου καὶ κέδρου καὶ λιβάνου ξύλου , καὶ ἔπειτα τὸ κατασωχόμενον τοῦτο παχὺ ἐὸν καταπλάσσονται πᾶν τὸ σῶμα καὶ τὸ πρόσωπον ·
But their women pound cypress and cedar and frankincense wood on a rough stone, adding water also,


4.75.3
4540
καὶ ἅμα μὲν εὐωδίη σφέας ἀπὸ τούτου ἴσχει , ἅμα δὲ ἀπαιρέουσαι τῇ δευτέρη ἡμέρῃ τὴν καταπλαστὺν γίνονται καθαραὶ καὶ λαμπραί .
and with the thick stuff thus pounded they anoint their bodies and faces, as a result of which not only does a fragrant scent come from them, but when on the second day they take off the ointment, their skin becomes clear and shining.


4.76.1
4541
ξεινικοῖσι δὲ νομαίοισι καὶ οὗτοι φεύγουσι αἰνῶς χρᾶσθαι , μήτε τεῶν ἄλλων , Ἑλληνικοῖσι δὲ καὶ ἥκιστα , ὡς διέδεξαν Ἀνάχαρσις τε καὶ δεύτερα αὖτις Σκύλης .
But as regards foreign customs, the Scythians (like others) very much shun practising those of any other country, and particularly of  Hellas, as was proved in the case of Anacharsis and also of Scyles.


4.76.2
4542
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ Ἀνάχαρσις ἐπείτε γῆν πολλὴν θεωρήσας καὶ ἀποδεξάμενος κατ’ αὐτὴν σοφίην πολλὴν ἐκομίζετο ἐς ἤθεα τὰ Σκυθέων , πλέων δι’ Ἑλλησπόντου προσίσχει ἐς Κύζικον .
For when Anacharsis was coming back to the Scythian country after having seen much of the world in his travels and given many examples of his wisdom, he sailed through the  Hellespont and put in at  Cyzicus;


4.76.3
4543
καὶ εὗρε γὰρ τῇ μητρὶ τῶν θεῶν ἀνάγοντας τοὺς Κυζικηνοὺς ὁρτὴν μεγαλοπρεπέως κάρτα , εὔξατο τῇ μητρὶ ὁ Ἀνάχαρσις , ἢν σῶς καὶ ὑγιὴς ἀπονοστήσῃ ἐς ἑωυτοῦ , θύσειν τε κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ κατὰ ὥρα τοὺς Κυζικηνοὺς ποιεῦντας καὶ παννυχίδα στήσειν .
where, finding the Cyzicenes celebrating the feast of the Mother of the Gods with great ceremony, he vowed to this same Mother that if he returned to his own country safe and sound he would sacrifice to her as he saw the Cyzicenes doing, and establish a nightly rite of worship.


4.76.4
4544
ὡς δὲ ἀπίκετο ἐς τὴν Σκυθικήν καταδὺς ἐς τὴν καλεομένην Ὑλαίην ( ἡ δ’ ἔστι μὲν παρὰ τὸν Ἀχιλλήιον δρόμον , τυγχάνει δὲ πᾶσα ἐοῦσα δενδρέων παντοίων πλέη ) , ἐς ταύτην δὴ καταδὺς ὁ Ἀνάχαρσις τὴν ὁρτὴν ἐπετέλεε πᾶσαν τῇ θεῷ , τύμπανον τε ἔχων καὶ ἐκδησάμενος ἀγάλματα .
So when he came to  Scythia, he hid himself in the country called Woodland (which is beside the Race of Achilles, and is all overgrown with every kind of timber); hidden there, Anacharsis celebrated the goddess' ritual with exactness, carrying a small drum and hanging images about himself.


4.76.5
4545
καὶ τῶν τις Σκυθέων καταφρασθεὶς αὐτὸν ταῦτα ποιεῦντα ἐσήμηνε τῷ βασιλέι Σαυλίω ·
Then some Scythian saw him doing this and told the king, Saulius;


4.76.5
4546
ὁ δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ἀπικόμενος ὡς εἶδε τὸν Ἀνάχαρσιν ποιεῦντα ταῦτα , τοξεύσας αὐτὸν ἀπέκτεινε .
who, coming to the place himself and seeing Anacharsis performing these rites, shot an arrow at him and killed him.


4.76.5
4547
καὶ νῦν ἤν τις εἴρηται περὶ Ἀναχάρσιος , οὐ φασί μιν Σκύθαι γινώσκειν , διὰ τοῦτο ὅτι ἐξεδήμησέ τε ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα καὶ ξεινικοῖσι ἔθεσι διεχρήσατο .
And now the Scythians, if they are asked about Anacharsis, say they have no knowledge of him; this is because he left his country for  Hellas and followed the customs of strangers.


4.76.6
4548
ὡς δ’ ἐγὼ ἤκουσα Τύμνεω τοῦ Ἀριαπείθεος ἐπιτρόπου , εἶναι αὐτὸν Ἰδανθύρσου τοῦ Σκυθέων βασιλέος πάτρων , παῖδα δὲ εἶναι Γνούρου τοῦ Λύκου τοῦ Σπαργαπείθεος .
But according to what I heard from Tymnes, the deputy for Ariapithes, Anacharsis was an uncle of Idanthyrsus king of  Scythia,


4.76.6
4549
εἰ ὦν ταύτης ἦν τῆς οἰκίης ὁ Ἀνάχαρσις , ἴστω ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀδελφεοῦ ἀποθανών ·
and he was the son of Gnurus, son of Lycus, son of Spargapithes.


4.76.6
4550
Ἰδάνθυρσος γὰρ ἦν παῖς Σαυλίου , Σαύλιος δὲ ἦν ὁ ἀποκτείνας Ἀνάχαρσιν .
Now if Anacharsis was truly of this family, then let him know he was slain by his own brother; for Idanthyrsus was the son of Saulius, and it was Saulius who killed Anacharsis.


4.77.1
4551
καίτοι τινὰ ἤδη ἤκουσα λόγον ἄλλον ὑπὸ Πελοποννησίων λεγόμενον , ὡς ὑπὸ τοῦ Σκυθέων βασιλέος Ἀνάχαρσις ἀποπεμφθεὶς τῆς Ἑλλάδος μαθητὴς γένοιτο , ὀπίσω τε ἀπονοστήσας φαίη πρὸς τὸν ἀποπέμψαντα Ἕλληνας πάντας ἀσχόλους εἶναι ἐς πᾶσαν σοφίην πλὴν Λακεδαιμονίων , τούτοισι δὲ εἶναι μούνοισι σωφρόνως δοῦναι τε καὶ δέξασθαι λόγον .
It is true that I have heard another story told by the Peloponnesians; namely, that Anacharsis had been sent by the king of  Scythia and had been a student of the ways of  Hellas, and after his return told the king who sent him that all Greeks were keen for every kind of learning, except the Lacedaemonians; but that these were the only Greeks who spoke and listened with discretion.


4.77.2
4552
ἀλλ’ οὗτος μὲν ὁ λόγος ἄλλως πέπλασται ὑπ’ αὐτῶν Ἑλλήνων , ὁ δ’ ὧν ἀνὴρ ὥσπερ πρότερον εἰρέθη διεφθάρη .
But this is a tale pointlessly invented by the Greeks themselves; and be this as it may, the man was put to death as I have said.


4.78.1
4553
οὗτος μέν νυν οὕτω δὴ ἔπρηξε διὰ ξεινικά τε νόμαια καὶ Ἑλληνικὰς ὁμιλίας .
This, then, was how Anacharsis fared, owing to his foreign ways and consorting with Greeks;


4.78.1
4554
πολλοῖσι δὲ κάρτα ἔτεσι ὕστερον Σκύλης ὁ Ἀριαπείθεος ἔπαθε παραπλήσια τούτῳ .
and a great many years afterward, Scyles, son of Ariapithes, suffered a like fate.


4.78.1
4555
Ἀριαπείθεϊ γὰρ τῷ Σκυθέων βασιλέι γίνεται μετ’ ἄλλων παίδων Σκύλης ·
Scyles was one of the sons born to Ariapithes, king of  Scythia;


4.78.1
4556
ἐξ Ἰστριηνῆς δὲ γυναικὸς οὗτος γίνεται καὶ οὐδαμῶς ἐγχωρίης ·
but his mother was of  Istria, and not native-born;


4.78.1
4557
τὸν ἡ μήτηρ αὕτη γλῶσσάν τε Ἑλλάδα καὶ γράμματα ἐδίδαξε .
and she taught him to speak and read Greek.


4.78.2
4558
μετὰ δὲ χρόνῳ ὕστερον Ἀριαπείθης μὲν τελευτᾷ δόλῳ ὑπὸ Σπαργαπείθεος τοῦ Ἀγαθύρσων βασιλέος , Σκύλης δὲ τήν τε βασιληίην παρέλαβε καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα τοῦ πατρός , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Ὀποίη ·
As time passed, Ariapithes was treacherously killed by Spargapithes, king of the Agathyrsi,


4.78.2
4559
ἦν δὲ αὕτη ἡ Ὀποίη ἀστή , ἐξ ἧς ἦν Ὄρικος Ἀριαπείθεϊ παῖς .
and Scyles inherited the kingship and his father's wife, a Scythian woman whose name was Opoea, and she bore Scyles a son, Oricus.


4.78.3
4560
βασιλεύων δὲ Σκυθέων ὁ Σκύλης διαίτῃ οὐδαμῶς ἠρέσκετο Σκυψικῇ , ἀλλὰ πολλὸν πρὸς τὰ Ἑλληνικὰ μᾶλλον τετραμμένος ἦν ἀπὸ παιδεύσιος τῆς ἐπεπαίδευτο , ἐποίεέ τε τοιοῦτο ·
So Scyles was king of  Scythia; but he was in no way content with the Scythian way of life, and was much more inclined to Greek ways, from the upbringing that he had received.


4.78.3
4561
εὖτε ἀγάγοι τὴν στρατιὴν τὴν Σκυθέων ἐς τὸ Βορυσθενειτέων ἄστυ ( οἱ δὲ Βορυσθενεῗται οὗτοι λέγουσι σφέας αὐτοὺς εἶναι Μιλησίους ) , ἐς τούτους ὅκως ἔλθοι ὁ Σκύλης , τὴν μὲν στρατιὴν καταλίπεσκε ἐν τῷ προαστείῳ , αὐτὸς δὲ ὅκως ἔλθοι ἐς τὸ τεῖχος καὶ τὰς πύλας ἐγκλῄσειε , τὴν στολὴν ἀποθέμενος τὴν Σκυθικὴν λάβεσκε ἂν Ἑλληνίδα ἐσθῆτα , ἔχων δ’ ἂν ταύτην ἠγόραζε οὔτε δορυφόρων ἑπομένων οὔτε ἄλλου οὐδενός ·
So this is what he would do: he would lead the Scythian army to the city of the Borysthenites (who say that they are Milesians), and when he arrived there would leave his army in the suburb of the city,


4.78.4
4562
τὰς δὲ πύλας ἐφύλασσον , μή τίς μιν Σκυθέων ἴδοι ἔχοντα ταύτην τὴν στολήν ·
while he himself, entering within the walls and shutting the gates, would take off his Scythian apparel and put on Greek dress;


4.78.4
4563
καὶ τά τε ἄλλα ἐχρᾶτο διαίτη Ἑλληνικῇ καὶ θεοῖσι ἱρὰ ἐποίεε κατὰ νόμους τοὺς Ἑλλήνων .
and in it he would go among the townsfolk unattended by spearmen or any others (who would guard the gates, lest any Scythian see him wearing this apparel), and in every way follow the Greek manner of life, and worship the gods according to Greek usage.


4.78.5
4564
ὅτε δὲ διατρίψειε μῆνα ἡ πλέον τούτου , ἀπαλλάσσετο ἐνδὺς τὴν Σκυθικὴν στολήν .
When he had spent a month or more like this, he would put on Scythian dress and leave the city.


4.78.5
4565
ταῦτα ποιέεσκε πολλάκις καὶ οἰκία τε ἐδείματο ἐν Βορυσθένεϊ καὶ γυναῖκα ἔγημε ἐς αὐτὰ ἐπιχωρίην .
He did this often; and he built a house in  Borysthenes, and married a wife of the people of the country and brought her there.


4.79.1
4566
ἐπείτε δὲ ἔδεέ οἱ κακῶς γενέσθαι , ἐγίνετο ἀπὸ προφάσιος τοιῆσδε .
But when things had to turn out badly for him, they did so for this reason:


4.79.1
4567
ἐπεθύμησε Διονύσῳ Βακχείῳ τελεσθῆναι ·
he conceived a desire to be initiated into the rites of the Bacchic Dionysus;


4.79.1
4568
μέλλοντι δέ οἱ ἐς χεῖρας ἄγεσθαι τὴν τελετὴν ἐγένετο φάσμα μέγιστον .
and when he was about to begin the sacred mysteries, he saw the greatest vision.


4.79.2
4569
ἦν οἱ ἐν Βορυσθενεϊτέων τῇ πόλι οἰκίης μεγάλης καὶ πολυτελέος περιβολή , τῆς καὶ ὀλίγῳ τι πρότερον τούτων μνήμην εἶχον , τὴν πέριξ λευκοῦ λίθου σφίγγες τε καὶ γρῦπες ἕστασαν ·
He had in the city of the Borysthenites a spacious house, grand and costly (the same house I just mentioned), all surrounded by sphinxes and griffins worked in white marble;


4.79.2
4570
ἐς ταύτην ὁ θεὸς ἐνέσκηψε βέλος .
this house was struck by a thunderbolt.


4.79.2
4571
καὶ ἣ μὲν κατεκάη πᾶσα , Σκύλης δὲ οὐδὲν τούτου εἵνεκα ἧσσον ἐπετέλεσε τὴν τελετήν .
And though the house burnt to the ground, Scyles none the less performed the rite to the end.


4.79.3
4572
Σκύθαι δὲ τοῦ βακχεύειν πέρι Ἕλλησι ὀνειδίζουσι ·
Now the Scythians reproach the Greeks for this Bacchic revelling,


4.79.3
4573
οὐ γὰρ φασὶ οἰκὸς εἶναι θεὸν ἐξευρίσκειν τοῦτον ὅστις μαίνεσθαι ἐνάγει ἀνθρώπους .
saying that it is not reasonable to set up a god who leads men to madness.


4.79.4
4574
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐτελέσθη τῷ Βακχείῳ ὁ Σκύλης , διεπρήστευσε τῶν τις Βορυσθενειτέων πρὸς τοὺς Σκύθας λέγων " ἡμῖν γὰρ καταγελᾶτε , ὦ Σκύθαι , ὅτι βακχεύομεν καὶ ἡμέας ὁ θεὸς λαμβάνει ·
So when Scyles had been initiated into the Bacchic rite, some one of the Borysthenites scoffed at the Scythians:


4.79.4
4575
νῦν οὗτος ὁ δαίμων καὶ τὸν ὑμέτερον βασιλέα λελάβηκε , καὶ βακχεύει τε καὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ μαίνεται .
“You laugh at us, Scythians, because we play the Bacchant and the god possesses us; but now this deity has possessed your own king, so that he plays the Bacchant and is maddened by the god.


4.79.4
4576
εἰ δέ μοι ἀπιστέετε , ἕπεσθε , καὶ ὑμῖν ἐγὼ δέξω " .
If you will not believe me, follow me now and I will show him to you.”


4.79.5
4577
εἵποντο τῶν Σκύθεων οἱ προεστεῶτες , καὶ αὐτοὺς ἀναγαγὼν ὁ Βορυσθενεΐτης λάθρῃ ἐπὶ πύργον κατεῖσε .
The leading men among the Scythians followed him, and the Borysthenite brought them up secretly onto a tower;


4.79.5
4578
ἐπείτε δὲ παρήιε σὺν τῷ θιάσῳ ὁ Σκύλης καὶ εἶδόν μιν βακχεύοντα οἱ Σκύθαι , κάρτα συμφορὴν μεγάλην ἐποιήσαντο , ἐξελθόντες δὲ ἐσήμαινον πάσῃ τῇ στρατιῇ τὰ ἴδοιεν .
from which, when Scyles passed by with his company of worshippers, they saw him playing the Bacchant; thinking it a great misfortune, they left the city and told the whole army what they had seen.


4.80.1
4579
ὡς δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα ἐξήλαυνε ὁ Σκύλης ἐς ἤθεα τὰ ἑωυτοῦ , οἱ Σκύθαι προστησάμενοι τὸν ἀδελφεὸν αὐτοῦ Ὀκταμασάδην , γεγονότα ἐκ τῆς Τήρεω θυγατρός , ἐπανιστέατο τῷ Σκύλῃ .
After this Scyles rode off to his own place; but the Scythians rebelled against him, setting up his brother Octamasades, son of the daughter of Teres, for their king.


4.80.2
4580
ὁ δὲ μαθὼν τὸ γινόμενον ἐπ’ ἑωυτῷ καὶ τὴν αἰτίην δι’ ἣν ἐποιέετο , καταφεύγει ἐς τὴν Θρηίκην .
Scyles, learning what had happened concerning him and the reason why it had happened, fled into  Thrace;


4.80.2
4581
πυθόμενος δὲ ὁ Ὀκταμασάδης ταῦτα ἐστρατεύετο ἐπὶ τὴν Θρηίκην .
and when Octamasades heard this he led his army there.


4.80.2
4582
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐπὶ τῷ Ἴστρῳ ἐγένετο , ἠντίασάν μιν οἱ Θρήικες , μελλόντων δὲ αὐτῶν συνάψειν ἔπεμψε Σιτάλκης παρὰ τὸν Ὀκταμασάδην λέγων τοιάδε .
But when he was beside the Ister, the Thracians barred his way; and when the armies were about to engage, Sitalces sent this message to Octamasades:


4.80.3
4583
" τι δεῖ ἡμέας ἀλλήλων πειρηθῆναι ;
“Why should we try each other's strength?


4.80.3
4584
εἶς μέν μευ τῆς ἀδελφεῆς παῖς , ἔχεις δέ μευ ἀδελφεόν .
You are my sister's son, and you have my brother with you;


4.80.3
4585
σὺ δέ μοι ἀπόδος τοῦτον , καὶ ἐγὼ σοὶ τὸν σὸν Σκύλην παραδίδωμι ·
give him back to me, and I will give up your Scyles to you;


4.80.3
4586
στρατιῇ δὲ μήτε σὺ κινδυνεύσῃς μήτ’ ἐγώ " .
and let us not endanger our armies.”


4.80.4
4587
ταῦτά οἱ πέμψας ὁ Σιτάλκης ἐπεκηρυκεύετο ·
Such was the offer Sitalces sent to him;


4.80.4
4588
ἦν γὰρ παρὰ τῷ Ὀκταμασάδη ἀδελφεὸς Σιτάλκεω πεφευγώς .
for Sitalces' brother had fled from him and was with Octamasades.


4.80.4
4589
ὁ δὲ Ὀκταμασάδης καταινέει ταῦτα , ἐκδοὺς δὲ τὸν ἑωυτοῦ μήτρωα Σιτάλκη ἔλαβε τὸν ἀδελφεὸν Σκύλην .
The Scythian agreed to this, and took his brother Scyles, giving up his own uncle to Sitalces.


4.80.5
4590
καὶ Σιτάλκης μὲν παραλαβὼν τὸν ἀδελφεὸν ἀπήγετο , Σκύλεω δὲ Ὀκταμασάδης αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ ἀπέταμε τὴν κεφαλήν .
Sitalces then took his brother and carried him away,


4.80.5
4591
οὕτω μὲν περιστέλλουσι τὰ σφέτερα νόμαια Σκύθαι , τοῖσι δὲ παρακτωμένοισι ξεινικοὺς νόμους τοιαῦτα ἐπιτίμια διδοῦσι .
but Octamasades beheaded Scyles on the spot. This is how closely the Scythians guard their customs, and these are the penalties they inflict on those who add foreign customs to their own.


4.81.1
4592
πλῆθος δὲ τὸ Σκυθέων οὐκ οἷος τε ἐγενόμην ἀτρεκέως πυθέσθαι , ἀλλὰ διαφόρους λόγους περὶ τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ ἤκουον ·
How numerous the Scythians are, I was not able to learn exactly,


4.81.1
4593
καὶ γὰρ κάρτα πολλοὺς εἶναι σφέας καὶ ὀλίγους ὡς Σκύθας εἶναι .
and the accounts that I heard did not tally, some saying that they are very numerous, and some that they are few, so far as they are true Scythians.


4.81.2
4594
τοσόνδε μέντοι ἀπέφαινόν μοι ἐς ὄψιν .
But this much they let me see for myself:


4.81.2
4595
ἔστι μεταξὺ Βορυσθένεός τε ποταμοῦ καὶ Ὑπάνιος χῶρος , οὔνομα δέ οἱ ἐστὶ Ἐξαμπαῖος ·
there is a region between the  Borysthenes and Hypanis rivers, whose name is Exampaeus;


4.81.2
4596
τοῦ καὶ ὀλίγῳ τι πρότερον τούτων μνήμην εἶχον , φάμενος ἐν αὐτῷ κρήνην ὕδατος πικροῦ εἶναι , ἀπ’ ἧς τὸ ὕδωρ ἀπορρέον τὸν Ὕπανιν ἄποτον ποιέειν .
this is the land that I mentioned when I said that there is a spring of salt water in it, whose water makes the Hypanis unfit to drink.


4.81.3
4597
ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χώρῳ κέεται χαλκήιον , μεγάθει καὶ ἑξαπλήσιον τοῦ ἐπὶ στόματι τοῦ Πόντου κρητῆρος , τὸν Παυσανίης ὁ Κλεομβρότου ἀνέθηκε .
In this region is a bronze vessel, as much as six times greater than the cauldron dedicated by Pausanias son of Cleombrotus at the entrance of the  Pontus.


4.81.4
4598
ὃς δὲ μὴ εἶδε κω τοῦτον , ὧδε δηλώσω .
For anyone who has not yet seen the latter, I will make my meaning plain:


4.81.4
4599
ἑξακοσίους ἀμφορέας εὐπετέως χωρέει τὸ ἐν Σκύθῃσι χαλκήιον , πάχος δὲ τὸ Σκυθικὸν τοῦτο χαλκήιον ἐστὶ δακτύλων ἕξ .
the Scythian bronze vessel easily contains five thousand four hundred gallons, and it is of six fingers' thickness.


4.81.4
4600
τοῦτο ὦν ἔλεγον οἱ ἐπιχώριοι ἀπὸ ἀρδίων γενέσθαι .
This vessel (so the people of the country said) was made out of arrowheads.


4.81.5
4601
βουλόμενον γὰρ τὸν σφέτερον βασιλέα , τῶ οὔνομα εἶναι Ἀριάνταν , τοῦτον εἰδέναι τὸ πλῆθος τὸ Σκυθέων κελεύειν μιν πάντας Σκύθας ἄρδιν ἕκαστον μίαν ἀπὸ τοῦ ὀιστοῦ κομίσαι .
For their king, whose name was Ariantas, desiring to know the census of the Scythians, commanded every Scythian to bring him the point from an arrow,


4.81.5
4602
ὃς δ’ ἄν μὴ κομίσῃ , θάνατον ἀπείλεε .
threatening death to all who did not.


4.81.6
4603
κομισθῆναι τε δὴ χρῆμα πολλὸν ἀρδίων καί οἱ δόξαι ἐξ αὐτέων μνημόσυνον ποιήσαντι λιπέσθαι .
So a vast number of arrow-heads was brought,


4.81.6
4604
ἐκ τουτέων δή μιν τὸ χαλκήιον ποιῆσαι τοῦτο καὶ ἀναθεῖναι ἐς τὸν Ἐξαμπαῖον τοῦτον .
and he decided to make and leave a memorial out of them;


4.81.6
4605
ταῦτα δὲ περὶ τοῦ πλήθεος τοῦ Σκυθέων ἤκουον .
and he made of these this bronze vessel, and set it up in this country Exampaeus. This much I heard about the number of the Scythians.


4.82.1
4606
θωμάσια δὲ ἡ χώρη αὕτη οὐκ ἔχει , χωρὶς ἢ ὅτι ποταμούς τε πολλῶ μεγίστους καὶ ἀριθμὸν πλείστους .
As for marvels, there are none in the land,


4.82.1
4607
τὸ δὲ ἀποθωμάσαι ἄξιον καὶ πάρεξ τῶν ποταμῶν καὶ τοῦ μεγάθεος τοῦ πεδίου παρέχεται , εἰρήσεται .
except that it has by far the greatest and the most numerous rivers in the world;


4.82.1
4608
ἴχνος Ἡρακλέος φαίνουσι ἐν πέτρῃ ἐνεόν , τὸ ἔοικε μὲν βήματι ἀνδρός , ἔστι δὲ τὸ μέγαθος δίπηχυ , παρὰ τὸν Τύρην ποταμόν .
and over and above the rivers and the great extent of the plains there is one most marvellous thing for me to mention:


4.82.1
4609
τοῦτο μέν νυν τοιοῦτο ἐστί , ἀναβήσομαι δὲ ἐς τὸν κατ’ ἀρχὰς ἤια λέξων λόγον .
they show a footprint of Heracles by the Tyras river stamped on rock, like the mark of a man's foot, but forty inches in length.


4.83.1
4610
παρασκευαζομένου Δαρείου ἐπὶ τοὺς Σκύθας καὶ ἐπιπέμποντος ἀγγέλους ἐπιτάξοντας τοῖσι μὲν πεζὸν στρατόν , τοῖσι δὲ νέας παρέχειν , τοῖσι δὲ ζεύγνυσθαι τὸν Θρηίκιον Βόσπορον Ἀρτάβανος ὁ Ὑστάσπεος , ἀδελφεὸς ἐὼν Δαρείου , ἐχρήιζε μηδαμῶς αὐτὸν στρατηίην ἐπὶ Σκύθας ποιέεσθαι , καταλέγων τῶν Σκυθέων τὴν ἀπορίην .
While Darius was making preparations against the Scythians, and sending messengers to direct some to furnish infantry and some to furnish ships, and others again to bridge the  Thracian Bosporus, Artabanus, son of Hystaspes and Darius' brother, by no means wanted him to make an expedition against the Scythians, telling him how hard that people were to deal with.


4.83.2
4611
ἀλλ’ οὐ γὰρ ἔπειθε συμβουλεύων οἱ χρηστά , ὃ μὲν ἐπέπαυτο , ὁ δέ , ἐπειδή οἱ τὰ ἅπαντα παρεσκεύαστο , ἐξήλαυνε τὸν στρατὸν ἐκ Σούσων .
But when, for all his good advice, he could not deter the king, Artabanus ceased to advise, and Darius, all his preparations made, led his army from  Susa.


4.84.1
4612
ἐνθαῦτα τῶν Περσέων Οἰόβαζος ἐδεήθη Δαρείου τριῶν ἐόντων οἱ παίδων καὶ πάντων στρατευομένων ἕνα αὐτῷ καταλειφθῆναι .
Then the Persian Oeobazus, who had three sons, all with the army, asked Darius that one be left behind.


4.84.1
4613
ὁ δὲ ἔφη ὡς φίλῳ ἐόντι καὶ μετρίων δεομένῳ πάντας τοὺς παῖδας καταλείψειν .
“You are my friend,” said the king, “and your request is reasonable; I will leave all your sons.”


4.84.2
4614
ὁ μὲν δὴ Οἰόβαζος περιχαρὴς ἦν , ἐλπίζων τοὺς υἱέας στρατηίης ἀπολελύσθαι .
Oeobazus was very happy, supposing his sons released from service;


4.84.2
4615
ὁ δὲ ἐκέλευσε τοὺς ἐπὶ τούτων ἐπεστεῶτας ἀποκτεῖναι πάντας τοὺς Οἰοβάζου παῖδας .
but Darius told those whose job it was to execute all of Oeobazus' sons. So their throats were cut, and they were left there.


4.85.1
4616
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν ἀποσφαγέντες αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ ἐλείποντο ·
But Darius, when he came to that place in his march from Susa where the Bosporus was bridged in the territory of Calchedon,


4.85.1
4617
Δαρεῖος δὲ ἐπείτε πορευόμενος ἐκ Σούσων ἀπίκετο τῆς Καλχηδονίης ἐπὶ τὸν Βόσπορον ἵνα ἔζευκτο ἡ γέφυρα , ἐνθεῦτεν ἐσβὰς ἐς νέα ἔπλεε ἐπὶ τὰς Κυανέας καλευμένας , τὰς πρότερον πλαγκτὰς Ἕλληνες φασὶ εἶναι , ἑζόμενος δὲ ἐπὶ ῥίῳ ἐθηεῖτο τὸν Πόντον ἐόντα ἀξιοθέητον .
went aboard ship and sailed to the Dark Rocks (as they are called), which the Greeks say formerly moved; there, he sat on a headland and viewed the Pontus, a marvellous sight.


4.85.2
4618
πελαγέων γὰρ ἁπάντων πέφυκε θωμασιώτατος ·
For it is the most wonderful sea of all.


4.85.2
4619
τοῦ τὸ μὲν μῆκος στάδιοι εἰσὶ ἑκατὸν καὶ χίλιοι καὶ μύριοι , τὸ δὲ εὖρος , τῇ εὐρύτατος αὐτὸς ἑωυτοῦ , στάδιοι τριηκόσιοι καὶ τρισχίλιοι .
Its length is eleven thousand one hundred stades, and its breadth three thousand three hundred stades at the place where it is widest.


4.85.3
4620
τούτου τοῦ πελάγεος τὸ στόμα ἐστὶ εὖρος τέσσερες στάδιοι ·
The channel at the entrance of this sea is four stades across;


4.85.3
4621
μῆκος δὲ , τοῦ στόματος ὁ αὐχήν , τὸ δὴ Βόσπορος κέκληται , κατ’ ὃ δὴ ἔζευκτο ἡ γέφυρα , ἐπὶ σταδίους εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατόν ἐστι .
the narrow neck of the channel, called Bosporus, across which the bridge was thrown, is about one hundred and twenty stades long.


4.85.3
4622
τείνει δ’ ἐς τὴν Προποντίδα ὁ Βόσπορος ·
The Bosporus reaches as far as to the Propontis;


4.85.4
4623
ἡ δὲ Προποντὶς ἐοῦσα εὖρος μὲν σταδίων πεντακοσίων , μῆκος δὲ τετρακοσίων καὶ χιλίων , καταδιδοῖ ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἐόντα στεινότητα μὲν ἑπτὰ σταδίους , μῆκος δὲ τετρακοσίους .
and the Propontis is five hundred stades wide and one thousand four hundred long;


4.85.4
4624
ἐκδιδοῖ δὲ ὁ Ἑλλήσποντος ἐς χάσμα πελάγεος τὸ δὴ Αἰγαῖον καλέεται .
its outlet is the Hellespont, which is no wider than seven stades and four hundred long. The Hellespont empties into a gulf of the sea which we call Aegean.


4.86.1
4625
μεμέτρηται δὲ ταῦτα ὧδε .
These measurements have been made in this way:


4.86.1
4626
νηῦς ἐπίπαν μάλιστα κῃ κατανύει ἐν μακρημερίῃ ὀργυιὰς ἑπτακισμυρίας , νυκτὸς δὲ ἑξακισμυρίας .
a ship will generally accomplish seventy thousand orguiae in a long day's voyage, and sixty thousand by night.


4.86.2
4627
ἤδη ὦν ἐς μὲν Φᾶσιν ἀπὸ τοῦ στόματος ( τοῦτο γὰρ ἐστὶ τοῦ Πόντου μακρότατον ) ἡμερέων ἐννέα πλόος ἐστὶ καὶ νυκτῶν ὀκτώ ·
This being granted, seeing that from the Pontus' mouth to the Phasis (which is the greatest length of the sea) it is a voyage of nine days and eight nights,


4.86.2
4628
αὗται ἕνδεκα μυριάδες καὶ ἑκατὸν ὀργυιέων γίνονται , ἐκ δὲ τῶν ὀργυιέων τουτέων στάδιοι ἑκατὸν καὶ χίλιοι καὶ μύριοι εἰσί .
the length of it will be one million one hundred and ten thousand orguiai, which make eleven thousand stades.


4.86.3
4629
ἐς δὲ Θεμισκύρην τὴν ἐπὶ Θερμώδοντι ποταμῷ ἐκ τῆς Σινδικῆς ( κατὰ τοῦτο γὰρ ἐστὶ τοῦ Πόντου εὐρύτατον ) τριῶν τε ἡμερέων καὶ δύο νυκτῶν πλόος ·
From the Sindic region to Themiscura on the Thermodon river (the greatest width of the Pontus)


4.86.3
4630
αὗται δὲ τρεῖς μυριάδες καὶ τριήκοντα ὀργυιέων γίνονται , στάδιοι δὲ τριηκόσιοι καὶ τρισχίλιοι .
it is a voyage of three days and two nights; that is, of three hundred and thirty thousand orguiai, or three thousand three hundred stades.


4.86.4
4631
ὁ μέν νυν Πόντος οὗτος καὶ Βόσπορός τε καὶ Ἑλλήσποντος οὕτω τέ μοι μεμετρέαται καὶ κατὰ τὰ εἰρημένα πεφύκασι , παρέχεται δὲ καὶ λίμνην ὁ Πόντος οὗτος ἐκδιδοῦσαν ἐς αὐτὸν οὐ πολλῷ τεῳ ἐλάσσω ἑωυτοῦ , ἣ Μαιῆτίς τε καλέεται καὶ μήτηρ τοῦ Πόντου .
Thus have I measured the  Pontus and the  Bosporus and  Hellespont, and they are as I have said. Furthermore, a lake is seen issuing into the  Pontus and not much smaller than the sea itself; it is called the Maeetian lake, and the mother of the  Pontus.


4.87.1
4632
ὁ δὲ Δαρεῖος ὡς ἐθεήσατο τὸν Πόντον , ἔπλεε ὀπίσω ἐπὶ τὴν γέφυραν , τῆς ἀρχιτέκτων ἐγένετο Μανδροκλέης Σάμιος ·
After having viewed the Pontus, Darius sailed back to the bridge, whose architect was Mandrocles of Samos;


4.87.1
4633
θεησάμενος δὲ καὶ τὸν Βόσπορον στήλας ἔστησε δύο ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ λίθου λευκοῦ , ἐνταμὼν γράμματα ἐς μὲν τὴν Ἀσσύρια ἐς δὲ τὴν Ἑλληνικά , ἔθνεα πάντα ὅσα περ ἦγε ·
and when he had viewed the Bosporus also, he set up two pillars of white marble by it, engraving on the one in Assyrian and on the other in Greek characters the names of all the nations that were in his army:


4.87.1
4634
ἦγε δὲ πάντα τῶν ἦρχε .
all the nations subject to him.


4.87.1
4635
τούτων μυριάδες ἐξηριθμήθησαν , χωρὶς τοῦ ναυτικοῦ , ἑβδομήκοντα σὺν ἱππεῦσι , νέες δὲ ἑξακόσιαι συνελέχθησαν .
The full census of these, over and above the fleet, was seven hundred thousand men, including horsemen, and the number of ships assembled was six hundred.


4.87.2
4636
τῇσι μέν νυν στήλῃσι ταύτῃσι Βυζάντιοι κομίσαντες ἐς τὴν πόλιν ὕστερον τούτων ἐχρήσαντο πρὸς τὸν βωμὸν τῆς Ὀρθωσίης Ἀρτέμιδος , χωρὶς ἑνὸς λίθου ·
These pillars were afterward carried by the Byzantines into their city and there used to build the altar of Orthosian Artemis, except for one column covered with Assyrian writing


4.87.2
4637
οὗτος δὲ κατελείφθη παρὰ τοῦ Διονύσου τὸν νηὸν ἐν Βυζαντίῳ , γραμμάτων Ἀσσυρίων πλέος .
that was left beside the temple of Dionysus at Byzantium.


4.87.2
4638
τοῦ δὲ Βοσπόρου ὁ χῶρος τὸν ἔζευξε βασιλεὺς Δαρεῖος , ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέει συμβαλλομένῳ , μέσον ἐστὶ Βυζαντίου τε καὶ τοῦ ἐπὶ στόματι ἱροῦ .
Now if my reckoning is correct, the place where king Darius bridged the Bosporus was midway between Byzantium and the temple at the entrance of the sea.


4.88.1
4639
Δαρεῖος δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα ἡσθεὶς τῆ σχεδίῃ τὸν ἀρχιτέκτονα αὐτῆς Μανδροκλέα τὸν Σάμιον ἐδωρήσατο πᾶσι δέκα ·
After this, being pleased with his bridge of boats,


4.88.1
4640
ἀπ’ ὧν δὴ Μανδροκλέης ἀπαρχὴν ζῷα γραψάμενος πᾶσαν τὴν ζεῦξιν τοῦ Βοσπόρου καὶ βασιλέα τε Δαρεῖον ἐν προεδρίῃ κατήμενον καὶ τὸν στρατὸν αὐτοῦ διαβαίνοντα ταῦτα γραψάμενος ἀνέθηκε ἔς τὸ Ἥραιον , ἐπιγράψας τάδε .
Darius made a gift of ten of everything to Mandrocles the Samian, the architect of it; Mandrocles took the first-fruits of these and had a picture made with them, showing the whole bridge of the Bosporus, and Darius sitting aloft on his throne and his army crossing; he set this up in the temple of Hera, with this inscription:


4.88.2
4641
Βόσπορον ἰχθυόεντα γεφυρώσας ἀνέθηκε Μανδροκλέης Ἥρῃ μνημόσυνον σχεδίης , αὑτῷ μὲν στέφανον περιθείς , Σαμίοισι δὲ κῦδος , Δαρείου βασιλέος ἐκτελέσας κατὰ νοῦν .
"  “After bridging the  Bosporus that teems with fish,    Mandrocles dedicated a memorial of the floating bridge to Hera,   Having won a crown for himself, and fame for the Samians,   Doing the will of King Darius.”  "  This memorialized the builder of the bridge.


4.89.1
4642
ταῦτα μέν νυν τοῦ ζεύξαντος τὴν γέφυραν μνημόσυνα ἐγένετο .
These were the memorials of the bridger of the Bosporus.


4.89.1
4643
Δαρεῖος δὲ δωρησάμενος Μανδροκλέα διέβαινε ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην , τοῖσι Ἴωσι παραγγείλας πλέειν ἐς τὸν Πόντον μέχρι Ἴστρου ποταμοῦ , ἐπεὰν δὲ ἀπίκωνται ἐς τὸν Ἴστρον , ἐνθαῦτα αὐτὸν περιμένειν ζευγνύντας τὸν ποταμόν .
Darius, after rewarding Mandrocles, crossed over to Europe; he had told the Ionians to sail into the Pontus as far as the Ister river, and when they got to the Ister, to wait there for him, bridging the river meanwhile;


4.89.1
4644
τὸ γὰρ δὴ ναυτικὸν ἦγον Ἴωνές τε καὶ Αἰολέες καὶ Ἑλλησπόντιοι .
for the fleet was led by Ionians and Aeolians and men of the Hellespont.


4.89.2
4645
ὁ μὲν δὴ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς Κυανέας διεκπλώσας ἔπλεε ἰθὺ τοῦ Ἴστρου , ἀναπλώσας δὲ ἀνὰ ποταμὸν δυῶν ἡμερέων πλόον ἀπὸ θαλάσσης , τοῦ ποταμοῦ τὸν αὐχένα , ἔκ τοῦ σχίζεται τὰ στόματα τοῦ Ἴστρου , ἐζεύγνυε .
So the fleet passed between the Dark Rocks and sailed straight for the Ister and, after a two days' voyage up the river from the sea, set about bridging the narrow channel of the river where its various mouths separate.


4.89.3
4646
Δαρεῖος δὲ ὡς διέβη τὸν Βόσπορον κατὰ τὴν σχεδίην , ἐπορεύετο διὰ τῆς Θρηίκης , ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐπὶ Τεάρου ποταμοῦ τὰς πηγὰς ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο ἡμέρας τρεῖς .
But Darius, passing over the  Bosporus on the floating bridge of ships, journeyed through  Thrace to the sources of the Tearus river, where he camped for three days.


4.90.1
4647
ὁ δὲ Τέαρος λέγεται ὑπὸ τῶν περιοίκων εἶναι ποταμῶν ἄριστος τὰ τε ἄλλα τὰ ἐς ἄκεσιν φέροντα καὶ δὴ καὶ ἀνδράσι καὶ ἵπποισι ψώρην ἀκέσασθαι .
The Tearus is said by those living on it to be the best river of all for purposes of healing, especially for healing mange in men and horses.


4.90.1
4648
εἰσὶ δὲ αὐτοῦ αἱ πηγαὶ δυῶν δέουσαι τεσσεράκοντα , ἐκ πέτρης τῆς αὐτῆς ῥέουσαι , καὶ αἳ μὲν αὐτέων εἰσὶ ψυχραὶ αἳ δὲ θερμαί .
Its springs are thirty-eight in number, some cold and some hot, all flowing from the same rock.


4.90.2
4649
ὁδὸς δ’ ἐπ’ αὐτάς ἐστι ἴση ἐξ Ἡραίου τε πόλιος τῆς παρὰ Περίνθῳ καὶ ἐξ Ἀπολλωνίης τῆς ἐν τῷ Εὐξείνῳ πόντῳ , δυῶν ἡμερέων ἑκατέρη .
There are two roads to the place, one from the town of Heraeum near Perinthus, one from Apollonia on the Euxine sea; each is a two days' journey.


4.90.2
4650
ἐκδιδοῖ δὲ ὁ Τέαρος οὗτος ἐς τὸν Κοντάδεσδον ποταμόν , ὁ δὲ Κοντάδεσδος ἐς τὸν Ἀγριάνην , ὁ δὲ Ἀγριάνης ἐς τὸν Ἕβρον , ὁ δὲ ἐς θάλασσαν τὴν παρ’ Αἴνῳ πόλι .
This Tearus is a tributary of the Contadesdus river, and that of the Agrianes, and that of the Hebrus, which empties into the sea near the city of Aenus.


4.91.1
4651
ἐπὶ τοῦτον ὦν τὸν ποταμὸν ἀπικόμενος ὁ Δαρεῖος ὡς ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο , ἡσθεὶς τῷ ποταμῷ στήλην ἔστησε καὶ ἐνθαῦτα , γράμματα ἐγγράψας λέγοντα τάδε .
Having come to this river and camped there, then, Darius was pleased with the sight of it, and set up yet another pillar there, cut with this inscription:


4.91.2
4652
" Τεάρου ποταμοῦ κεφαλαὶ ὕδωρ ἄριστόν τε καὶ κάλλιστον παρέχονται πάντων ποταμῶν ·
“From the headwaters of the river Tearus flows the best and finest water of all;


4.91.2
4653
καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτὰς ἀπίκετο ἐλαύνων ἐπὶ Σκύθας στρατὸν ἀνὴρ ἄριστος τε καὶ κάλλιστος πάντων ἀνθρώπων , Δαρεῖος ὁ Ὑστάσπεος , Περσέων τε καὶ πάσης τῆς ἠπείρου βασιλεύς " .
and to them came, leading an army against the Scythians, the best and finest man of all, Darius son of Hystaspes, king of Persia and all the continent.”


4.91.2
4654
ταῦτα δὲ ἐνθαῦτα ἐγράφη .
Such was the inscription.


4.92.1
4655
Δαρεῖος δὲ ἐνθεῦτεν ὁρμηθεὶς ἀπίκετο ἐπ’ ἄλλον ποταμὸν τῷ οὔνομα Ἀρτησκός ἐστι , ὃς διὰ Ὀδρυσέων ῥέει .
From there, Darius set out and came to another river called Artescus, which flows through the country of the Odrysae;


4.92.1
4656
ἐπὶ τοῦτον δὴ τὸν ποταμὸν ἀπικόμενος ἐποίησε τοιόνδε ·
and having reached this river, he did something like this.


4.92.1
4657
ἀποδέξας χωρίον τῇ στρατιῇ ἐκέλευε πάντα ἄνδρα λίθον ἕνα παρεξιόντα τιθέναι ἐς τὸ ἀποδεδεγμένον τοῦτο χωρίον .
He pointed out a spot to the army, and told every man to lay one stone as he passed in this spot that he pointed out.


4.92.1
4658
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ἡ στρατιὴ ἐπετέλεσε , ἐνθαῦτα κολωνοὺς μεγάλους τῶν λίθων καταλιπὼν ἀπήλαυνε τὴν στρατιήν .
After his army did this, he led it away, leaving behind there great piles of stones.


4.93.1
4659
πρὶν δὲ ἀπικέσθαι ἐπὶ τὸν Ἴστρον , πρώτους αἱρέει Γέτας τοὺς ἀθανατίζοντας .
But before he came to the Ister, he first took the Getae, who pretend to be immortal.


4.93.1
4660
οἱ μὲν γὰρ τὸν Σαλμυδησσὸν ἔχοντες Θρήικες καὶ ὑπὲρ Ἀπολλωνίης τε καὶ Μεσαμβρίης πόλιος οἰκημένοι , καλεύμενοι δὲ Κυρμιάναι καὶ Νιψαῖοι , ἀμαχητὶ σφέας αὐτοὺς παρέδοσαν Δαρείῳ ·
The Thracians of Salmydessus and of the country above the towns of Apollonia and Mesambria, who are called Cyrmianae and Nipsaei, surrendered without a fight to Darius;


4.93.1
4661
οἱ δὲ Γέται πρὸς ἀγνωμοσύνην τραπόμενοι αὐτίκα ἐδουλώθησαν , Θρηίκων ἐόντες ἀνδρηιότατοι καὶ δικαιότατοι .
but the Getae resisted stubbornly, and were enslaved at once, the bravest and most just Thracians of all.


4.94.1
4662
ἀθανατίζουσι δὲ τόνδε τὸν τρόπον ·
Their belief in their immortality is as follows:


4.94.1
4663
οὔτε ἀποθνήσκειν ἑωυτοὺς νομίζουσι ἰέναι τε τὸν ἀπολλύμενον παρὰ Σάλμοξιν δαίμονα ·
they believe that they do not die, but that one who perishes goes to the deity Salmoxis,


4.94.1
4664
οἳ δὲ αὐτῶν τὸν αὐτὸν τοῦτον ὀνομάζουσι Γεβελέιζιν ·
Some of them call this same one Gebeleïzis.


4.94.2
4665
διὰ πεντετηρίδος τε τὸν πάλῳ λαχόντα αἰεὶ σφέων αὐτῶν ἀποπέμπουσι ἄγγελον παρὰ τὸν Σάλμοξιν , ἐντελλόμενοι τῶν ἂν ἑκάστοτε δέωνται , πέμπουσι δὲ ὧδε ·
Once every five years they choose one of their people by lot and send him as a messenger to Salmoxis, with instructions to report their needs;


4.94.2
4666
οἳ μὲν αὐτῶν ταχθέντες ἀκόντια τρία ἔχουσι , ἄλλοι δὲ διαλαβόντες τοῦ ἀποπεμπομένου παρὰ τὸν Σάλμοξιν τὰς χεῖρας καὶ τοὺς πόδας , ἀνακινήσαντες αὐτὸν μετέωρον ῥίπτουσι ἐς τὰς λόγχας .
and this is how they send him:


4.94.2
4667
ἢν μὲν δὴ ἀποθάνῃ ἀναπαρείς , τοῖσι δὲ ἵλεος ὁ θεὸς δοκέει εἶναι ·
**4.94.2.4667** three lances are held by designated men; others seize the messenger to Salmoxis by his hands and feet, and swing and toss him up on to the spear-points.


4.94.3
4668
ἢν δὲ μὴ ἀποθάνῃ , αἰτιῶνται αὐτὸν τὸν ἄγγελον , φάμενοί μιν ἄνδρα κακὸν εἶναι , αἰτιησάμενοι δὲ τοῦτον ἄλλον ἀποπέμπουσι ·
If he is killed by the toss, they believe that the god regards them with favor;


4.94.3
4669
ἐντέλλονται δὲ ἔτι ζῶντι .
but if he is not killed, they blame the messenger himself, considering him a bad man, and send another messenger in place of him. It is while the man still lives that they give him the message.


4.94.4
4670
οὗτοι οἱ αὐτοὶ Θρήικες καὶ πρὸς βροντήν τε καὶ ἀστραπὴν τοξεύοντες ἄνω πρὸς τὸν οὐρανὸν ἀπειλέουσι τῷ θεῷ , οὐδένα ἄλλον θεὸν νομίζοντες εἶναι εἰ μὴ τὸν σφέτερον .
Furthermore, when there is thunder and lightning these same Thracians shoot arrows skyward as a threat to the god, believing in no other god but their own.


4.95.1
4671
ὡς δὲ ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι τῶν τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον οἰκεόντων Ἑλλήνων καὶ Πόντον , τὸν Σάλμοξιν τοῦτον ἐόντα ἄνθρωπον δουλεῦσαι ἐν Σάμῳ , δουλεῦσαι δὲ Πυθαγόρῃ τῷ Μνησάρχου , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ αὐτὸν γενόμενον ἐλεύθερον χρήματα κτήσασθαι μεγάλα , κτησάμενον δὲ ἀπελθεῖν ἐς τὴν ἑωυτοῦ .
I understand from the Greeks who live beside the  Hellespont and  Pontus, that this Salmoxis was a man who was once a slave in  Samos, his master being Pythagoras son of Mnesarchus;


4.95.2
4672
ἅτε δὲ κακοβίων τε ἐόντων τῶν Θρηίκων καὶ ὑπαφρονεστέρων , τὸν Σάλμοξιν τοῦτον ἐπιστάμενον δίαιτάν τε Ἰάδα καὶ ἤθεα βαθύτερα ἢ κατὰ Θρήικας , οἷα Ἕλλησι τε ὁμιλήσαντα καὶ Ἑλλήνων οὐ τῷ ἀσθενεστάτῳ σοφιστῇ Πυθαγόρη , κατασκευάσασθαι ἀνδρεῶνα , ἐς τὸν πανδοκεύοντα τῶν ἀστῶν τοὺς πρώτους καὶ εὐωχέοντα ἀναδιδάσκειν ὡς οὔτε αὐτὸς οὔτε οἱ συμπόται αὐτοῦ οὔτε οἱ ἐκ τούτων αἰεὶ γινόμενοι ἀποθανέονται , ἀλλ’ ἥξουσι ἐς χῶρον τοῦτον ἵνα αἰεὶ περιεόντες ἕξουσι τὰ πάντα ἀγαθά .
then, after being freed and gaining great wealth, he returned to his own country. Now the Thracians were a poor and backward people, but this Salmoxis knew Ionian ways and a more advanced way of life than the Thracian; for he had consorted with Greeks, and moreover with one of the greatest Greek teachers, Pythagoras;


4.95.4
4673
ἐν ᾧ δὲ ἐποίεε τὰ καταλεχθέντα καὶ ἔλεγε ταῦτα , ἐν τούτῳ κατάγαιον οἴκημα ἐποιέετο .
While he was doing as I have said and teaching this doctrine, he was meanwhile making an underground chamber.


4.95.4
4674
ὡς δέ οἱ παντελέως εἶχε τὸ οἴκημα , ἐκ μὲν τῶν Θρηίκων ἠφανίσθη , καταβὰς δὲ κάτω ἐς τὸ κατάγαιον οἴκημα διαιτᾶτο ἐπ’ ἔτεα τρία ·
When this was finished, he vanished from the sight of the Thracians, and went down into the underground chamber, where he lived for three years,


4.95.5
4675
οἳ δὲ μιν ἐπόθεόν τε καὶ ἐπένθεον ὡς τεθνεῶτα .
while the Thracians wished him back and mourned him for dead;


4.95.5
4676
τετάρτω δὲ ἔτεϊ ἐφάνη τοῖσι Θρήιξι , καὶ οὕτω πιθανά σφι ἐγένετο τὰ ἔλεγε ὁ Σάλμοξις .
then in the fourth year he appeared to the Thracians, and thus they came to believe what Salmoxis had told them.


4.95.5
4677
ταῦτα φασί μιν ποιῆσαι .
Such is the Greek story about him.


4.96.1
4678
ἐγὼ δὲ περὶ μὲν τούτου καὶ τοῦ καταγαίου οἰκήματος οὔτε ἀπιστέω οὔτε ὦν πιστεύω τι λίην , δοκέω δὲ πολλοῖσι ἔτεσι πρότερον τὸν Σάλμοξιν τοῦτον γενέσθαι Πυθαγόρεω .
Now I neither disbelieve nor entirely believe the tale about Salmoxis and his underground chamber; but I think that he lived many years before Pythagoras;


4.96.2
4679
εἴτε δὲ ἐγένετό τις Σάλμοξις ἄνθρωπος , εἴτ’ ἐστὶ δαίμων τις Γέτῃσι οὗτος ἐπιχώριος , χαιρέτω .
and as to whether there was a man called Salmoxis or this is some deity native to the Getae, let the question be dismissed.


4.96.2
4680
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ χρεώμενοι ὡς ἐχειρώθησαν ὑπὸ Περσέων , εἵποντο τῷ ἄλλῳ στρατῷ .
These people who believe in such ways were enslaved by the Persians, and they followed the rest of the army.


4.97.1
4681
Δαρεῖος δὲ ὡς ἀπίκετο καὶ ὁ πεζὸς ἅμ’ αὐτῷ στρατὸς ἐπὶ τὸν Ἴστρον , ἐνθαῦτα διαβάντων πάντων Δαρεῖος ἐκέλευσε τούς τε Ἴωνας τὴν σχεδίην λύσαντας ἕπεσθαι κατ’ ἤπειρον ἑωυτῷ καὶ τὸν ἐκ τῶν νεῶν στρατόν .
Such were the ways of the Getae, who were subdued by the Persians and followed their army. When Darius and the land army with him had come to the Ister, and all had crossed, he had the Ionians break the bridge and follow him in his march across the mainland, together with the men of the fleet.


4.97.2
4682
μελλόντων δὲ τῶν Ἰώνων λύειν καὶ ποιέειν τὰ κελευόμενα , Κώης ὁ Ἐρξάνδρου στρατηγὸς ἐὼν Μυτιληναίων ἔλεξε Δαρείῳ τάδε , πυθόμενος πρότερον εἰ οἱ φίλον εἴη γνώμην ἀποδέκεσθαι παρὰ τοῦ βουλομένου ἀποδείκνυσθαι .
So the Ionians were preparing to break the bridge and do Darius' bidding; but Cöes son of Erxander, the general of the Mytilenaeans, after first asking if Darius were willing to listen to advice from one who wanted to give it, said,


4.97.3
4683
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἐπὶ γῆν γὰρ μέλλεις στρατεύεσθαι τῆς οὔτε ἀρηρομένον φανήσεται οὐδὲν οὔτε πόλις οἰκεομένη ·
“Since, O King, you are about to march against a country where you will not find tilled lands or inhabited cities,


4.97.3
4684
σύ νυν γέφυραν ταύτὴν ἔα κατὰ χώρην ἑστάναι , φυλάκους αὐτῆς λιπὼν τούτους οἵπερ μιν ἔζευξαν .
let this bridge stay where it is, leaving those who made it to guard it.


4.97.4
4685
καὶ ἤν τε κατὰ νόον πρήξωμεν εὑρόντες Σκύθας , ἔστι ἄποδος ἡμῖν , ἤν τε καὶ μή σφεας εὑρεῖν δυνώμεθα , ἥ γε ἄποδος ἡμῖν ἀσφαλής ·
Thus, if we find the Scythians and do what we want, we have a way of return;


4.97.4
4686
οὐ γὰρ ἔδεισά κω μὴ ἑσσωθέωμεν ὑπὸ Σκυθέων μάχῃ , ἁλλὰ μᾶλλον μὴ οὐ δυνάμενοι σφέας εὑρεῖν πάθωμεν τι ἀλώμενοι .
and even if we do not find them, at least our way back is safe; for my fear has never been that we shall be overcome by the Scythians in the field, but rather that we may not be able to find them, and so go astray to our harm.


4.97.5
4687
καὶ τάδε λέγειν φαίη τις ἄν με ἐμεωυτοῦ εἵνεκεν , ὡς καταμένω ·
Now it may perhaps be said that I say this for my own sake, because I want to remain behind;


4.97.5
4688
ἐγὼ δὲ γνώμην μὲν τὴν εὕρισκον ἀρίστην σοί , βασιλεῦ , ἐς μέσον φέρω , αὐτὸς μέντοι ἕψομαί τοι καὶ οὐκ ἂν λειφθείην " .
but it is not so; I only declare publicly the opinion that I think best for you, and I will follow you and do not want to be left here.”


4.97.6
4689
κάρτα τε ἥσθη τῇ γνώμῃ Δαρεῖος καὶ μιν ἀμείψατο τοῖσιδε .
Darius was very pleased with this advice,


4.97.6
4690
" ξεῖνε Λέσβιε , σωθέντος ἐμεῦ ὀπίσω ἐς οἶκον τὸν ἐμὸν ἐπιφάνηθί μοι πάντως , ἵνα σε ἀντὶ χρηστῆς συμβουλίης χρηστοῖσι ἔργοισι ἀμείψωμαι " .
and he answered Cöes thus: “My friend from Lesbos, do not fail to show yourself to me when I return to my house safe, so that I may make you a good return for your good advice.”


4.98.1
4691
ταῦτα δὲ εἴπας καὶ ἀπάψας ἅμματα ἑξήκοντα ἐν ἱμάντι καλέσας ἐς λόγους τοὺς Ἰώνων τυράννους ἔλεγε τάδε .
After saying this, he tied sixty knots in a thong, and summoning the Ionian sovereigns to an audience said to them:


4.98.2
4692
" ἄνδρες Ἴωνες , ἡ μὲν πρότερον γνώμη ἀποδεχθεῖσα ἐς τὴν γέφυραν μετείσθω μοι , ἔχοντες δὲ τὸν ἱμάντα τόνδε ποιέετε τάδε .
“Gentlemen of Ionia, I take back the decision which I delivered before about the bridge;


4.98.2
4693
ἐπεὰν ἐμὲ ἴδητε τάχιστα πορευόμενον ἐπὶ Σκύθας , ἀπὸ τούτου ἀρξάμενοι τοῦ χρόνου λύετε ἅμμα ἓν ἑκάστης ἡμέρης ·
now, take this thong and do as follows. Begin to reckon from the day when you see me march away against the Scythians, and untie one knot each day:


4.98.2
4694
ἢν δὲ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ μὴ παρέω ἀλλὰ διεξέλθωσι ὑμῖν αἱ ἡμέραι τῶν ἁμμάτων , ἀποπλέετε ἐς τὴν ὑμετέρην αὐτῶν .
and if the days marked by the knots have all passed and I have not returned, embark for your own homes.


4.98.3
4695
μέχρι δὲ τούτου , ἐπείτε οὕτω μετέδοξε , φυλάσσετε τὴν σχεδίην , πᾶσαν προθυμίην σωτηρίης τε καὶ φυλακῆς παρεχόμενοι .
But until then, since the plan is changed, guard the bridge, making every effort to keep and watch it.


4.98.3
4696
ταῦτα δὲ ποιεῦντες ἐμοὶ μεγάλως χαριεῖσθε " .
You will please me very much if you do this.”


4.98.3
4697
Δαρεῖος μὲν ταῦτα εἴπας ἐς τὸ πρόσω ἐπείγετο .
Having said this, Darius hastened to march further.


4.99.1
4698
τῆς δὲ Σκυθικῆς γῆς ἡ Θρηίκη τὸ ἐς θάλασσαν πρόκειται ·
Thrace runs farther out into the sea than Scythia;


4.99.1
4699
κόλπου δὲ ἀγομένου τῆς γῆς ταύτης , ἡ Σκυθική τε ἐκδέκεται καὶ ὁ Ἴστρος ἐκδιδοῖ ἐς αὐτήν , πρὸς εὗρον ἄνεμον τὸ στόμα τετραμμένος .
and Scythia begins where a bay is formed in its coast, and the mouth of the Ister, facing southeast, is in that country.


4.99.2
4700
τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ Ἴστρου ἔρχομαι σημανέων τὸ πρὸς θάλασσαν αὐτῆς τῆς Σκυθικῆς χώρης ἐς μέτρησιν .
Now I am going to describe the coast of the true Scythia from the Ister, and give its measurements.


4.99.2
4701
ἀπὸ Ἴστρου αὕτη ἤδη ἡ ἀρχαίη Σκυθίη ἐστί , πρὸς μεσαμβρίην τε καὶ νότον ἄνεμον κειμένη , μέχρι πόλιος Καρκινίτιδος καλεομένης .
The ancient Scythian land begins at the Ister and faces south and the south wind, as far as the city called Carcinitis.


4.99.3
4702
τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ ταύτης τὴν μὲν ἐπὶ θάλασσαν τὴν αὐτὴν φέρουσαν , ἐοῦσαν ὀρεινήν τε χώρην καὶ προκειμένην τὸ ἐς Πόντον , νέμεται τὸ Ταυρικὸν ἔθνος μέχρι χερσονήσου τῆς τρηχέης καλεομένης ·
Beyond this place, the country fronting the same sea is hilly and projects into the Pontus;


4.99.3
4703
αὕτη δὲ ἐς θάλασσαν τὴν πρὸς ἀπηλιώτην ἄνεμον κατήκει .
it is inhabited by the Tauric nation as far as what is called the Rough Peninsula; and this ends in the eastern sea.


4.99.4
4704
ἔστι γὰρ τῆς Σκυθικῆς τὰ δύο μέρεα τῶν οὔρων ἐς θάλασσαν φέροντα , τήν τε πρὸς μεσαμβρίην καὶ τὴν πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ , κατά περ τῆς Ἀττικῆς χώρης ·
For the sea to the south and the sea to the east are two of the four boundary lines of Scythia,


4.99.4
4705
καὶ παραπλήσια ταύτῃ καὶ οἱ Ταῦροι νέμονται τῆς Σκυθικῆς , ὡς εἰ τῆς Ἀττικῆς ἄλλο ἔθνος καὶ μὴ Ἀθηναῖοι νεμοίατο τὸν γουνὸν τὸν Σουνιακόν , μᾶλλον ἐς τὸν πόντον τὴν ἄκρην ἀνέχοντα , τὸν ἀπὸ Θορικοῦ μέχρι Ἀναφλύστου δήμου ·
just as seas are boundaries of Attica; and the Tauri inhabit a part of Scythia like Attica, as though some other people, not Attic, were to inhabit the heights of Sunium from Thoricus to the town of Anaphlystus, if Sunium jutted farther out into the sea.


4.99.5
4706
λέγω δὲ ὡς εἶναι ταῦτα σμικρὰ μεγάλοισι συμβάλλειν ·
I mean, so to speak, to compare small things with great.


4.99.5
4707
τοιοῦτον ἡ Ταυρική ἐστι .
Such a land is the Tauric country.


4.99.5
4708
ὃς δὲ τῆς Ἀττικῆς ταῦτα μὴ παραπέπλωκε , ἐγὼ δὲ ἄλλως δηλώσω ·
But those who have not sailed along that part of Attica may understand from this other analogy:


4.99.5
4709
ὡς εἰ τῆς Ἰηπυγίης ἄλλο ἔθνος καὶ μὴ Ἰήπυγες ἀρξάμενοι ἐκ Βρεντεσίου λιμένος ἀποταμοίατο μέχρι Τάραντος καὶ νεμοίατο τὴν ἄκρην .
it is as though in Calabria some other people, not Calabrian, were to live on the promontory within a line drawn from the harbor of Brundisium to Tarentum.


4.99.5
4710
δύο δὲ λέγων ταῦτα πολλὰ λέγω παρόμοια , τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ἔοικε ἡ Ταυρική .
I am speaking of these two countries, but there are many others of a similar kind that Tauris resembles.


4.100.1
4711
τὸ δ’ ἀπὸ τῆς Ταυρικῆς ἤδη Σκύθαι τὰ κατύπερθε τῶν Ταύρων καὶ τὰ πρὸς θαλάσσης τῆς ἠοίης νέμονται , τοῦ τε Βοσπόρου τοῦ Κιμμερίου τὰ πρὸς ἑσπέρης καὶ τῆς λίμνης τῆς Μαιήτιδος μέχρι Τανάιδος ποταμοῦ , ὃς ἐκδιδοῖ ἐς μυχὸν τῆς λίμνης ταύτης .
Beyond the Tauric country the Scythians begin, living north of the Tauri and beside the eastern sea, west of the  Cimmerian Bosporus and the Maeetian lake, as far as the  Tanaïs river, which empties into the end of that lake.


4.100.2
4712
ἤδη ὧν ἀπὸ μὲν Ἴστρου τὰ κατύπερθε ἐς τὴν μεσόγαιαν φέροντα ἀποκληίεται ἡ Σκυθικὴ ὑπὸ πρώτων Ἀγαθύρσων , μετὰ δὲ Νευρῶν , ἔπειτα δὲ Ἀνδροφάγων , τελευταίων δὲ Μελαγχλαίνων .
Now it has been seen that on its northern and inland side, running from the Ister,  Scythia is bounded first by the Agathyrsi, next by the Neuri, next by the Man-eaters, and last by the Black-cloaks.


4.101.1
4713
ἔστι ὦν τῆς Σκυθικῆς ὡς ἐούσης τετραγώνου , τῶν δύο μερέων κατηκόντων ἐς θάλασσαν , πάντῃ ἴσον τό τε ἐς τὴν μεσόγαιαν φέρον καὶ τὸ παρὰ τὴν θάλασσαν .
Scythia, then, is a four-sided country, two of whose sides are coastline, the frontiers running inland and those that are by the sea making it a perfect square;


4.101.2
4714
ἀπὸ γὰρ Ἴστρου ἐπὶ Βορυσθένεα δέκα ἡμερέων ὁδός ἀπὸ Βορυσθένεος τε ἐπὶ τὴν λίμνην τὴν Μαιῆτιν ἑτερέων δέκα ·
for it is a ten days' journey from the Ister to the Borysthenes,


4.101.2
4715
καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ θαλάσσης ἐς μεσόγαιαν ἐς τοὺς Μελαγχλαίνους τοὺς κατύπερθε Σκυψέων οἰκημένους εἴκοσι ἡμερέων ὁδὸς .
and the same from the Borysthenes to the Maeetian lake; and it is a twenty days' journey from the sea inland to the country of the Black-cloaks who live north of Scythia.


4.101.3
4716
ἡ δὲ ὁδὸς ἡ ἡμερησίη ἀνὰ διηκόσια στάδια συμβέβληταί μοι .
Now, as I reckon a day's journey at two hundred stades,


4.101.3
4717
οὕτω ἂν εἴη τῆς Σκυθικῆς τὰ ἐπικάρσια τετρακισχιλίων σταδίων καὶ τὰ ὄρθια τὰ ἐς τὴν μεσόγαιαν φέροντα ἑτέρων τοσούτων σταδίων .
the cross-measurement of Scythia would be a distance of five hundred miles, and the line drawn straight up inland the same.


4.101.3
4718
ἡ μέν νυν γῆ αὕτη ἐστὶ μέγαθος τοσαύτη .
Such then is the extent of this land.


4.102.1
4719
οἱ δὲ Σκύθαι δόντες σφίσι λόγον ὡς οὐκ οἷοί τε εἰσὶ τὸν Δαρείου στρατὸν ἰθυμαχίῃ διώσασθαι μοῦνοι , ἔπεμπον ἐς τοὺς πλησιοχώρους ἀγγέλους ·
Convinced that they alone were not able to repel Darius' army in open warfare,


4.102.1
4720
τῶν δὲ καὶ δὴ οἱ βασιλέες συνελθόντες ἐβουλεύοντο ὡς στρατοῦ ἐπελαύνοντος μεγάλου .
the Scythians sent messengers to their neighbors, whose kings had already gathered and were deliberating on the presumption that a great army was marching against them.


4.102.2
4721
ἦσαν δὲ οἱ συνελθόντες βασιλέες Ταύρων καὶ Ἀγαθύρσων καὶ Νευρῶν καὶ Ἀνδροφάγων καὶ Μελαγχλαίνων καὶ Γελωνῶν καὶ Βουδίνων καὶ Σαυροματέων .
The assembled kings were those of the Tauri, Agathyrsi, Neuri, Maneaters, Black-cloaks, Geloni, Budini, and Sauromatae.


4.103.1
4722
τούτων Ταῦροι μὲν νόμοισι τοιοῖσιδε χρέωνται ·
Among these, the Tauri have the following customs:


4.103.1
4723
θύουσι μὲν τῇ , Παρθένῳ τούς τε ναυηγοὺς καὶ τοὺς ἂν λάβωσι Ἑλλήνων ἐπαναχθέντες τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
all ship-wrecked men, and any Greeks whom they capture in their sea-raids, they sacrifice to the Virgin goddess as I will describe:


4.103.2
4724
καταρξάμενοι ῥοπάλῳ παίουσι τὴν κεφαλήν .
after the first rites of sacrifice, they strike the victim on the head with a club;


4.103.2
4725
οἳ μὲν δὴ λέγουσι ὡς τὸ σῶμα ἀπὸ τοῦ κρημνοῦ ὠθέουσι κάτω ( ἐπὶ γὰρ κρημνοῦ ἵδρυται τὸ ἱρόν ) , τὴν δὲ κεφαλὴν ἀνασταυροῦσι ·
according to some, they then place the head on a pole and throw the body off the cliff on which their temple stands;


4.103.2
4726
οἳ δὲ κατὰ μὲν τὴν κεφαλὴν ὁμολογέουσι , τὸ μέντοι σῶμα οὐκ ὠθέεσθαι ἀπὸ τοῦ κρημνοῦ λέγουσι ἀλλὰ γῇ κρύπτεσθαι .
others agree as to the head, but say that the body is buried, not thrown off the cliff.


4.103.2
4727
τὴν δὲ δαίμονα ταύτην τῆ θύουσι λέγουσι αὐτοὶ Ταῦροι Ἰφιγένειαν τὴν Ἀγαμέμνονος εἶναι .
The Tauri themselves say that this deity to whom they sacrifice is Agamemnon's daughter Iphigenia.


4.103.3
4728
πολεμίους δὲ ἄνδρας τοὺς ἂν χειρώσωνται ποιεῦσι τάδε ·
As for enemies whom they defeat,


4.103.3
4729
ἀποταμὼν ἕκαστος κεφαλὴν ἀποφέρεται ἐς τὰ οἰκία , ἔπειτα ἐπὶ ξύλου μεγάλου ἀναπείρας ἱστᾷ ὑπὲρ τῆς οἰκίης ὑπερέχουσαν πολλόν , μάλιστα δὲ ὑπὲρ τῆς καπνοδόκης .
each cuts his enemy's head off and carries it away to his house, where he places it on a tall pole and stands it high above the dwelling, above the smoke-vent for the most part.


4.103.3
4730
φασὶ δὲ τούτους φυλάκους τῆς οἰκίης πάσης ὑπεραιωρέεσθαι .
These heads, they say, are set up to guard the whole house.


4.103.3
4731
ζῶσι δὲ ἀπὸ ληίης τε καὶ πολέμου .
The Tauri live by plundering and war.


4.104.1
4732
Ἀγάθυρσοι δὲ ἁβρότατοι ἀνδρῶν εἰσι καὶ χρυσοφόροι τὰ μάλιστα , ἐπίκοινον δὲ τῶν γυναικῶν τὴν μῖξιν ποιεῦνται , ἵνα κασίγνητοι τε ἀλλήλων ἔωσι καὶ οἰκήιοι ἐόντες πάντες μήτε φθόνῳ μήτε ἔχθεϊ χρέωνται ἐς ἀλλήλους .
The Agathyrsi are the most refined of men and especially given to wearing gold. Their intercourse with women is promiscuous, so that they may be consanguine with one another and, all being relations, not harbor jealousy or animosity toward one another.


4.104.1
4733
τὰ δὲ ἄλλα νόμαια Θρήιξι προσκεχωρήκασι .
In the rest of their customs they are like the Thracians.


4.105.1
4734
Νευροὶ δὲ νόμοισι μὲν χρέωνται Σκυθικοῖσι , γενεῇ δὲ μιῇ πρότερον σφέας τῆς Δαρείου στρατηλασίης κατέλαβε ἐκλιπεῖν τὴν χώρην πᾶσαν ὑπὸ ὀφίων ·
The Neuri follow Scythian customs; but one generation before the advent of Darius' army, they happened to be driven from their country by snakes;


4.105.1
4735
ὄφιας γάρ σφι πολλοὺς μὲν ἡ χώρη ἀνέφαινε , οἱ δὲ πλεῦνες ἄνωθέν σφι ἐκ τῶν ἐρήμων ἐπέπεσον , ἐς ὃ πιεζόμενοι οἴκησαν μετὰ Βουδίνων τὴν ἑωυτῶν ἐκλιπόντες .
for their land produced great numbers of these, and still more came down on them out of the desolation on the north, until at last the Neuri were so afflicted that they left their own country and lived among the Budini.


4.105.1
4736
κινδυνεύουσι δὲ οἱ ἄνθρωποι οὗτοι γόητες εἶναι .
It may be that these people are wizards;


4.105.2
4737
λέγονται γὰρ ὑπὸ Σκυθέων καὶ Ἑλλήνων τῶν ἐν τῇ Σκυθικῇ κατοικημένων ὡς ἔτεος ἑκάστου ἅπαξ τῶν Νευρῶν ἕκαστος λύκος γίνεται ἡμέρας ὀλίγας καὶ αὖτις ὀπίσω ἐς τ- αὐτὸ κατίσταται .
for the Scythians, and the Greeks settled in Scythia, say that once a year every one of the Neuri becomes a wolf for a few days and changes back again to his former shape.


4.105.2
4738
ἐμὲ μέν νυν ταῦτα λέγοντες οὐ πείθουσι , λέγουσι δὲ οὐδὲν ἧσσον , καὶ ὀμνῦσι δὲ λέγοντες .
Those who tell this tale do not convince me; but they tell it nonetheless, and swear to its truth.


4.106.1
4739
ἀνδροφάγοι δὲ ἀγριώτατα πάντων ἀνθρώπων ἔχουσι ἤθεα , οὔτε δίκην νομίζοντες οὔτε νόμῳ οὐδενὶ χρεώμενοι ·
The Man-eaters are the most savage of all men in their way of life;


4.106.1
4740
νομάδες δὲ εἰσι , ἐσθῆτά τε φορέουσι τῇ Σκυθικῇ ὁμοίην , γλῶσσαν δὲ ἰδίην , ἀνδροφαγέουσι δὲ μοῦνοι τούτων .
they know no justice and obey no law. They are nomads, wearing a costume like the Scythian, but speaking a language of their own; of all these, they are the only people that eat men.


4.107.1
4741
μελάγχλαινοι δὲ εἵματα μὲν μέλανα φορέουσι πάντες , ἐπ’ ὧν καὶ τὰς ἐπωνυμίας ἔχουσι , νόμοισι δὲ Σκυθικοῖσι χρέωνται .
The Black-cloaks all wear black clothing, from which they get their name; their customs are Scythian.


4.108.1
4742
Βουδῖνοι δὲ ἔθνος ἐὸν μέγα καὶ πολλὸν γλαυκόν τε πᾶν ἰσχυρῶς ἐστι καὶ πυρρόν ·
The Budini are a great and populous nation;


4.108.1
4743
πόλις δὲ ἐν αὐτοῖσι πεπόλισται ξυλίνη , οὔνομα δὲ τῇ πόλι ἐστὶ Γελωνός .
the eyes of them all are very bright, and they are ruddy. They have a city built of wood, called Gelonus.


4.108.1
4744
τοῦ δὲ τείχεος μέγαθος κῶλον ἕκαστον τριήκοντα σταδίων ἐστί , ὑψηλὸν δὲ καὶ πᾶν ξύλινον , καὶ αἱ οἰκίαι αὐτῶν ξύλιναι καὶ τὰ ἱρά .
The wall of it is three and three quarters miles in length on each side of the city; this wall is high and all of wood; and their houses are wooden, and their temples;


4.108.2
4745
ἔστι γὰρ δὴ αὐτόθι Ἑλληνικῶν θεῶν ἱρὰ Ἑλληνικῶς κατεσκευασμένα ἀγάλμασί τε καὶ βωμοῖσι καὶ νηοῖσι ξυλίνοισι , καὶ τῷ Διονύσῳ τριετηρίδας ἀνάγουσι καὶ βακχεύουσι .
for there are temples of Greek gods among them, furnished in Greek style with images and altars and shrines of wood; and they honor Dionysus every two years with festivals and revelry.


4.108.2
4746
εἰσὶ γὰρ οἱ Γελωνοὶ τὸ ἀρχαῖον Ἕλληνες , ἐκ τῶν δὲ ἐμπορίων ἐξαναστάντες οἴκησαν ἐν τοῖσι Βουδίνοισι ·
For the Geloni are by their origin Greeks, who left their trading ports to settle among the Budini;


4.108.2
4747
καὶ γλώσσῃ τὰ μὲν Σκυθικῇ , τὰ δὲ Ἑλληνικῇ χρέωνται .
and they speak a language half Greek and half Scythian.


4.109.1
4748
Βουδῖνοι δὲ οὐ τῇ αὐτῇ γλώσσῃ χρέωνται καὶ Γελωνοί , οὐδὲ δίαιτα ἡ αὐτή .
The Budini are indigenous; they are nomads, and the only people in these parts that eat fir-cones;


4.109.1
4749
οἱ μὲν γὰρ Βουδῖνοι ἐόντες αὐτόχθονες νομάδες τε εἰσὶ καὶ φθειροτραγέουσι μοῦνοι τῶν ταύτῃ , Γελωνοὶ δὲ γῆς τε ἐργάται καὶ σιτοφάγοι καὶ κήπους ἐκτημένοι , οὐδὲν τὴν ἰδέην ὅμοιοι οὐδὲ τὸ χρῶμα .
the Geloni are farmers, eating grain and cultivating gardens; they are altogether unlike the Budini in form and in coloring.


4.109.1
4750
ὑπὸ μέντοι Ἑλλήνων καλέονται καὶ οἱ Βουδῖνοι Γελωνοί , οὐκ ὀρθῶς καλεόμενοι .
Yet the Greeks call the Budini too Geloni; but this is wrong.


4.109.2
4751
ἡ δὲ χώρη σφέων πᾶσα ἐστὶ δασέα ἴδῃσι παντοίῃσι ·
Their whole country is thickly wooded with every kind of tree;


4.109.2
4752
ἐν δὲ τῇ ἴδῃ τῇ πλείστῃ ἐστὶ λίμνη μεγάλη τε καὶ πολλὴ καὶ ἕλος καὶ κάλαμος περὶ αὐτήν .
in the depth of the forest there is a great, wide lake and a marsh surrounded by reeds;


4.109.2
4753
ἐν δὲ ταύτῃ ἐνύδριες ἁλίσκονται καὶ κάστορες καὶ ἄλλα θηρία τετραγωνοπρόσωπα , τῶν τὰ δέρματα παρὰ τὰς σισύρνας παραρράπτεται , καὶ οἱ ὄρχιες αὐτοῖσι εἰσὶ χρήσιμοι ἐς ὑστερέων ἄκεσιν .
otter is trapped in it, and beaver, besides certain square-faced creatures whose skins are used to trim mantles, and their testicles are used by the people to heal sicknesses of the womb.


4.110.1
4754
Σαυροματέων δὲ πὲρι ὧδε λέγεται .
About the Sauromatae, the story is as follows.


4.110.1
4755
ὅτε Ἕλληνες Ἀμαζόσι ἐμαχέσαντο ( τὰς δὲ Ἀμαζόνας καλέουσι Σκύθαι Οἰόρπατα , δύναται δὲ τὸ οὔνομα τοῦτο κατὰ Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν ἀνδροκτόνοι ·
When the Greeks were at war with the Amazons (whom the Scythians call Oiorpata, a name signifying in our tongue killers of men, for in Scythian a man is “oior” and to kill is “pata”),


4.110.1
4756
οἰὸρ γὰρ καλέουσι ἄνδρα , τὸ δὲ πατὰ κτείνειν ) , τότε λόγος τοὺς Ἕλληνας νικήσαντας τῇ ἐπὶ Θερμώδοντι μάχη ἀποπλέειν ἄγοντας τρισὶ πλοίοισι τῶν Ἀμαζόνων ὅσας ἐδυνέατο ζωγρῆσαι , τὰς δὲ ἐν τῷ πελάγει ἐπιθεμένας ἐκκόψαι τοὺς ἄνδρας .
the story runs that after their victory on the Thermodon they sailed away carrying in three ships as many Amazons as they had been able to take alive; and out at sea the Amazons attacked the crews and killed them.


4.110.2
4757
πλοῖα δὲ οὐ γινώσκειν αὐτὰς οὐδὲ πηδαλίοισι χρᾶσθαι οὐδὲ ἱστίοισι οὐδὲ εἰρεσίῃ ·
But they knew nothing about ships, or how to use rudder or sail or oar;


4.110.2
4758
ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ ἐξέκοψαν τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐφέροντο κατὰ κῦμα καὶ ἄνεμον , καὶ ἀπικνέονται τῆς λίμνης τῆς Μαιήτιδος ἐπὶ Κρημνούς ·
and with the men dead, they were at the mercy of waves and winds, until they came to the Cliffs by the Maeetian lake;


4.110.2
4759
οἱ δὲ Κρημνοὶ εἰσὶ γῆς τῆς Σκυθέων τῶν ἐλευθέρων .
this place is in the country of the free Scythians.


4.110.2
4760
ἐνθαῦτα ἀποβᾶσαι ἀπὸ τῶν πλοίων αἱ Ἀμαζόνες ὁδοιπόρεον ἐς τὴν οἰκεομένην .
The Amazons landed there, and set out on their journey to the inhabited country,


4.110.2
4761
ἐντυχοῦσαι δὲ πρώτῳ ἱπποφορβίῳ τοῦτο διήρπασαν , καὶ ἐπὶ τούτων ἱππαζόμεναι ἐληίζοντο τὰ τῶν Σκυθέων .
 and seizing the first troop of horses they met, they mounted them and raided the Scythian lands.


4.111.1
4762
οἱ δὲ Σκύθαι οὐκ εἶχον συμβαλέσθαι τὸ πρῆγμα ·
The Scythians could not understand the business;


4.111.1
4763
οὔτε γὰρ φωνὴν οὔτε ἐσθῆτα οὔτε τὸ ἔθνος ἐγίνωσκον , ἀλλ’ ἐν θώματι ἦσαν ὁκόθεν ἔλθοιεν , ἐδόκεον δ’ αὐτὰς εἶναι ἄνδρας τὴν αὐτὴν ἡλικίην ἔχοντας , μάχην τε δὴ πρὸς αὐτὰς ἐποιεῦντο .
for they did not recognize the women's speech or their dress or their nation, but wondered where they had come from, and imagined them to be men all of the same age; and they met the Amazons in battle.


4.111.1
4764
ἐκ δὲ τῆς μάχης τῶν νεκρῶν ἐκράτησαν οἱ Σκύθαι , καὶ οὕτω ἔγνωσαν ἐούσας γυναῖκας .
The result of the fight was that the Scythians got possession of the dead, and so came to learn that their foes were women.


4.111.2
4765
βουλευομένοισι ὦν αὐτοῖσι ἔδοξε κτείνειν μὲν οὐδενὶ τρόπῳ ἔτι αὐτάς , ἑωυτῶν δὲ τοὺς νεωτάτους ἀποπέμψαι ἐς αὐτάς , πλῆθος εἰκάσαντας ὅσαι περ ἐκεῖναι ἦσαν τούτους δὲ στρατοπεδεύεσθαι πλησίον ἐκεινέων καὶ ποιέειν τὰ περ ἂν καὶ ἐκεῖναι ποιέωσι .
Therefore, after deliberation they resolved by no means to slay them as before,  but to send their youngest men to them, of a number corresponding (as they guessed) to the number of the women.


4.111.2
4766
ἢν δὲ αὐτοὺς διώκωσι , μάχεσθαι μὲν μή , ὑποφεύγειν δέ ·
They directed these youths to camp near the Amazons and to imitate all that they did; if the women pursued them, not to fight, but to flee;


4.111.2
4767
ἐπεὰν δὲ παύσωνται , ἐλθόντας αὖτις πλησίον στρατοπεδεύεσθαι .
and when the pursuit stopped, to return and camp near them.


4.111.2
4768
ταῦτα ἐβουλεύσαντο οἱ Σκύθαι βουλόμενοι ἐξ αὐτέων παῖδας ἐκγενήσεσθαι .
This was the plan of the Scythians, for they desired that children be born of the women.


4.111.2
4769
ἀποπεμφθέντες δὲ οἱ νεηνίσκοι ἐποίευν τὰ ἐντεταλμένα .
The young men who were sent did as they were directed.


4.112.1
4770
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἔμαθον αὐτοὺς αἱ Ἀμαζόνες ἐπ’ οὐδεμιῇ δηλήσι ἀπιγμένους , ἔων χαίρειν ·
When the Amazons perceived that the youths meant them no harm, they let them be;


4.112.1
4771
προσεχώρεον δὲ πλησιαιτέρω τὸ στρατόπεδον τῷ στρατοπέδῳ ἐπ’ ἡμέρῃ ἑκάστη .
but every day the two camps drew nearer to each other.


4.112.1
4772
εἶχον δὲ οὐδὲν οὐδ’ οἱ νεηνίσκοι , ὥσπερ αἱ Ἀμαζόνες , εἰ μὴ τὰ ὅπλα καὶ τοὺς ἵππους , ἀλλὰ ζόην ἔζωον τὴν αὐτὴν ἐκείνῃσι , θηρεύοντές τε καὶ ληιζόμενοι .
Now the young men, like the Amazons, had nothing but their arms and their horses, and lived as did the women, by hunting and plunder.


4.113.1
4773
ἐποίευν δὲ αἱ Ἀμαζόνες ἐς τὴν μεσαμβρίην τοιόνδε ·
At midday the Amazons would do the following.


4.113.1
4774
ἐγίνοντο σποράδες κατὰ μίαν τε καὶ δύο , πρόσω δὴ ἀπ’ ἀλληλέων ἐς εὐμαρείην ἀποσκιδνάμεναι .
They would scatter and go apart from each other singly or in pairs, roaming apart for greater comfort.


4.113.1
4775
μαθόντες δὲ καὶ οἱ Σκύθαι ἐποίευν τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο .
The Scythians noticed this and did likewise;


4.113.1
4776
καί τις μουνωθεισέων τινὶ αὐτέων ἐνεχρίμπτετο , καὶ ἡ Ἀμαζὼν οὐκ ἀπωθέετο ἀλλὰ περιεῖδε χρήσασθαι .
and as the women wandered alone, a young man laid hold of one of them, and the woman did not resist but let him do his will;


4.113.2
4777
καὶ φωνῆσαι μὲν οὐκ εἶχε , οὐ γὰρ συνίεσαν ἀλλήλων , τῇ δὲ χειρὶ ἔφραζε ἐς τὴν ὑστεραίην ἐλθεῖν ἐς τ- αὐτὸ χωρίον καὶ ἕτερον ἄγειν , σημαίνουσα δύο γενέσθαι καὶ αὐτὴ ἑτέρην ἄξειν .
and since they did not understand each other's speech and she could not speak to him, she signed with her hand that he should come the next day to the same place and bring another youth with him (showing by signs that there should be two), and she would bring another woman with her.


4.113.3
4778
ὁ δὲ νεηνίσκος , ἐπεὶ ἀπῆλθε , ἔλεξε ταῦτα πρὸς τοὺς λοιπούς ·
The youth went away and told his comrades;


4.113.3
4779
τῇ δὲ δευτεραίῃ ἦλθε ἐς τὸ χωρίον αὐτός τε οὗτος καὶ ἕτερον ἦγε , καὶ τὴν Ἀμαζόνα εὗρε δευτέρην αὐτὴν ὑπομένουσαν .
and the next day he came himself with another to the place, where he found the Amazon and another with her awaiting them.


4.113.3
4780
οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ νεηνίσκοι ὡς ἐπύθοντο ταῦτα , καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐκτιλώσαντο τὰς λοιπὰς τῶν Ἀμαζόνων .
When the rest of the young men learned of this, they had intercourse with the rest of the Amazons.


4.114.1
4781
μετὰ δὲ συμμίξαντες τὰ στρατόπεδα οἴκεον ὁμοῦ , γυναῖκα ἔχων ἕκαστος ταύτην τῇ τὸ πρῶτον συνεμίχθη .
Presently they joined their camps and lived together, each man having for his wife the woman with whom he had had intercourse at first.


4.114.1
4782
τὴν δὲ φωνὴν τὴν μὲν τῶν γυναικῶν οἱ ἄνδρες οὐκ ἐδυνέατο μαθεῖν , τὴν δὲ τῶν ἀνδρῶν αἱ γυναῖκες συνέλαβον .
Now the men could not learn the women's language, but the women mastered the speech of the men;


4.114.2
4783
ἐπεὶ δὲ συνῆκαν ἀλλήλων , ἔλεξαν πρὸς τὰς Ἀμαζόνας τάδε οἱ ἄνδρες .
and when they understood each other, the men said to the Amazons,


4.114.2
4784
" ἡμῖν εἰσὶ μὲν τοκέες , εἰσὶ δὲ κτήσιες ·
“We have parents and possessions;


4.114.2
4785
νῦν ὦν μηκέτι πλεῦνα χρόνον ζόην τοιήνδε ἔχωμεν , ἀλλ’ ἀπελθόντες ἐς τὸ πλῆθος διαιτώμεθα .
therefore, let us no longer live as we do, but return to our people and be with them;


4.114.2
4786
γυναῖκας δὲ ἕξομεν ὑμέας καὶ οὐδαμὰς ἄλλας " .
and we will still have you, and no others, for our wives.”


4.114.2
4787
αἳ δὲ πρὸς ταῦτα ἔλεξαν τάδε .
To this the women replied:


4.114.3
4788
" ἡμεῖς οὐκ ἂν δυναίμεθα οἰκέειν μετὰ τῶν ὑμετερέων γυναικῶν ·
“We could not live with your women;


4.114.3
4789
οὐ γὰρ τὰ αὐτὰ νόμαια ἡμῖν τε κ- ἐκείνῃσι ἐστί .
for we and they do not have the same customs.


4.114.3
4790
ἡμεῖς μὲν τοξεύομέν τε καὶ ἀκοντίζομεν καὶ ἱππαζόμεθα , ἔργα δὲ γυναικήια οὐκ ἐμάθομεν ·
We shoot the bow and throw the javelin and ride, but have never learned women's work;


4.114.3
4791
αἱ δὲ ὑμέτεραι γυναῖκες τούτων μὲν οὐδὲν τῶν ἡμεῖς κατελέξαμεν ποιεῦσι , ἔργα δὲ γυναικήια ἐργάζονται μένουσαι ἐν τῇσι ἁμάξῃσι , οὔτ’ ἐπὶ θήρην ἰοῦσαι οὔτε ἄλλῃ οὐδαμῇ .
and your women do none of the things of which we speak, but stay in their wagons and do women's work, and do not go out hunting or anywhere else.


4.114.4
4792
οὐκ ἂν ὦν δυναίμεθα ἐκείνῃσι συμφέρεσθαι .
So we could never agree with them.


4.114.4
4793
ἀλλ’ εἰ βούλεσθε γυναῖκας ἔχειν ἡμέας καὶ δοκέειν εἶναι δίκαιοι , ἐλθόντες παρὰ τοὺς τοκέας ἀπολάχετε τῶν κτημάτων τὸ μέρος , καὶ ἔπειτα ἐλθόντες οἰκέωμεν ἐπὶ ἡμέων αὐτῶν " .
If you want to keep us for wives and to have the name of fair men, go to your parents and let them give you the allotted share of their possessions, and after that let us go and live by ourselves.”


4.114.4
4794
ἐπείθοντο καὶ ἐποίησαν ταῦτα οἱ νεηνίσκοι .
The young men agreed and did this.


4.115.1
4795
ἐπείτε δὲ ἀπολαχόντες τῶν κτημάτων τὸ ἐπιβάλλον ἦλθον ὀπίσω παρὰ τὰς Ἀμαζόνας , ἔλεξαν αἱ γυναῖκες πρὸς αὐτοὺς τάδε .
So when they had been given the allotted share of possessions that fell to them, and returned to the Amazons, the women said to them:


4.115.2
4796
" ἡμέας ἔχει φόβος τε καὶ δέος ὅκως χρὴ οἰκέειν ἐν τῷδε τῷ χώρῳ , τοῦτο μὲν ὑμέας ἀποστερησάσας πατέρων , τοῦτο δὲ γῆν τὴν ὑμετέρην δηλησαμένας πολλά .
“We are worried and frightened how we are to live in this country after depriving you of your fathers and doing a lot of harm to your land.


4.115.3
4797
ἀλλ’ ἐπείτε ἀξιοῦτε ἡμέας γυναῖκας ἔχειν , τάδε ποιέετε ἅμα ἡμῖν ·
Since you propose to have us for wives, do this with us:


4.115.3
4798
φέρετε ἐξαναστέωμεν ἐκ τῆς γῆς τῆσδε καὶ περήσαντες Τάναιν ποταμὸν οἰκέωμεν " .
come, let us leave this country and live across the Tanaïs river.”


4.116.1
4799
ἐπείθοντο καὶ ταῦτα οἱ νεηνίσκοι , διαβάντες δὲ τὸν Τάναϊν ὁδοιπόρεον πρὸς ἥλιον ἀνίσχοντα τριῶν μὲν ἡμερέων ἀπὸ τοῦ Τανάιδος ὁδόν , τριῶν δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς λίμνης τῆς Μαιήτιδος πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον .
To this too the youths agreed; and crossing the Tanaïs, they went a three days' journey east from the river,


4.116.1
4800
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ ἐς τοῦτον τὸν χῶρον ἐν τῷ νυν κατοίκηνται , οἴκησαν τοῦτον .
and a three days' journey north from lake Maeetis; and when they came to the region in which they now live, they settled there.


4.116.2
4801
καὶ διαίτῃ ἀπὸ τούτου χρὲωνται τῇ παλαιῇ τῶν Σαυροματέων αἱ γυναῖκες , καὶ ἐπὶ θήρην ἐπ’ ἵππων ἐκφοιτῶσαι ἅμα τοῖσι ἀνδράσι καὶ χωρὶς τῶν ἀνδρῶν , καὶ ἐς πόλεμον φοιτῶσαι καὶ στολὴν τὴν αὐτὴν τοῖσι ἀνδράσι φορέουσαι .
Ever since then the women of the Sauromatae have followed their ancient ways; they ride out hunting, with their men or without them; they go to war, and dress the same as the men.


4.117.1
4802
φωνῇ δὲ οἱ Σαυρομάται νομίζουσι Σκυθικῇ , σολοικίζοντες αὐτῇ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀρχαίου , ἐπεὶ οὐ χρηστῶς ἐξέμαθον αὐτὴν αἱ Ἀμαζόνες .
The language of the Sauromatae is Scythian, but not spoken in its ancient purity,


4.117.1
4803
τὰ περὶ γάμων δὲ ὧδέ σφι διακέεται .
since the Amazons never learned it correctly.


4.117.1
4804
οὐ γαμὲεται παρθένος οὐδεμία πρὶν ἂν τῶν πολεμίων ἄνδρα ἀποκτείνῃ ·
In regard to marriage, it is the custom that no maiden weds until she has killed a man of the enemy;


4.117.1
4805
αἳ δὲ τινὲς αὐτέων καὶ τελευτῶσι γηραιαὶ πρὶν γήμασθαι , οὐ δυνάμεναι τὸν νόμον ἐκπλῆσαι ,
and some of them grow old and die unmarried, because they cannot fulfill the law.


4.118.1
4806
ἐπὶ τούτων ὦν τῶν καταλεχθέντων ἐθνέων τοὺς βασιλέας ἁλισμένους ἀπικόμενος τῶν Σκυθέων οἱ ἄγγελοι ἔλεγον ἐκδιδάσκοντες ὡς ὁ Πέρσης , ἐπειδή οἱ τὰ ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ τῇ ἑτέρῃ πάντα κατέστραπται , γέφυραν ζεύξας ἐπὶ τῷ αὐχένι τοῦ Βοσπόρου διαβέβηκε ἐς τήνδε τὴν ἤπειρον , διαβὰς δὲ καὶ καταστρεψάμενος Θρήικας γεφυροῖ ποταμὸν Ἴστρον , βουλόμενος καὶ τάδε πάντα ὑπ’ ἑωυτῷ ποιήσασθαι .
The kings of the aforesaid nations having gathered, then, the Scythian messengers came and laid everything before them, explaining how the Persian, now that the whole of the other continent was subject to him, had crossed over to their continent by a bridge thrown across the neck of the  Bosporus, and how having crossed it and subjugated the Thracians he was now bridging the Ister, so as to make that whole region subject to him like the others.


4.118.2
4807
" ὑμεῖς ὦν μηδενὶ τρόπῳ ἐκ τοῦ μέσου κατήμενοι περιίδητε ἡμέας διαφθαρέντας , ἀλλὰ τ- αὐτὸ νοήσαντες ἀντιάζωμεν τὸν ἐπιόντα .
“By no means stand aside and let us be destroyed,” they said;


4.118.2
4808
οὔκων ποιήσετε ταῦτα ;
“rather, let us unite and oppose this invader.


4.118.2
4809
ἡμεῖς μὲν πιεζόμενοι ἢ ἐκλείψομεν τὴν χώρην ἢ μένοντες ὁμολογίῃ χρησόμεθα .
If you will not, then we shall either be driven out of our country or stay and make terms.


4.118.3
4810
τί γὰρ πάθωμεν μὴ βουλομένων ὑμέων τιμωρέειν ;
For what is to become of us if you will not help us?


4.118.3
4811
ὑμῖν δὲ οὐδὲν ἐπὶ τούτῳ ἔσται ἐλαφρότερον .
And afterward it will not be easy for you, either;


4.118.3
4812
ἥκει γὰρ ὁ Πέρσης οὐδέν τι μᾶλλον ἐπ’ ἡμέας ἢ οὐ καὶ ἐπ’ ὑμέας , οὐδέ οἱ καταχρήσει ἡμέας καταστρεψαμένῳ ὑμέων ἀπέχεσθαι .
for the Persian has come to attack you no less than us, and when he has subjugated us he will not be content to leave you alone.


4.118.4
4813
μέγα δὲ ὑμῖν λόγων τῶνδε μαρτύριον ἐρέομεν .
We will give you a convincing proof of what we say:


4.118.4
4814
εἰ γὰρ ἐπ’ ἡμέας μούνους ἐστρατηλάτεε ὁ Πέρσης τίσασθαι τῆς πρόσθε δουλοσύνης βουλόμενος , χρῆν αὐτὸν πάντων τῶν ἄλλων ἀπεχόμενον ἰέναι οὕτω ἐπὶ τὴν ἡμετέρην , καὶ ἂν ἐδήλου πᾶσι ὡς ἐπὶ Σκύθας ἐλαύνει καὶ οὐκ ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄλλους .
if indeed the Persian were marching against us alone, wanting vengeance for our former enslavement of his country, he ought to leave others alone and make straight for us, and would show everyone that Scythia and no other country was his goal.


4.118.5
4815
νῦν δὲ ἐπείτε τάχιστα διέβη ἐς τήνδε τὴν ἤπειρον , τοὺς αἰεὶ ἐμποδὼν γινομένους ἡμεροῦται πάντας ·
But as it is, from the day he crossed over to this continent, he has been taming all that come in his way,


4.118.5
4816
τούς τε δὴ ἄλλους ἔχει ὑπ’ ἑωυτῷ Θρήικας καὶ δὴ καὶ τοὺς ἡμῖν ἐόντας πλησιοχώρους Γέτας " .
and he holds in subjection not only the rest of Thrace, but also our neighbors the Getae.”


4.119.1
4817
ταῦτα Σκυθέων ἐπαγγελλομένων ἐβουλεύοντο οἱ βασιλέες οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐθνέων ἥκοντες , καί σφεων ἐσχίσθησαν αἱ γνῶμαι ·
After the Scythians had made this speech, the kings who had come from the nations deliberated, and their opinions were divided.


4.119.1
4818
ὁ μὲν γὰρ Γελωνὸς καὶ ὁ Βουδῖνος καὶ ὁ Σαυρομάτης κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ γενόμενοι ὑπεδέκοντο Σκύθῃσι τιμωρήσειν , ὁ δὲ Ἀγάθυρσος καὶ Νευρὸς καὶ Ἀνδροφάγος καὶ οἱ τῶν Μελαγχλαίνων καὶ Ταύρων τάδε Σκύθῃσι ὑπεκρίναντο .
The kings of the Geloni and the Budini and the Sauromatae were of one mind and promised to help the Scythians; but the kings of the Agathyrsi and Neuri and Maneaters and Black-cloaks and Tauri gave this answer to the messengers:


4.119.2
4819
" εἰ μὲν μὴ ὑμεῖς ἔατε οἱ πρότεροι ἀδικήσαντες Πέρσας καὶ ἄρξαντες πολέμου , τούτων δεόμενοι τῶν νῦν δέεσθε λέγειν τε ἂν ἐφαίνεσθε ἡμῖν ὀρθά , καὶ ἡμεῖς ὑπακούσαντες τ- αὐτὸ ἂν ὑμῖν ἐπρήσσομεν .
“Had it not been you who wronged the Persians first and began the war, what you now ask would seem to us right, and we would listen and act together with you.


4.119.3
4820
νῦν δὲ ὑμεῖς τε ἐς τὴν ἐκείνων ἐσβαλόντες γῆν ἄνευ ἡμέων ἐπεκρατέετε Περσέων ὅσον χρόνον ὑμῖν ὁ θεὸς παρεδίδου , καὶ ἐκεῖνοι , ἐπεί σφεας ὡυτὸς θεὸς ἐγείρει , τὴν ὁμοίην ὑμῖν ἀποδιδοῦσι .
But as it is, you invaded their land without us and ruled the Persians for as long as god granted; and the Persians, urged on by the same god, are only repaying you in kind.


4.119.4
4821
ἡμεῖς δὲ οὔτε τι τότε ἠδικήσαμεν τοὺς ἄνδρας τούτους οὐδὲν οὔτε νῦν πρότεροι πειρησόμεθα ἀδικέειν .
But we did these men no wrong at that former time, nor do we intend now to wrong them first;


4.119.4
4822
ἢν μέντοι ἐπίῃ καὶ τὴν ἡμετέρην ἄρξῃ τε ἀδικέων , καὶ ἡμεῖς οὐ πεισόμεθα ,μέχρι δὲ τοῦτο ἴδωμεν , μενέομεν παρ’ ἡμῖν αὐτοῖσι ·
but if the Persian comes against our land too and begins the wrong-doing, then we will not accept it, either; but until we see that, we shall keep to ourselves.


4.119.4
4823
ἥκειν γὰρ δοκέομεν οὐκ ἐπ’ ἡμέας Πέρσας ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τοὺς αἰτίους τῆς ἀδικίης γενομὲνους " .
For in our judgment the Persians have not come for us but for those who were the agents of wrong.”


4.120.1
4824
ταῦτα ὡς ἀπενειχθέντα ἐπύθοντο οἱ Σκύθαι , ἐβουλεύοντο ἰθυμαχίην μὲν μηδεμίαν ποιέεσθαι ἐκ τοῦ ἐμφανέος , ὅτε δὴ σφι οὗτοι γε σύμμαχοι οὐ προσεγίνοντο , ὑπεξιόντες δὲ καὶ ὑπεξελαύνοντες τὰ φρέατα τὰ παρεξίοιεν αὐτοὶ καὶ τὰς κρήνας συγχοῦν , τὴν ποίην τε ἐκ τῆς γῆς ἐκτρίβειν , διχοῦ σφέας διελόντες .
When this answer was brought back to the Scythians, they determined not to meet their enemy in the open field, since they could not get the allies that they sought, but rather to fall back driving off their herds, choking the wells and springs on their way and destroying the grass from the earth; and they divided themselves into two companies.


4.120.2
4825
καὶ πρὸς μὲν τὴν μίαν τῶν μοιρέων , τῆς ἐβασίλευε Σκώπασις , προσχωρέειν Σαυρομάτας ·
It was their decision that to one of their divisions, which Scopasis ruled, the Sauromatae be added;


4.120.2
4826
τούτους μὲν δὴ ὑπάγειν , ἢν ἐπὶ τοῦτο τράπηται ὁ Πέρσης ἰθὺ Τανάιδος ποταμοῦ παρὰ τὴν Μαιῆτιν λίμνην ὑποφεύγοντας , ἀπελαύνοντος τε τοῦ Πέρσεω ἐπιόντας διώκειν .
if the Persian marched that way, this group was to retire before him and fall back toward the Tanaïs river, by the Maeetian lake, and if the Persian turned to go back, then they were to pursue and attack him.


4.120.2
4827
αὕτη μέν σφι μία ἦν μοῖρα τῆς βασιληίης , τεταγμένη ταύτην τὴν ὁδὸν ἥ περ εἴρηται ·
This was one of the divisions of the royal people, and it was appointed to follow this course;


4.120.3
4828
τὰς δὲ δύο τῶν βασιληίων , τήν τε μεγάλην τῆς ἦρχε Ἰδάνθυρσος καὶ τὴν τρίτην τῆς ἐβασίλευε Τάξακις , συνελθούσας ἐς τ- αὐτὸ καὶ Γελωνῶν τε καὶ Βουδίνων προσγενομένων , ἡμέρης καὶ τούτους ὁδῶ προέχοντας τῶν Περσέων ὑπεξάγειν , ὑπιόντας τε καὶ ποιεῦντας τὰ βεβουλευμένα ·
their two other divisions, namely, the greater whose ruler was Idanthyrsus, and the third whose king was Taxakis, were to unite, and taking with them also the Geloni and Budini, to draw off like the others at the Persian approach, always keeping one day's march ahead of the enemy, avoiding a confrontation and doing what had been determined.


4.120.4
4829
πρῶτα μέν νυν ὑπάγειν σφέας ἰθὺ τῶν χωρέων τῶν ἀπειπαμένων τὴν σφετέρην συμμαχίην , ἵνα καὶ τούτους ἐκπολεμώσωσι ·
First, then, they were to retreat in a straight line toward the countries which refused their alliance, so as to involve these, too, in the war;


4.120.4
4830
εἰ γὰρ μὴ ἑκόντες γε ὑπέδυσαν τὸν πόλεμον τὸν πρὸς Πέρσας , ἀλλ’ ἀέκοντας ἐκπολεμώσειν ·
for if they did not of their own accord support the war against the Persians, they must be involved against their will;


4.120.4
4831
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο ὑποστρέφειν ἐς τὴν σφετέρην καὶ ἐπιχειρέειν , ἢν δὴ βουλευομένοισι δοκέῃ .
and after that, the division was to turn back to its own country, and attack the enemy, if in deliberation they thought this best.


4.121.1
4832
ταῦτα οἱ Σκύθαι βουλευσάμενοι ὑπηντίαζον τὴν Δαρείου στρατιήν , προδρόμους ἀποστείλαντες τῶν ἱππέων τοὺς ἀρίστους .
Determined on this plan, the Scythians sent an advance guard of their best horsemen to meet Darius' army.


4.121.1
4833
τὰς δὲ ἁμάξας ἐν τῇσι σφι διαιτᾶτο τὰ τέκνα καὶ αἱ γυναῖκες πάσας καὶ τὰ πρόβατα πάντα , πλὴν ὅσα σφι ἐς φορβὴν ἱκανὰ ἦν τοσαῦτα ὑπολιπόμενοι , τὰ ἄλλα ἅμα τῇσι ἁμάξῃσι προέπεμψαν , ἐντειλάμενοι αἰεὶ τὸ πρὸς βορέω ἐλαύνειν .
As for the wagons in which their children and wives lived, all these they sent forward, with instructions to drive always northward; and they sent all their flocks with the wagons, keeping none back except what was required for their food.


4.122.1
4834
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ προεκομίζετο .
After this convoy was first sent on its way,


4.122.1
4835
τῶν δὲ Σκυθέων οἱ πρόδρομοι ὡς εὗρον τοὺς Πέρσας ὅσον τε τριῶν ἡμερέων ὁδὸν ἀπέχοντας ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἴστρου , οὗτοι μὲν τούτους εὑρόντες , ἡμέρης ὁδῷ προέχοντες , ἐστρατοπεδεύοντο τὰ ἐκ τῆς γῆς φυόμενα λεαίνοντες , οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ὡς εἶδον ἐπιφανεῖσαν τῶν Σκυθέων τὴν ἵππον , ἐπήισαν κατὰ στίβον αἰεὶ ὑπαγόντων ·
the advance guard of the Scythians found the Persians about a three days' march distant from the Ister; and having found them they camped a day's march ahead of the enemy and set about scorching the earth of all living things.


4.122.2
4836
καὶ ἔπειτα ( πρὸς γὰρ τὴν μίαν τῶν μοιρέων ἴθυσαν ) οἱ Πέρσαι ἐδίωκον πρὸς ἠῶ τε καὶ ἰθὺ Τανάιδος .
When the Persians saw the Scythian cavalry appear, they marched on its track, the horsemen always withdrawing before them; and then, making for the one Scythian division, the Persians held on in pursuit toward the east and the  Tanaïs river;


4.122.3
4837
διαβάντων δὲ τούτων τὸν Τάναιν ποταμὸν οἱ Πέρσαι ἐπιδιαβάντες ἐδίωκον , ἐς ὃ τῶν Σαυροματέων τὴν χώρην διεξελθόντες ἀπίκοντο ἐς τὴν τῶν Βουδίνων .
when the horsemen crossed this, the Persians crossed also, and pursued until they had marched through the land of the Sauromatae to the land of the Budini.


4.123.1
4838
ὅσον μὲν δὴ χρόνον οἱ Πέρσαι ἤισαν διὰ τῆς Σκυθικῆς καὶ τῆς Σαυρομάτιδος χώρης , οἳ δὲ εἶχον οὐδὲν σίνεσθαι ἅτε τῆς χώρης ἐούσης χέρσου ·
As long as the Persians were traversing the Scythian and Sauromatic territory there was nothing for them to harm, as the land was dry and barren.


4.123.1
4839
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐς τὴν τῶν Βουδίνων χώρην ἐσέβαλλον , ἐνθαῦτα δὴ ἐντυχόντες τῷ ξυλίνῳ τείχεϊ , ἐκλελοιπότων τῶν Βουδίνων καὶ κεκενωμένου τοῦ τείχεος πάντων , ἐνέπρησαν αὐτό .
But when they entered the country of the Budini, they found themselves before the wooden-walled town; the Budini had abandoned it and left nothing in it, and the Persians burnt the town.


4.123.2
4840
τοῦτο δὲ ποιήσαντες εἵποντο αἰεὶ τὸ πρόσω κατὰ στίβον , ἐς ὃ διεξελθόντες ταύτην ἐς τὴν ἔρημον ἀπίκοντο .
Then going forward still on the horsemen's track, they passed through this country into desolation,


4.123.2
4841
ἡ δὲ ἔρημος αὕτη ὑπὸ οὐδαμῶν νέμεται ἀνδρῶν , κέεται δὲ ὑπὲρ τῆς Βουδίνων χώρης ἐοῦσα πλῆθος ἑπτὰ ἡμερέων ὁδοῦ .
which is inhabited by no one; it lies to the north of the Budini and its breadth is a seven days' march.


4.123.3
4842
ὑπὲρ δὲ τῆς ἐρήμου Θυσσαγέται οἰκέουσι , ποταμοὶ δὲ ἐξ αὐτῶν τέσσερες μεγάλοι ῥέοντες διὰ Μαιητέων ἐκδιδοῦσι ἐς τὴν λίμνην τὴν καλεομένην Μαιῆτιν , τοῖσι οὐνόματα κέεται τάδε , Λύκος Ὄαρος Τάναις Σύργις .
Beyond this desolation live the Thyssagetae; four great rivers flow from their country through the land of the Maeetians, and issue into the lake called the Maeetian; their names are Lycus,  Oarus,  Tanaïs, Syrgis.


4.124.1
4843
ἐπεὶ ὦν ὁ Δαρεῖος ἦλθε ἐς τὴν ἔρημον , παυσάμενος τοῦ δρόμου ἵδρυσε τὴν στρατιὴν ἐπὶ ποταμῷ Ὀάρῳ .
When Darius came into the desolate country, he halted in his pursuit and camped on the Oarus river,


4.124.1
4844
τοῦτο δὲ ποιήσας ὀκτὼ τείχεα ἐτείχεε μεγάλα , ἴσον ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων ἀπέχοντα , σταδίους ὡς ἑξήκοντα μάλιστά κῃ ·
where he built eight great forts, all at an equal distance of about seven miles from one another.


4.124.1
4845
τῶν ἔτι ἐς ἐμὲ τὰ ἐρείπια σόα ἦν .
the ruins of which were standing even in my lifetime,


4.124.2
4846
ἐν ᾧ δὲ οὗτος πρὸς ταῦτα ἐτράπετο , οἱ διωκόμενοι Σκύθαι περιελθόντες τὰ κατύπερθε ὑπέστρεφον ἐς τὴν Σκυθικήν .
While he was occupied with these, the Scythians whom he was pursuing doubled north and turned back into Scythia.


4.124.2
4847
ἀφανισθέντων δὲ τούτων τὸ παράπαν , ὡς οὐκέτι ἐφαντάζοντό σφι , οὕτω δὴ ὁ Δαρεῖος τείχεα μὲν ἐκεῖνα ἡμίεργα μετῆκε , αὐτὸς δὲ ὑποστρέψας ἤιε πρὸς ἑσπέρην , δοκέων τούτους τε πάντας τοὺς Σκύθας εἶναι καὶ πρὸς ἑσπέρην σφέας φεύγειν .
Then, when they had altogether vanished and were no longer within the Persians' sight, Darius left those forts only half finished, and he too doubled about and marched west, thinking that those Scythians were the whole army, and that they were fleeing toward the west.


4.125.1
4848
ἐλαύνων δὲ τὴν ταχίστην τὸν στρατὸν ὡς ἐς τὴν Σκυθικὴν ἀπίκετο , ἐνέκυρσε ἀμφοτέρῃσι τῇσι μοίρῃσι τῶν Σκυθέων , ἐντυχὼν δὲ ἐδίωκε ὑπεκφέροντας ἡμέρης ὁδῷ .
But when he came by forced marches into  Scythia, he met the two divisions of the Scythians, and pursued them, who always kept a day's march away from him;


4.125.2
4849
καὶ οὐ γὰρ ἀνίει ἐπιὼν ὁ Δαρεῖος , οἱ Σκύθαι κατὰ τὰ βεβουλευμένα ὑπέφευγον ἐς τῶν ἀπειπαμένων τὴν σφετέρην συμμαχίην , πρώτην δὲ ἐς τῶν Μελαγχλαίνων τὴν γῆν .
and because Darius would not stop pursuing them, the Scythians, according to the plan they had made, fell back before him to the countries of those who had refused their alliance, to the land of the Black-cloaks first.


4.125.3
4850
ὡς δὲ ἐσβαλόντες τούτους ἐτάραξαν οἵ τε Σκύθαι καὶ οἱ Πέρσαι , κατηγέοντο οἱ Σκύθαι ἐς τῶν Ἀνδροφάγων τοὺς χώρους ·
The Scythians and Persians burst into their land, agitating them;


4.125.3
4851
ταραχθέντων δὲ καὶ τούτων ὑπῆγον ἐπὶ τὴν Νευρίδα ·
and from there, the Scythians led the Persians into the country of the Man-eaters, agitating them too;


4.125.3
4852
ταρασσομένων δὲ καὶ τούτων ἤισαν ὑποφεύγοντες οἱ Σκύθαι ἐς τοὺς Ἀγαθύρσους .
from there, they drew off into the country of the Neuri and, agitating them also, fled to the Agathyrsi.


4.125.4
4853
Ἀγαθύρσοι δὲ ὁρέοντες καὶ τοὺς ὁμούρους φεύγοντας ὑπὸ Σκυθέων καὶ τεταραγμένους , πρὶν ἤ σφι ἐμβαλεῖν τοὺς Σκύθας πέμψαντες κήρυκα ἀπηγόρευον Σκύθῃσι μὴ ἐπιβαίνειν τῶν σφετέρων οὔρων , προλέγοντες ὡς εἰ πειρήσονται ἐσβαλόντες , σφίσι πρῶτα διαμαχήσονται .
But the Agathyrsi, seeing their neighbors fleeing panic-stricken at the Scythians' approach, before the Scythians could break into their land sent a herald to forbid them to set foot across their borders, warning the Scythians that if they tried to break through they would have to fight with the Agathyrsi first.


4.125.5
4854
Ἀγάθυρσοι μὲν προείπαντες ταῦτα ἐβοήθεον ἐπὶ τοὺς οὔρους , ἐρύκειν ἐν νόῳ ἔχοντες τοὺς ἐπιόντας ·
With this warning, the Agathyrsi mustered on their borders, intending to stop the invaders.


4.125.5
4855
Μελάγχλαινοι δὲ καὶ Ἀνδροφάγοι καὶ Νευροὶ ἐσβαλόντων τῶν Περσέων ἅμα Σκύθησι οὔτε πρὸς ἀλκὴν ἐτράποντο ἐπιλαθόμενοί τε τῆς ἀπειλῆς ἔφευγον αἰεὶ τὸ πρὸς βορέω ἐς τὴν ἔρημον τεταραγμένοι .
When the Persians and the Scythians broke into their lands, the Blackcloaks and Man-eaters and Neuri put up no resistance, but forgot their threats and fled panic-stricken north into the desolate country.


4.125.6
4856
οἱ δὲ Σκύθαι ἐς μὲν τοὺς Ἀγαθύρσους οὐκέτι ἀπείπαντας ἀπικνέοντο , οἳ δὲ ἐκ τῆς Νευρίδος χώρης ἐς τὴν σφετέρην κατηγέοντο τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι .
But warned off by the Agathyrsi, the Scythians made no second attempt on that country, but led the Persians from the lands of the Neuri into  Scythia.


4.126.1
4857
ὡς δὲ πολλὸν τοῦτο ἐγίνετο καὶ οὐκ ἐπαύετο , πέμψας Δαρεῖος ἱππέα παρὰ τὸν Σκυθέων βασιλέα Ἰδάνθυρσον ἔλεγε τάδε .
As this went on for a long time and did not stop, Darius sent a horseman to Idanthyrsus the Scythian king, with this message:


4.126.1
4858
" δαιμόνιε ἀνδρῶν , τί φεύγεις αἰεί , ἐξεόν τοι τῶνδε τὰ ἕτερα ποιέειν ;
“You crazy man, why do you always run, when you can do otherwise?


4.126.1
4859
εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἀξιόχρεος δοκέεις εἶναι σεωυτῷ τοῖσι ἐμοῖσι πρήγμασι ἀντιωθῆναι , σὺ δὲ τάς τε καὶ παυσάμενος πλάνης μάχεσθαι ·
If you believe yourself strong enough to withstand my power, stand and fight and stop running;


4.126.1
4860
εἰ δὲ συγγινώσκεαι εἶναι ἥσσων , σὺ δὲ καὶ οὕτω παυσάμενος τοῦ δρόμου δεσπότῃ τῷ σῷ δῶρα φέρων γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ ἐλθὲ ἐς λόγους " .
but if you know you are the weaker, then stop running like this and come to terms with your master, bringing gifts of earth and water.”


4.127.1
4861
πρὸς ταῦτα ὁ Σκυθέων βασιλεὺς Ἰδάνθυρσος λέγει τάδε .
Idanthyrsus the Scythian king replied:


4.127.1
4862
" οὕτω τὸ ἐμὸν ἔχει , ὦ Πέρσα .
“It is like this with me, Persian:


4.127.1
4863
ἐγὼ οὐδένα κω ἀνθρώπων δείσας ἔφυγον οὔτε πρότερον οὔτε νῦν σὲ φεύγω , οὐδέ τι νεώτερον εἰμὶ ποιήσας νῦν ἢ καὶ ἐν εἰρήνη ἐώθεα ποιέειν .
I never ran from any man before out of fear, and I am not running from you now; I am not doing any differently now than I am used to doing in time of peace, too.


4.127.2
4864
ὅ τι δὲ οὐκ αὐτίκα μάχομαι τοι , ἐγὼ καὶ τοῦτο σημανέω .
As to why I do not fight with you at once, I will tell you why.


4.127.2
4865
ἡμῖν οὔτε ἄστεα οὔτε γῆ πεφυτευμένη ἐστί , τῶν πέρι δείσαντες μὴ ἁλῷ , ἢ καρῇ ταχύτερον ἂν ὑμῖν συμμίσγοιμεν ἐς μάχην .
We Scythians have no towns or cultivated land, out of fear for which, that the one might be taken or the other wasted, we would engage you sooner in battle.


4.127.2
4866
εἰ δὲ δέοι πάντως ἐς τοῦτο κατὰ τάχος ἀπικνέεσθαι , τυγχάνουσι ἡμῖν ἐόντες τάφοι πατρώιοι ·
But if all you want is to come to that quickly, we have the graves of our fathers.


4.127.3
4867
φέρετε , τούτους ἀνευρόντες συγχέειν πειρᾶσθε αὐτούς , καὶ γνώσεσθε τότε εἴτε ὑμῖν μαχησόμεθα περὶ τῶν τάφων εἴτε καὶ οὐ μαχησόμεθα .
Come on, find these and try to destroy them: you shall know then whether we will fight you for the graves or whether we will not fight.


4.127.3
4868
πρότερον δέ , ἢν μὴ ἡμέας λόγος αἱρέῃ , οὐ συμμίξομεν τοι .
Until then, unless we have reason, we will not engage with you.


4.127.4
4869
ἀμφὶ μὲν μάχῃ τοσαῦτα εἰρήσθω , δεσπότας δὲ ἐμοὺς ἐγὼ Δία τε νομίζω τὸν ἐμὸν πρόγονον καὶ Ἱστίην τὴν Σκυθέων βασίλειαν μούνους εἶναι .
As to fighting, enough; as to masters, I acknowledge Zeus my forefather and Hestia queen of the Scythians only.


4.127.4
4870
σοὶ δὲ ἀντὶ μὲν δώρων γῆς τε καὶ ὕδατος δῶρα πέμψω τοιαῦτα οἷα σοὶ πρέπει ἐλθεῖν , ἀντὶ δὲ τοῦ ὅτι δεσπότης ἔφησας εἶναι ἐμός , κλαίειν λέγω " .
As for you, instead of gifts of earth and water I shall send such as ought to come to you; and for your boast that you are my master, I say ‘Weep!’”


4.127.4
4871
τοῦτο ἐστὶ ἡ ἀπὸ Σκυθέων ῥῆσις .
Such is the proverbial “Scythian speech.”


4.128.1
4872
ὁ μὲν δὴ κῆρυξ οἰχώκεε ἀγγελέων ταῦτα Δαρείῳ , οἱ δὲ Σκυθέων βασιλέες ἀκούσαντες τῆς δουλοσύνης τὸ οὔνομα ὀργῆς ἐπλήσθησαν .
So the herald went to carry this message to Darius; but the Scythian kings were filled with anger when they heard the word “slavery”.


4.128.2
4873
τὴν μὲν δὴ μετὰ Σαυροματέων μοῖραν ταχθεῖσαν , τῆς ἦρχε Σκώπασις , πέμπουσι Ἴωσι κελεύοντες ἐς λόγους ἀπικέσθαι , τούτοισι οἳ τὸν Ἴστρον ἐζευγμένον ἐφρούρεον ·
They then sent the division of the Scythians to which the Sauromatae were attached, and which was led by Scopasis, to speak with those Ionians guarding the bridge over the Ister;


4.128.2
4874
αὐτῶν δὲ τοῖσι ὑπολειπομένοισι ἔδοξε πλανᾶν μὲν μηκέτι Πέρσας , σῖτα δὲ ἑκάστοτε ἀναιρεομένοισι ἐπιτίθεσθαι .
as for those of the Scythians who remained behind, it was decided that they should no longer decoy the Persians, but attack them whenever they were foraging for provision.


4.128.2
4875
νωμῶντες ὧν σῖτα ἀναιρεομένους τοὺς Δαρείου ἐποίευν τὰ βεβουλευμένα .
So they watched for the time when Darius' men were foraging, and did as they had planned.


4.128.3
4876
ἡ μὲν δὴ ἵππος τὴν ἵππον αἰεὶ τράπεσκε ἡ τῶν Σκυθέων , οἱ δὲ τῶν Περσέων ἱππόται φεύγοντες ἐσέπιπτον ἐς τὸν πεζόν , ὁ δὲ πεζὸς ἂν ἐπεκούρεε ·
The Scythian horse always routed the Persian horse,


4.128.3
4877
οἱ δὲ Σκύθαι ἐσαράξαντες τὴν ἵππον ὑπέστρεφον τὸν πεζὸν φοβεόμενοι .
and when the Persian cavalry would fall back in flight on their infantry, the infantry would come up to their aid; and the Scythians, once they had driven in the horse, turned back for fear of the infantry.


4.128.3
4878
ἐποιέοντο δὲ καὶ τὰς νύκτας παραπλησίας προσβολὰς οἱ Σκύθαι .
The Scythians attacked in this fashion by night as well as by day.


4.129.1
4879
τὸ δὲ τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι τε ἦν σύμμαχον καὶ τοῖσι Σκύθῃσι ἀντίξοον ἐπιτιθεμένοισι τῷ Δαρείου στρατοπέδῳ , θῶμα μέγιστον ἐρέω , τῶν τε ὄνων ἡ φωνὴ καὶ τῶν ἡμιόνων τὸ εἶδος .
Very strange to say, what aided the Persians and thwarted the Scythians in their attacks on Darius' army was the braying of the asses and the appearance of the mules.


4.129.2
4880
οὔτε γὰρ ὄνον οὔτε ἡμίονον γῆ ἡ Σκυθικὴ φέρει , ὡς καὶ πρότερόν μοι δεδήλωται , οὐδὲ ἔστι ἐν τῇ Σκυθικῇ πάσῃ χώρῃ τὸ παράπαν οὔτε ὄνος οὔτε ἡμίονος διὰ τὰ ψύχεα .
For, as I have before indicated, Scythia produces no asses or mules;


4.129.2
4881
ὑβρίζοντες ὧν οἱ ὄνοι ἐτάρασσον τὴν ἵππον τῶν Σκυθέων .
and there is not in most of Scythia an ass or a mule, because of the cold. Therefore the asses frightened the Scythian horses when they brayed loudly;


4.129.3
4882
πολλάκις δὲ ἐπελαυνόντων ἐπὶ τοὺς Πέρσας μεταξὺ ὅκως ἀκούσειαν οἱ ἵπποι τῶν ὄνων τῆς φωνῆς , ἐταράσσοντο τε ὑποστρεφόμενοι καὶ ἐν θώματι ἔσκον , ὀρθὰ ἱστάντες τὰ ὦτα , ἅτε οὔτε ἀκούσαντες πρότερον φωνῆς τοιαύτης οὔτε ἰδόντες τὸ εἶδος .
and often, when they were in the act of charging the Persians, the horses would shy in fear if they heard the asses bray or would stand still with ears erect, never having heard a noise like it or seen a like creature.


4.130.1
4883
ταῦτα μέν νυν ἐπὶ σμικρόν τι ἐφέροντο τοῦ πολέμου .
The Persians thus gained very little in the war,


4.130.1
4884
οἱ δὲ Σκύθαι ὅκως τοὺς Πέρσας ἴδοιεν τεθορυβημένους , ἵνα παραμένοιεν τε ἐπὶ πλέω χρόνον ἐν τῇ Σκυθικῇ καὶ παραμένοντες ἀνιῴατο τῶν πάντων ἐπιδευέες ἐόντες , ἐποίεον τοιάδε ·
for when the Scythians saw that the Persians were shaken, they formed a plan to have them remain longer in Scythia and, remaining, be distressed by lack of necessities:


4.130.1
4885
ὅκως τῶν προβάτων τῶν σφετέρων αὐτῶν καταλίποιεν μετὰ τῶν νομέων , αὐτοὶ ἂν ὑπεξήλαυνον ἐς ἄλλον χῶρον .
they would leave some of their flocks behind with the shepherds, moving away themselves to another place;


4.130.1
4886
οἱ δὲ ἂν Πέρσαι ἐπελθόντες λάβεσκον τὰ πρόβατα καὶ λαβόντες ἐπηείροντο ἂν τῷ πεποιημένῳ .
and the Persians would come and take the sheep, and be encouraged by this achievement.


4.131.1
4887
πολλάκις δὲ τοιούτου γινομένου , τέλος Δαρεῖος τε ἐν ἀπορίῃσι εἴχετο , καὶ οἱ Σκυθέων βασιλέες μαθόντες τοῦτο ἔπεμπον κήρυκα δῶρα Δαρείῳ φέροντα ὄρνιθά τε καὶ μῦν καὶ βάτραχον καὶ ὀιστοὺς πέντε .
After such a thing had happened several times, Darius was finally at a loss; and when they perceived this, the Scythian kings sent a herald to Darius with the gift of a bird, a mouse, a frog, and five arrows.


4.131.2
4888
Πέρσαι δὲ τὸν φέροντα τὰ δῶρα ἐπειρώτεον τὸν νόον τῶν διδομένων .
The Persians asked the bearer of these gifts what they meant;


4.131.2
4889
ὁ δὲ οὐδὲν .
but he said


4.131.2
4890
ἔφη οἱ ἐπεστάλθαι ἄλλο ἢ δόντα τὴν ταχίστην ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι ·
that he had only been told to give the gifts and then leave at once;


4.131.2
4891
αὐτοὺς δὲ τοὺς Πέρσας ἐκέλευε , εἰ σοφοί εἰσι , γνῶναι τὸ θέλει τὰ δῶρα λέγειν .
he told the Persians to figure out what the presents meant themselves, if they were smart enough.


4.132.1
4892
ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες οἱ Πέρσαι ἐβουλεύοντο .
When they heard this, the Persians deliberated.


4.132.1
4893
Δαρείου μέν νυν ἡ γνώμη ἦν Σκύθας ἑωυτῷ διδόναι σφέας τε αὐτοὺς καὶ γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ , εἰκάζων τῇδε , ὡς μῦς μὲν ἐν γῇ γίνεται καρπὸν τὸν αὐτὸν ἀνθρώπῳ σιτεόμενος , βάτραχος δὲ ἐν ὕδατι , ὄρνις δὲ μάλιστα ἔοικε ἵππῳ , τοὺς δὲ ὀιστοὺς ὡς τὴν ἑωυτῶν ἀλκὴν παραδιδοῦσι .
Darius' judgment was that the Scythians were surrendering themselves and their earth and their water to him; for he reasoned that a mouse is a creature found in the earth and eating the same produce as men, and a frog is a creature of the water and a bird particularly like a horse; and the arrows signified that the Scythians surrendered their fighting power.


4.132.2
4894
αὕτη μὲν Δαρείῳ ἀπεδέδεκτο ἡ γνώμη .
This was the opinion declared by Darius;


4.132.2
4895
συνεστήκεε δὲ ταύτῃ τῇ γνώμη ἡ Γοβρύεω , τῶν ἀνδρῶν τῶν ἑπτὰ ἑνὸς τῶν τὸν Μάγον κατελόντων , εἰκάζοντος τὰ δῶρα λέγειν " ἢν μὴ ὄρνιθες γενόμενοι ἀναπτῆσθε ἐς τὸν οὐρανόν , ὦ Πέρσαι , ἢ μύες γενόμενοι κατὰ τῆς γῆς καταδύητε , ἢ βάτραχοι γενόμενοι ἐς τὰς λίμνας ἐσπηδήσητε , οὐκ ἀπονοστήσετε ὀπίσω ὑπὸ τῶνδε τῶν τοξευμάτων βαλλόμενοι " .
but the opinion of Gobryas, one of the seven who had slain the Magus, was contrary to it. He reasoned that the meaning of the gifts was,


4.133.1
4896
Πέρσαι μὲν δὴ τὰ δῶρα εἴκαζον .
The Persians reasoned thus about the gifts.


4.133.1
4897
ἡ δὲ Σκυθέων μία μοῖρα ἡ ταχθεῖσα πρότερον μὲν παρὰ τὴν Μαιῆτιν λίμνην φρουρέειν , τότε δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν Ἴστρον Ἴωσι ἐς λόγους ἐλθεῖν , ὡς ἀπίκετο ἐπὶ τὴν γέφυραν , ἔλεγε τάδε .
But when the first division of the Scythians came to the bridge — the division that had first been appointed to stand on guard by the Maeetian lake and had now been sent to the Ister to speak with the Ionians — they said,


4.133.2
4898
" ἄνδρες Ἴωνες , ἐλευθερίην ἥκομεν ὑμῖν φέροντες , ἤν πέρ γε ἐθέλητε ἐσακούειν .
“Ionians, we have come to bring you freedom, if you will only listen to us.


4.133.2
4899
πυνθανόμεθα γὰρ Δαρεῖον ἐντείλασθαι ὑμῖν ἑξήκοντα ἡμέρας μούνας φρουρήσαντας τὴν γέφυραν , αὐτοῦ μὴ παραγενομένου ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ , ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι ἐς τὴν ὑμετέρην .
We understand that Darius has directed you to guard the bridge for sixty days only, and if he does not come within that time, then to go away to your homes.


4.133.3
4900
νῦν ὧν ὑμεῖς τάδε πολεῦντες ἐκτὸς μὲν ἔσεσθε πρὸς ἐκείνου αἰτίης , ἐκτὸς δὲ πρὸς ἡμέων ·
Now then, do what will leave you guiltless in his eyes as in ours: stay here for the time appointed;


4.133.3
4901
τὰς προκειμένας ἡμέρας παραμείναντες τὸ ἀπὸ τούτου ἀπαλλάσσεσθε " .
and after that, leave.”


4.133.3
4902
οὗτοι μέν νυν ὑποδεξαμένων Ἰώνων ποιήσειν ταῦτα ὀπίσω τὴν ταχίστην ἐπείγοντο .
So the Ionians promised to do this, and the Scythians made their way back with all haste.


4.134.1
4903
Πέρσῃσι δὲ μετὰ τὰ δῶρα ἐλθόντα Δαρείῳ ἀντετάχθησαν οἱ ὑπολειφθέντες Σκύθαι πεζῷ καὶ ἵπποισι ὡς συμβαλέοντες .
But after sending the gifts to Darius, the Scythians who had remained there came out with foot and horse and offered battle to the Persians.


4.134.1
4904
τεταγμένοισι δὲ τοῖσι Σκύθῃσι λαγὸς ἐς τὸ μέσον διήιξε .
But when the Scythian ranks were set in order, a rabbit ran out between the armies; and every Scythian that saw it gave chase.


4.134.1
4905
τῶν δὲ ὡς ἕκαστοι ὥρων τὸν λαγὸν ἐδίωκον .
So there was confusion and shouting among the Scythians; Darius asked about the clamor among the enemy;


4.134.1
4906
ταραχθέντων δὲ τῶν Σκυθέων καὶ βοῇ χρεωμένων , εἴρετο ὁ Δαρεῖος τῶν ἀντιπολεμίων τὸν θόρυβον ·
and when he heard that they were chasing a rabbit, he said to those with whom he was accustomed to speak,


4.134.1
4907
πυθόμενος δὲ σφέας τὸν λαγὸν διώκοντας , εἶπε ἄρα πρὸς τούς περ ἐώθεε καὶ τὰ ἄλλα λέγειν " οὗτοι ὧνδρες ἡμέων πολλὸν καταφρονέουσι , καί μοι νῦν φαίνεται Γοβρύης εἶπαι περὶ τῶν Σκυθικῶν δώρων ὀρθῶς .
“These men hold us in deep contempt; and I think now that Gobryas' opinion of the Scythian gifts was true.


4.134.2
4908
ὡς ὦν οὕτω ἤδη δοκεόντων καὶ αὐτῷ μοι ἔχειν , βουλῆς ἀγαθῆς δεῖ , ὅκως ἀσφαλέως ἡ κομιδὴ ἡμῖν ἔσται τὸ ὀπίσω " .
Since, then, my own judgment agrees with his, we need to consider carefully how we shall return safely.”


4.134.2
4909
πρὸς ταῦτα Γοβρύης εἶπε " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἐγὼ σχεδὸν μὲν καὶ λόγῳ ἠπιστάμην τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν τὴν ἀπορίην , ἐλθὼν δὲ μᾶλλον ἐξέμαθον , ὁρέων αὐτοὺς ἐμπαίζοντας ἡμῖν .
To this Gobryas said: “O King, I understood almost by reason alone how difficult it would be to deal with these Scythians; but when I came here, I understood even better, watching them toying with us.


4.134.3
4910
νῦν ὦν μοι δοκέει , ἐπεὰν τάχιστα νὺξ ἐπέλθῃ , ἐκκαύσαντας τὰ πυρὰ ὡς ἐώθαμεν καὶ ἄλλοτε ποιέειν , τῶν στρατιωτέων τοὺς ἀσθενεστάτους ἐς τὰς ταλαιπωρίας ἐξαπατήσαντας καὶ τοὺς ὄνους πάντας καταδήσαντας ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι , πρὶν ἢ καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν Ἴστρον ἰθῦσαι Σκύθας λύσοντας τὴν γέφυραν , ἢ καί τι Ἴωσι δόξας τὸ ἡμέας οἷον τε ἔσται ἐξεργάσασθαι " .
Now then, my advice is that at nightfall we kindle our campfires in the usual way, deceive those in our army who are least fit to endure hardship, and tether all our asses here, and ourselves depart, before the Scythians can march straight to the Ister to break up the bridge, or the Ionians take some action by which we may well be ruined.”


4.135.1
4911
Γοβρύης μὲν ταῦτα συνεβούλευε .
This was Gobryas' advice,


4.135.1
4912
μετὰ δὲ νύξ τε ἐγίνετο καὶ Δαρεῖος ἐχρᾶτο τῇ γνώμῃ ταύτῃ ·
and at nightfall Darius followed it.


4.135.1
4913
τοὺς μὲν καματηροὺς τῶν ἀνδρῶν καὶ τῶν ἦν ἐλάχιστος ἀπολλυμένων λόγος , καὶ τοὺς ὄνους πάντας καταδήσας κατέλιπε αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδω .
He left the men who were worn out, and those whose loss mattered least to him, there in the camp, and all the asses, too, tethered.


4.135.2
4914
κατέλιπε δὲ τούς τε ὄνους καὶ τοὺς ἀσθενέας τῆς στρατιῆς τῶνδε εἵνεκεν , ἵνα οἱ μὲν ὄνοι βοὴν παρέχωνται ·
His reasons for leaving the asses, and the infirm among his soldiers, were the following:


4.135.2
4915
οἱ δὲ ἄνθρωποι ἀσθενείης μὲν εἵνεκεν κατελείποντο , προφάσιος δὲ τῆσδε δηλαδή , ὡς αὐτὸς μὲν σὺν τῷ καθαρῷ τοῦ στρατοῦ ἐπιθήσεσθαι μέλλοι τοῖσι Σκύθῃσι , οὗτοι δὲ τὸ στρατόπεδον τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ῥυοίατο .
the asses, so that they would bray; the men, who were left because of their infirmity, he pretended were to guard the camp while he attacked the Scythians with the fit part of his army.


4.135.3
4916
ταῦτα τοῖσι ὑπολελειμμένοισι ὑποθέμενος ὁ Δαρεῖος καὶ πυρὰ ἐκκαύσας τὴν ταχίστην ἐπείγετο ἐπὶ τὸν Ἴστρον .
Giving this order to those who were left behind, and lighting campfires, Darius made all haste to reach the Ister.


4.135.3
4917
οἱ δὲ ὄνοι ἐρημωθέντες τοῦ ὁμίλου οὕτω δὴ μᾶλλον πολλῷ ἵεσαν τῆς φωνῆς ·
When the asses found themselves deserted by the multitude, they brayed the louder for it;


4.135.3
4918
ἀκούσαντες δὲ οἱ Σκύθαι τῶν ὄνων πάγχυ κατὰ χώρην ἤλπιζον τοὺς Πέρσας εἶναι .
and the Scythians heard them and assumed that the Persians were in the place.


4.136.1
4919
ἡμέρης δὲ γενομένης γνόντες οἱ ὑπολειφθέντες ὡς προδεδομένοι εἶεν ὑπὸ Δαρείου , χεῖράς τε προετείνοντο τοῖσι Σκύθῃσι καὶ ἔλεγον τὰ κατήκοντα ·
But when it was day, the men left behind perceived that Darius had betrayed them, and they held out their hands to the Scythians and explained the circumstances;


4.136.1
4920
οἳ δὲ ὡς ἤκουσαν ταῦτα τὴν ταχίστην συστραφέντες , αἵ τε δύο μοῖραι τῶν Σκυθέων καὶ ἡ μία καὶ Σαυρομάται καὶ Βουδῖνοι καὶ Γελωνοί , ἐδίωκον τοὺς Πέρσας ἰθὺ τοῦ Ἴστρου .
they, when they heard this, assembled their power in haste, the two divisions of their horde and the one division that was with the Sauromatae and Budini and Geloni, and made straight for the Ister in pursuit of the Persians.


4.136.2
4921
ἅτε δὲ τοῦ Περσικοῦ μὲν τοῦ πολλοῦ ἐόντος πεζοῦ στρατοῦ καὶ τὰς ὁδοὺς οὐκ ἐπισταμένου , ὥστε οὐ τετμημενέων τῶν ὁδῶν , τοῦ δὲ Σκυθικοῦ ἱππότεω καὶ τὰ σύντομα τῆς ὁδοῦ ἐπισταμένου , ἁμαρτόντες ἀλλήλων , ἔφθησαν πολλῷ οἱ Σκύθαι τοὺς Πέρσας ἐπὶ τὴν γέφυραν ἀπικόμενοι .
And as the Persian army was for the most part infantry and did not know the roads (which were not marked), while the Scythians were horsemen and knew the short cuts, they went wide of each other, and the Scythians reached the bridge long before the Persians.


4.136.3
4922
μαθόντες δὲ τοὺς Πέρσας οὔκω ἀπιγμένους ἔλεγον πρὸς τοὺς Ἴωνας ἐόντας ἐν τῇσι νηυσί " ἄνδρες Ἴωνες , αἵ τε ἡμέραι ὑμῖν τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ διοίχηνται καὶ οὐ ποιέετε δίκαια ἔτι παραμένοντες .
There, perceiving that the Persians had not yet come, they said to the Ionians, who were in their ships, “Ionians, the days have exceeded the number, and you are wrong to be here still.


4.136.4
4923
ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ πρότερον δειμαίνοντες ἐμένετε , νῦν λύσαντες τὸν πόρον τὴν ταχίστην ἄπιτε χαίροντες ἐλεύθεροι , θεοῖσί τε καὶ Σκύθῃσι εἰδότες χάριν .
Since it was fear that kept you here, now break the bridge in haste and go, free and happy men, thanking the gods and the Scythians.


4.136.4
4924
τὸν δὲ πρότερον ἐόντα ὑμέων δεσπότην ἡμεῖς παραστησόμεθα οὕτω ὥστε ἐπὶ μηδαμοὺς ἔτι ἀνθρώπους αὐτὸν στρατεύσασθαι " .
The one that was your master we shall impress in such a way that he will never lead an army against anyone again.”


4.137.1
4925
πρὸς ταῦτα Ἴωνες ἐβουλεύοντο .
Then the Ionians held a council.


4.137.1
4926
Μιλτιάδεω μὲν τοῦ Ἀθηναίου , στρατηγέοντος καὶ τυραννεύοντος Χερσονησιτέων τῶν ἐν Ἑλλησπόντῳ , ἦν γνώμη πείθεσθαι Σκύθῃσι καὶ ἐλευθεροῦν Ἰωνίην , Ἱστιαίου δὲ τοῦ Μιλησίου ἐναντίη ταύτῃ , λέγοντος ὡς νῦν μὲν διὰ Δαρεῖον ἕκαστος αὐτῶν τυραννεύει πόλιος ·
Miltiades the Athenian, general and sovereign of the Chersonesites of the Hellespont, advised that they do as the Scythians said and set Ionia free.


4.137.2
4927
τῆς Δαρείου δὲ δυνάμιος καταιρεθείσης οὔτε αὐτὸς Μιλησίων οἷος τε ἔσεσθαι ἄρχειν οὔτε ἄλλον οὐδένα οὐδαμῶν ·
But Histiaeus of Miletus advised the opposite.


4.137.2
4928
βουλήσεσθαι γὰρ ἑκάστην τῶν πολίων δημοκρατέεσθαι μᾶλλον ἢ τυραννεύεσθαι .
He said, “It is owing to Darius that each of us is sovereign of his city; if Darius' power is overthrown, we shall no longer be able to rule, I in Miletus or any of you elsewhere; for all the cities will choose democracy rather than despotism.”


4.137.3
4929
Ἰστιαίου δὲ γνώμην ταύτην ἀποδεικνυμένου αὐτίκα πάντες ἦσαν τετραμμένοι πρὸς ταύτην τὴν γνώμην , πρότερον τὴν Μιλτιάδεω αἱρεόμενοι .
When Histiaeus explained this, all of them at once inclined to his view, although they had first sided with Miltiades.


4.138.1
4930
ἦσαν δὲ οὗτοι οἱ διαφέροντές τε τὴν ψῆφον καὶ ἐόντες λόγου πρὸς βασιλέος , Ἑλλησποντίων μὲν τύραννοι Δάφνις τε Ἀβυδηνὸς καὶ Ἵπποκλος Λαμψακηνὸς καὶ Ἡρόφαντος Παριηνὸς καὶ Μητρόδωρος Προκοννήσιος καὶ Ἀρισταγόρης Κυζικηνὸς καὶ Ἀρίστων Βυζάντιος .
Those high in Darius' favor who gave their vote were Daphnis of  Abydos, Hippoclus of  Lampsacus, Herophantus of Parium, Metrodorus of  Proconnesus, Aristagoras of  Cyzicus, Ariston of  Byzantium,


4.138.2
4931
οὗτοι μὲν ἦσαν οἱ ἐξ Ἑλλησπόντου , ἀπ’ Ἰωνίης δὲ Στράττις τε Χῖος καὶ Αἰάκης Σάμιος καὶ Λαοδάμας Φωκαιεὺς καὶ Ἱστιαῖος Μιλήσιος , τοῦ ἦν γνώμη ἡ προκειμένη ἐναντίη τῇ Μιλτιάδεω .
all from the Hellespont and sovereigns of cities there;


4.138.2
4932
Αἰολέων δὲ παρῆν λόγιμος μοῦνος Ἀρισταγόρης , Κυμαῖος .
and from Ionia, Strattis of Chios, Aiaces of Samos, Laodamas of Phocaea, and Histiaeus of Miletus who opposed the plan of Miltiades. As for the Aeolians, their only notable man present was Aristagoras of Cymae.


4.139.1
4933
οὗτοι ὦν ἐπείτε τὴν Ἱστιαίου αἱρέοντο γνώμην , ἔδοξε σφι πρὸς ταύτῃ τάδε ἔργα τε καὶ ἔπεα προσθεῖναι , τῆς μὲν γεφύρης λύειν τὰ κατὰ τοὺς Σκύθας ἐόντα , λύειν δὲ ὅσον τόξευμα ἐξικνέεται , ἵνα καὶ ποιέειν τι δοκέωσι ποιεῦντες μηδὲν καὶ οἱ Σκύθαι μὴ πειρῴατο βιώμενοι καὶ βουλόμενοι διαβῆναι τὸν Ἴστρον κατὰ τὴν γέφυραν , εἰπεῖν τε λύοντας τῆς γεφύρης τὸ ἐς τὴν Σκυθικὴν ἔχον ὡς πάντα ποιήσουσι τὰ Σκύθησι ἐστὶ ἐν ἡδονῇ .
When these accepted Histiaeus' view, they decided to act upon it in the following way: to break as much of the bridge on the Scythian side as a bowshot from there carried, so that they seem to be doing something when in fact they were doing nothing, and that the Scythians not try to force their way across the bridge over the Ister; and to say while they were breaking the portion of the bridge on the Scythian side, that they would do all that the Scythians desired.


4.139.2
4934
ταῦτα μὲν προσέθηκαν τῇ γνώμῃ .
This was the plan they adopted;


4.139.2
4935
μετὰ δὲ ἐκ πάντων ὑπεκρίνατο Ἱστιαῖος τάδε λέγων .
and then Histiaeus answered for them all, and said,


4.139.2
4936
" Ἄνδρες Σκύθαι , χρηστὰ ἥκετε φέροντες καὶ ἐς καιρὸν , ἐπείγεσθε ·
“You have come with good advice, Scythians, and your urgency is timely:


4.139.2
4937
καὶ τά τε ἀπ’ ὑμέων ἡμῖν , χρηστῶς ὁδοῦται καὶ τὰ ἀπ’ ἡμέων ἐς ὑμέας ἐπιτηδέως ὑπηρετέεται .
you guide us well and we do you a convenient service;


4.139.2
4938
ὡς γὰρ ὁρᾶτε , καὶ λύομεν τὸν πόρον καὶ προθυμίην πᾶσαν ἕξομεν θέλοντες εἶναι ἐλεύθεροι .
for, as you see, we are breaking the bridge, and will be diligent about it, as we want to be free.


4.139.3
4939
ἐν ᾧ δὲ ἡμεῖς τάδε λύομεν , ὑμέας καιρός ἐστι δίζησθαι ἐκείνους , εὑρόντας δὲ ὑπέρ τε ἡμέων καὶ ὑμέων αὐτῶν τίσασθαι οὕτω ὡς κείνους πρέπει " .
But while we are breaking the bridge, this is your opportunity to go and find the Persians, and when you have found them, punish them as they deserve on our behalf and on your own.”


4.140.1
4940
Σκύθαι μὲν τὸ δεύτερον Ἴωσι πιστεύσαντες λέγειν ἀληθέα ὑπέστρεφον ἐπὶ ζήτησιν τῶν Περσέων , καὶ ἡμάρτανον πάσης τῆς ἐκείνων διεξόδου .
So the Scythians, trusting the Ionians' word once more, turned back to look for the Persians;


4.140.1
4941
αἴτιοι δὲ τούτου αὐτοὶ οἱ Σκύθαι ἐγένοντο ,τὰς νομὰς τῶν ἵππων τὰς ταύτῃ διαφθείραντες καὶ τὰ ὕδατα συγχώσαντες .
but they missed the way by which their enemies returned. The Scythians themselves were to blame for this, because they had destroyed the horses' pasturage in that region and blocked the wells.


4.140.2
4942
εἰ γὰρ ταῦτα μὴ ἐποίησαν , παρεῖχε ἄν σφι , εἰ ἐβούλοντο , εὐπετέως ἐξευρεῖν τοὺς Πέρσας .
Had they not done, they could, if they had wished, easily have found the Persians.


4.140.2
4943
νῦν δὲ τά σφι ἐδόκεε ἄριστα βεβουλεῦσθαι , κατὰ ταῦτα ἐσφάλησαν .
But as it was, that part of their plan which they had thought the best was the very cause of their going astray.


4.140.3
4944
Σκύθαι μέν νυν τῆς σφετέρης χώρης τῇ χιλός τε τοῖσι ἵπποισι καὶ ὕδατα ἦν , ταύτῃ διεξιόντες ἐδίζηντο τοὺς ἀντιπολεμίους , δοκέοντες καὶ ἐκείνους διὰ τοιούτων τὴν ἀπόδρησιν ποιέεσθαι .
So the Scythians went searching for their enemies through the parts of their own country where there was forage for the horses and water, supposing that they, too, were heading for such places in their flight;


4.140.3
4945
οἱ δὲ δὴ Πέρσαι τὸν πρότερον ἑωυτῶν γενόμενον στίβον , τοῦτον φυλάσσοντες ἤισαν , καὶ οὕτω μόγις εὗρον τὸν πόρον .
but the Persians kept to their own former tracks, and so with much trouble they found the crossing.


4.140.4
4946
οἶα δὲ νυκτός τε ἀπικόμενοι καὶ λελυμένης τῆς γεφύρης ἐντυχόντες , ἐς πᾶσαν ἀρρωδίην ἀπίκοντο μή σφεας οἱ Ἴωνες ἔωσι ἀπολελοιπότες .
But as they arrived at night and found the bridge broken, they were in great alarm lest the Ionians had abandoned them.


4.141.1
4947
ἦν δὲ περὶ Δαρεῖον ἀνὴρ Αἰγύπτιος φωνέων μέγιστον ἀνθρώπων ·
There was an Egyptian with Darius whose voice was the loudest in the world;


4.141.1
4948
τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα καταστάντα ἐπὶ τοῦ χείλεος τῦ Ἴστρου ἐκέλευε Δαρεῖος καλέειν Ἱστιαῖον Μιλήσιον .
Darius had this man stand on the bank of the Ister and call to Histiaeus the Milesian.


4.141.1
4949
ὃ μὲν δὴ ἐποίεε ταῦτα , Ἱστιαῖος δὲ ἐπακούσας τῷ πρώτῳ κελεύσματι τάς τε νέας ἁπάσας παρεῖχε διαπορθμεύειν τὴν στρατιὴν καὶ τὴν γέφυραν ἔζευξε .
This the Egyptian did; Histiaeus heard and answered the first shout, and sent all the ships to ferry the army over, and repaired the bridge.


4.142.1
4950
Πέρσαι μὲν ὦν οὕτω ἐκφεύγουσι Σκύθαι δὲ διζήμενοι καὶ τὸ δεύτερον ἥμαρτον τῶν Περσέων , καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ὡς ἐόντας Ἴωνας ἐλευθέρους κακίστους τε καὶ ἀνανδροτάτους κρίνουσι εἶναι ἁπάντων ἀνθρώπων , τοῦτο δέ , ὡς δούλων ἐόντων τὸν λόγον ποιεύμενοι , ἀνδράποδα φιλοδέσποτα φασὶ εἶναι καὶ ἄδρηστα .
Thus the Persians escaped.


4.142.1
4951
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ Σκύθῃσι ἐς Ἴωνας ἀπέρριπται .
The Scythians sought the Persians, but missed them again. Their judgment of the Ionians is that if they are regarded as free men they are the basest and most craven in the world; but if they are reckoned as slaves, none love their masters more, or desire less to escape. Thus have the Scythians taunted the Ionians.


4.143.1
4952
Δαρεῖος δὲ διὰ τῆς Θρηίκης πορευόμενος ἀπίκετο ἐς Σηστὸν τῆς Χερσονήσου .
Darius marched through Thrace to Sestos on the Chersonesus;


4.143.1
4953
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ αὐτὸς μὲν διέβη τῇσι νηυσὶ ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην , λείπει δὲ στρατηγὸν ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ Μεγάβαζον ἄνδρα Πέρσην ·
from there, he crossed over with his ships to Asia, leaving Megabazus as his commander in Europe, a Persian


4.143.1
4954
τῷ Δαρεῖος κοτὲ ἔδωκε γέρας , τοιόνδε εἴπας ἐν Πέρσῃσι ἔπος .
whom he once honored by saying among the Persians what I note here:


4.143.2
4955
ὁρμημένου Δαρείου ῥοιὰς τρώγειν , ὡς ἄνοιξε τάχιστα τὴν πρώτην τῶν ῥοιέων , εἴρετο αὐτὸν ὁ ἀδελφεὸς Ἀρτάβανος ὅ τι βούλοιτ’ ἄν οἱ τοσοῦτο πλῆθος γενέσθαι ὅσοι ἐν τῇ ῥοιῇ κόκκοι ·
Darius was about to eat pomegranates, and no sooner had he opened the first of them than his brother Artabanus asked him what he would like to have as many of as there were seeds in his pomegranate;


4.143.2
4956
Δαρεῖος δὲ εἶπε Μεγαβάζους ἄν οἱ τοσούτους ἀριθμὸν γενέσθαι βούλεσθαι μᾶλλον ἢ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ὑπήκοον .
then Darius said that he would rather have that many men like Megabazus than make all Hellas subject to him.


4.143.3
4957
ἐν μὲν δὴ Πέρσησι ταῦτά μιν εἴπας ἐτίμα , τότε δὲ αὐτὸν ὑπέλιπε στρατηγὸν ἔχοντα τῆς στρατιῆς τῆς ἑωυτοῦ ὀκτὼ μυριάδας .
By speaking thus among Persians, the king honored Megabazus; and now he left him behind as his commander, at the head of eighty thousand of his army.


4.144.1
4958
οὗτος δὲ ὁ Μεγάβαζος εἴπας τόδε τὸ ἔπος ἐλίπετο ἀθάνατον μνήμην πρὸς Ἑλλησποντίων .
This Megabazus is forever remembered by the people of the  Hellespont for replying,


4.144.2
4959
γενόμενος γὰρ ἐν Βυζαντίῳ ἐπύθετο ἑπτακαίδεκα ἔτεσι πρότερον Καλχηδονίους κτίσαντας τὴν χώρην Βυζαντίων , πυθόμενος δὲ ἔφη Καλχηδονίους τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον τυγχάνειν ἐόντας τυφλούς ·
when he was told at Byzantium that the people of Calchedon had founded their town seventeen years before the Byzantines had founded theirs, that the Calchedonians must at that time have been blind,


4.144.2
4960
οὐ γὰρ ἂν τοῦ καλλίονος παρεόντος κτίζειν χώρου τὸν αἰσχίονα ἑλέσθαι , εἰ μὴ ἦσαν τυφλοί .
for had they not been, they would never have chosen the worse site for their city when they might have had the better.


4.144.3
4961
οὗτος δὴ ὦν τότε ὁ Μεγάβαζος στρατηγὸς λειφθεὶς ἐν τῇ χώρῃ Ἑλλησποντίων τοὺς μὴ μηδίζοντας κατεστρέφετο .
This Megabazus, left now as commander in the country, subjugated all the people of the  Hellespont who did not take the side of the Persians.


4.145.1
4962
οὗτος μέν νυν ταῦτα ἔπρησσε .
At the same time that he was doing this,


4.145.1
4963
τὸν αὐτὸν δὲ τοῦτον χρόνον ἐγίνετο ἐπὶ Λιβύην ἄλλος στρατιῆς μέγας στόλος , διὰ πρόφασιν τὴν ἐγὼ ἀπηγήσομαι προδιηγησάμενος πρότερον τάδε .
another great force was sent against Libya, for the reason that I shall give after I finish the story that I am going to tell now.


4.145.2
4964
τῶν ἐκ τῆς Ἀργοῦς ἐπιβατέων παίδων παῖδες ἐξελασθέντες ὑπὸ Πελασγῶν τῶν ἐκ Βραυρῶνος ληισαμένων τὰς Ἀθηναίων γυναῖκας , ὑπὸ τούτων ἐξελασθέντες ἐκ , Λήμνου οἴχοντο πλέοντες ἐς Λακεδαίμονα , ἱζόμενοι δὲ ἐν τῷ Τηϋγέτῳ πῦρ ἀνέκαιον .
The descendants of the crew of the Argo were driven out by the Pelasgians who carried off the Athenian women from  Brauron; after being driven out of  Lemnos by them, they sailed away to  Lacedaemon, and there camped on Teügetum and kindled a fire.


4.145.3
4965
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ ἰδόντες ἄγγελον ἔπεμπον πευσόμενοι τίνες τε καὶ ὁκόθεν εἰσί ·
Seeing it, the Lacedaemonians sent a messenger to inquire who they were and where they came from.


4.145.3
4966
οἳ δὲ τῷ ἀγγέλῳ εἰρωτῶντι ἔλεγον ὡς εἴησαν μὲν Μινύαι , παῖδες δὲ εἶεν τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀργοῖ πλεόντων ἡρώων , προσσχόντας δὲ τούτους ἐς Λῆμνον φυτεῦσαι σφέας .
They answered the messenger that they were Minyae, descendants of the heroes who had sailed in the Argo and put in at Lemnos and there begot their race.


4.145.4
4967
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀκηκοότες τὸν λόγον τῆς γενεῆς τῶν Μινυέων , πέμψαντες τὸ δεύτερον εἰρώτων τί θέλοντες ἥκοιέν τε ἐς τὴν χώρην καὶ πῦρ αἴθοιεν .
Hearing the story of the lineage of the Minyae, the Lacedaemonians sent a second time and asked why they had come into Laconia and kindled a fire.


4.145.4
4968
οἳ δὲ ἔφασαν ὑπὸ Πελασγῶν ἐκβληθέντες ἥκειν ἐς τοὺς πατέρας ·
They replied that, having been expelled by the Pelasgians, they had come to the land of their fathers,


4.145.4
4969
δικαιότατον γὰρ εἶναι οὕτω τοῦτο γίνεσθαι .
as was most just;


4.145.4
4970
δέεσθαι δὲ οἰκέειν ἅμα τούτοισι μοῖράν τε τιμέων μετέχοντες καὶ τῆς γῆς ἀπολαχόντες .
and their wish was to live with their fathers' people, sharing in their rights and receiving allotted pieces of land.


4.145.5
4971
Λακεδαιμονίοισι δὲ ἕαδε δέκεσθαι τοὺς Μινύας ἐπ’ οἷσι θέλουσι αὐτοί .
The Lacedaemonians were happy to receive the Minyae on the terms which their guests desired;


4.145.5
4972
μάλιστα δὲ ἐνῆγε σφέας ὥστε ποιέειν ταῦτα τῶν Τυνδαριδέων ἡ ναυτιλίη ἐν τῇ Ἀργοῖ .
the chief cause of their consenting was that the Tyndaridae had been in the ship's company of the Argo;


4.145.5
4973
δεξάμενοι δὲ τοὺς Μινύας γῆς τε μετέδοσαν καὶ ἐς φυλὰς διεδάσαντο .
so they received the Minyae and gave them land and distributed them among their own tribes.


4.145.5
4974
οἳ δὲ αὐτίκα μὲν γάμους ἔγημαν , τὰς δὲ ἐκ Λήμνου ἤγοντο ἐξέδοσαν ἄλλοισι .
The Minyae immediately married, and gave in marriage to others the women they had brought from Lemnos.


4.146.1
4975
χρόνου δὲ οὐ πολλοῦ διεξελθόντος αὐτίκα οἱ Μινύαι ἐξύβρισαν , τῆς τε βασιληίης μεταιτέοντες καὶ ἄλλα ποιέοντες οὐκ ὅσια .
But in no time these Minyae became imperious, demanding an equal right to the kingship, and doing other impious things;


4.146.2
4976
τοῖσι ὦν Λακεδαιμονίοισι ἔδοξε αὐτοὺς ἀποκτεῖναι , συλλαβόντες δὲ σφέας κατέβαλον ἐς ἑρκτήν .
Hence the Lacedaemonians resolved to kill them, and they seized them and cast them into prison.


4.146.2
4977
κτείνουσι δὲ τοὺς ἂν κτείνωσι Λακεδαιμόνιοι νυκτός , μετ’ ἡμέρην δὲ οὐδένα .
(When the Lacedaemonians execute, they do it by night, never by day.)


4.146.3
4978
ἐπεὶ ὦν ἔμελλον σφέας καταχρήσασθαι , παραιτήσαντο αἱ γυναῖκες τῶν Μινυέων , ἐοῦσαι ἀσταί τε καὶ τῶν πρώτων Σπαρτιητέων θυγατέρες , ἐσελθεῖν τε ἐς τὴν ἑρκτὴν καὶ ἐς λόγους ἐλθεῖν ἑκάστη τῷ ἑωυτῆς ἀνδρί .
Now when they were about to kill the prisoners, the wives of the Minyae, who were natives of the country, daughters of leading Spartans, asked permission to enter the prison and each converse with her husband;


4.146.3
4979
οἳ δὲ σφέας παρῆκαν , οὐδένα δόλον δοκέοντες ἐξ αὐτέων ἔσεσθαι .
the Lacedaemonians granted this, not expecting that there would be any treachery from them.


4.146.4
4980
αἳ δὲ ἐπείτε ἐσῆλθον , ποιέουσι τοιάδε ·
But when the wives came into the prison, they gave their husbands all their own garments, and themselves put on the men's clothing;


4.146.4
4981
πᾶσαν τὴν εἶχον ἐσθῆτα παραδοῦσαι τοῖσι ἀνδράσι αὐταὶ τὴν τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἔλαβον , οἱ δὲ Μινύαι ἐνδύντες τὴν γυναικηίην ἐσθῆτα ἅτε γυναῖκες ἐξήισαν ἔξω , ἐκφυγόντες δὲ τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ ἵζοντο αὖτις ἐς τὸ Τηΰγετον .
so the Minyae passed out in the guise of women dressed in women's clothing; and thus escaping, once more camped on Teügetum.


4.147.1
4982
τὸν δὲ αὐτὸν τοῦτον χρόνον Θήρας ὁ Αὐτεσίωνος τοῦ Τισαμενοῦ τοῦ Θερσάνδρου τοῦ Πολυνείκεος ἔστελλε ἐς ἀποικίην ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος ·
Now, about this same time, Theras, a descendant of Polynices through Thersander, Tisamenus, and Autesion, was preparing to lead out colonists from  Lacedaemon.


4.147.2
4983
ἦν δὲ ὁ Θήρας οὗτος , γένος ἐὼν Καδμεῖος , τῆς μητρὸς ἀδελφεὸς τοῖσι Ἀριστοδήμου παισὶ Εὐρυσθένεϊ καὶ Προκλές .
This Theras was of the line of Cadmus and was an uncle on their mother's side to Aristodemus' sons Eurysthenes and Procles;


4.147.2
4984
ἐόντων δὲ ἔτι τῶν παίδων τούτων νηπίων ἐπιτροπαίην εἶχε ὁ Θήρας τὴν ἐν Σπάρτῃ βασιληίην .
and while these boys were yet children he held the royal power of Sparta as regent;


4.147.3
4985
αὐξηθέντων δὲ τῶν ἀδελφιδέων καὶ παραλαβόντων τὴν ἀρχήν , οὕτω δὴ ὁ Θήρας δεινὸν ποιεύμενος ἄρχεσθαι ὑπ’ ἄλλων ἐπείτε ἐγεύσατο ἀρχῆς , οὐκ ἔφη μένειν ἐν τῇ Λακεδαίμονι ἀλλ’ ἀποπλεύσεσθαι ἐς τοὺς συγγενέας .
but when his nephews grew up and became kings, then Theras could not endure to be a subject when he had had a taste of supreme power, and said he would no longer stay in  Lacedaemon but would sail away to his family.


4.147.4
4986
ἦσαν δὲ ἐν τῇ νῦν Θήρῃ καλεομένη νήσῳ , πρότερον δὲ Καλλίστῃ τῇ αὐτῇ ταύτῃ , ἀπόγονοι Μεμβλιάρου τοῦ Ποικίλεω ἀνδρὸς Φοίνικος .
On the island now called Thera, but then Calliste, there were descendants of Membliarus the son of Poeciles, a Phoenician;


4.147.4
4987
Κάδμος γὰρ ὁ Ἀγήνορος Εὐρώπην διζήμενος προσέσχε ἐς τὴν νῦν Θήρην καλεομένην ·
for Cadmus son of Agenor had put in at the place now called Thera during his search for Europa;


4.147.4
4988
προσσχόντι δὲ εἴτε δή οἱ ἡ χώρη ἤρεσε , εἴτε καὶ ἄλλως ἠθέλησε ποιῆσαι τοῦτο ·
and having put in, either because the land pleased him, or because for some other reason he desired to do so,


4.147.4
4989
καταλείπει γὰρ ἐν τῇ νήσῳ ταύτῃ ἄλλους τε τῶν Φοινίκων καὶ δὴ καὶ τῶν ἑωυτοῦ συγγενέων Μεμβλίαρον .
he left on this island his own relation Membliarus together with other Phoenicians.


4.147.5
4990
οὗτοι ἐνέμοντο τὴν Καλλίστην καλεομένην ἐπὶ γενεάς , πρὶν ἤ Θήραν ἐλθεῖν ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος , ὀκτὼ ἀνδρῶν .
These dwelt on the island of  Calliste for eight generations before Theras came from  Lacedaemon.


4.148.1
4991
ἐπὶ τούτους δὴ ὦν ὁ Θήρας λεὼν ἔχων ἀπὸ τῶν φυλέων ἔστελλε , συνοικήσων τούτοισι καὶ οὐδαμῶς ἐξελῶν αὐτοὺς ἀλλὰ κάρτα οἰκηιούμενος .
It was these that Theras was preparing to join, taking with him a company of people from the tribes; his intention was to settle among the people of  Calliste and not drive them out but claim them as in fact his own people.


4.148.2
4992
ἐπείτε δὲ καὶ οἱ Μινύαι ἐκδράντες ἐκ τῆς ἑρκτῆς ἵζοντο ἐς τὸ Τηΰγετον , τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων βουλευομένων σφέας ἀπολλύναι παραιτέεται ὁ Θήρας , ὅκως μήτε φόνος γένηται , αὐτός τε ὑπεδέκετο σφέας ἐξάξειν ἐκ τῆς χώρης .
So when the Minyae escaped from prison and camped on Teügetum, and the Lacedaemonians were planning to put them to death, Theras interceded for their lives, that there might be no killing, promising to lead them out of the country himself.


4.148.3
4993
συγχωρησάντων δὲ τῇ γνώμῃ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων , τρισὶ τριηκοντέροισι ἐς τοὺς Μεμβιάρου ἀπογόνους ἔπλωσε , οὔτι πάντας ἄγων τοὺς Μινύας ἀλλ’ ὀλίγους τινάς .
The Lacedaemonians consented to this, and Theras sailed with three thirty-oared ships to join the descendants of Membliarus, taking with him not all the Minyae but only a few;


4.148.4
4994
οἱ γὰρ πλεῦνες αὐτῶν ἐτράποντο ἐς τοὺς Παρωρεάτας καὶ Καύκωνας , τούτους δὲ ἐξελάσαντες ἐκ τῆς χώρης σφέας αὐτοὺς ἓξ μοίρας διεῖλον , καὶ ἔπειτα ἔκτισαν πόλιας τάσδε ἐν αὐτοῖσι , Λέπρεον Μάκιστον Φρίξας Πύργον Ἔπιον Νούδιον .
for the greater part of them made their way to the lands of the Paroreatae and Caucones, and after having driven these out of their own country, they divided themselves into six companies and established the cities of Lepreum, Macistus, Phrixae, Pyrgus, Epium, and Nudium in the land they had won;


4.148.4
4995
τουτέων δὲ τὰς πλεῦνας ἐπ’ ἐμέο Ἠλεῖοι ἐπόρθησαν .
most of these were in my time taken and sacked by the Eleans.


4.148.4
4996
τῇ δὲ νήσῳ ἐπὶ τοῦ οἰκιστέω Θήρα ἡ ἐπωνυμίη ἐγένετο .
As for the island Calliste, it was called Thera after its colonist.


4.149.1
4997
ὁ δὲ παῖς οὐ γὰρ ἔφη οἱ συμπλεύσεσθαι , τοιγαρῶν ἔφη αὐτὸν καταλείψειν ὄιν ἐν λύκοισι .
But as Theras' son would not sail with him, his father said that he would leave him behind as a sheep among wolves;


4.149.1
4998
ἐπὶ του ἔπεος τούτου οὔνομα τῷ νεηνίσκῳ τούτῳ Οἰόλυκος ἐγένετο , καί κως τὸ οὔνομα τοῦτο ἐπεκράτησε .
after which saying the boy got the nickname of Oeolycus, and it so happened that this became his customary name.


4.149.1
4999
Οἰολύκου δὲ γίνεται Αἰγεύς , ἐπ’ οὗ Αἰγεῖδαι καλέονται φυλὴ μεγάλη ἐν Σπάρτῃ .
He had a son, Aegeus, from whom the Aegidae, a great Spartan clan, take their name.


4.149.2
5000
τοῖσι δὲ ἐν τῇ φυλῇ ταύτῃ ἀνδράσι οὐ γὰρ ὑπέμειναν τὰ τέκνα , ἱδρύσαντο ἐκ θεοπροπίου Ἐρινύων τῶν Λαΐου τε καὶ Οἰδιπόδεω ἱρόν ·
The men of this clan, finding that none of their children lived, set up a temple of the avenging spirits of Laïus and Oedipus, by the instruction of an oracle, after which their children lived.


4.149.2
5001
καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο ὑπέμειναν G? τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο καὶ ἐν Θήῃ τοῖσι ἀπὸ τῶν ἀνδρῶν τούτων γεγονόσι .
It fared thus, too, with the children of the Aegidae at Thera.


4.150.1
5002
μέχρι μέν νυν τούτου τοῦ λόγου Λακεδαιμόνιοι Θηραίοισι κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ λέγουσι , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτου μοῦνοι Θηραῖοι ὧδε γενέσθαι λέγουσι .
So far in the story the Lacedaemonian and Theraean records agree; for the rest, we have only the word of the Theraeans.


4.150.2
5003
Γρῖννος ὁ Αἰσανίου ἐὼν Ψήρα τούτου ἀπόγονος καὶ βασιλεύων Θήρης τῆς νήσου ἀπίκετο ἐς Δελφούς , ἄγων ἀπὸ τῆς πόλιος ἑκατόμβην ·
Grinnus son of Aesanius, king of Thera, a descendant of this same Theras, came to Delphi bringing a hecatomb from his city;


4.150.2
5004
εἵποντο δέ οἱ καὶ ἄλλοι τῶν πολιητέων καὶ δὴ καὶ Βάττος ὁ Πολυμνήστου , ἐὼν γένος Εὐφημίδης τῶν Μινυέων .
among others of his people, Battus son of Polymnestus came with him, a descendant of Euphemus of the Minyan clan.


4.150.3
5005
χρεωμένῳ δὲ τῷ Γρίννῳ τῷ , βασιλέι τῶν Θηραίων περὶ ἄλλων χρᾷ ἡ Πυθίη κτίζειν ἐν Λιβύη πόλιν .
When Grinnus king of Thera asked the oracle about other matters, the priestess' answer was that he should found a city in Libya.


4.150.3
5006
ὁ δὲ ἀμείβετο λέγων " ἐγὼ μὲν ὦναξ πρεσβύτερός τε ἤδη εἰμὶ καὶ βαρὺς ἀείρεσθαι ·
“Lord, I am too old and heavy to stir;


4.150.3
5007
σὺ δὲ τινὰ τῶνδε τῶν νεωτέρων κέλευε ταῦτα ποιέειν " .
command one of these younger men to do this,”


4.150.3
5008
ἅμα τε ἔλεγε ταῦτα καὶ ἐδείκνυε ἐς τὸν Βάττον .
answered Grinnus, pointing to Battus as he spoke.


4.150.4
5009
τότε μὲν τοσαῦτα .
No more was said then.


4.150.4
5010
μετὰ δὲ ἀπελθόντες ἀλογίην εἶχον τοῦ χρηστηρίου , οὔτε Λιβύην εἰδότες ὅκου γῆς εἴη οὔτε τολμῶντες ἐς ἀφανὲς χρῆμα ἀποστέλλειν ἀποικίην .
But when they departed, they neglected to obey the oracle, since they did not know where Libya was, and were afraid to send a colony out to an uncertain destination.


4.151.1
5011
ἑπτὰ δὲ ἐτέων μετὰ ταῦτα οὐκ ὗε τὴν Θήρην , ἐν τοῖσι τὰ δένδρεα πάντα σφι τὰ ἐν τῇ νήσῳ πλὴν ἑνὸς ἐξαυάνθη .
For seven years after this there was no rain in Thera; all the trees in the island except one withered.


4.151.1
5012
χρεωμένοισι δὲ τοῖσι Θηραίοισι προέφερε ἡ Πυθίη τὴν ἐς Λιβύην ἀποικίην .
The Theraeans inquired at Delphi again, and the priestess mentioned the colony they should send to Libya.


4.151.2
5013
ἐπείτε δὲ κακοῦ οὐδὲν ἦν σφι μῆχος , πέμπουσι ἐς Κρήτην ἀγγέλους διζημένους εἴ τις Κρητῶν ἢ μετοίκων ἀπιγμένος εἴη ἐς Λιβύην .
So, since there was no remedy for their ills, they sent messengers to Crete to find any Cretan or traveller there who had travelled to Libya.


4.151.2
5014
περιπλανώμενοι δὲ αὐτὴν οὗτοι ἀπίκοντο καὶ ἐς Ἴτανον πόλιν , ἐν ταύτῃ δὲ συμμίσγουσι ἀνδρὶ πορφυρέι τῷ οὕνομα ἦν Κορώβιος , ὃς ἔφη ὑπ’ ἀνέμων ἀπενειχθεὶς ἀπικέσθαι ἐς Λιβύην καὶ Λιβύης ἐς Πλατέαν νῆσον .
In their travels about the island, these came to the town of Itanus, where they met a murex fisherman named Corobius, who told them that he had once been driven off course by winds to Libya, to an island there called Platea.


4.151.3
5015
μισθῷ , δὲ τοῦτον πείσαντες ἦγον ἐς Θήρην , ἐκ δὲ Θήρης ἔπλεον κατάσκοποι ἄνδρες τὰ πρῶτα οὐ πολλοί ·
They hired this man to come with them to Thera; from there, just a few men were sent aboard ship to spy out the land first;


4.151.3
5016
κατηγησαμένου δὲ τοῦ Κορωβίου ἐς τὴν νῆσον ταύτην δὴ τὴν Πλατέαν , τὸν μέν Κορώβιον λείπουσι , σιτία καταλιπόντες ὅσων δὴ μηνῶν , αὐτοὶ δὲ ἔπλεον τὴν ταχίστην ἀπαγγελέοντες Θηραίοισι περὶ τῆς νήσου .
guided by Corobius to the aforesaid island Platea, these left him there with provision for some months, and themselves sailed back with all speed to Thera to bring news of the island.


4.152.1
5017
ἀποδημεόντων δὲ τούτων πλέω χρόνον τοῦ συγκειμένου τὸν Κορώβιον ἐπέλιπε τὰ πάντα , μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα νηῦς Σαμίη , τῆς ναύκληρος ἦν Κωλαῖος , πλέουσα ἐπ’ Αἰγύπτου ἀπηνείχθη ἐς τὴν Πλατέαν ταύτην ·
But after they had been away for longer than the agreed time, and Corobius had no provisions left, a Samian ship sailing for Egypt, whose captain was Colaeus, was driven off her course to Platea,


4.152.1
5018
πυθόμενοι δὲ οἱ Σάμιοι παρὰ τοῦ Κορωβίου τὸν πάντα λόγον , σιτία οἱ ἐνιαυτοῦ καταλείπουσι .
where the Samians heard the whole story from Corobius and left him provisions for a year;


4.152.2
5019
αὐτοὶ δὲ ἀναχθέντες ἐκ τῆς νήσου καὶ γλιχόμενοι Αἰγύπτου ἔπλεον , ἀποφερόμενοι ἀπηλιώτῃ ἀνέμῳ ·
they then put out to sea from the island and would have sailed to Egypt,


4.152.2
5020
καὶ οὐ γὰρ ἀνίει τὸ πνεῦμα , Ἡρακλέας στήλας διεκπερήσαντες ἀπίκοντο ἐς Ταρτησσόν , θείῃ πομπῇ χρεώμενοι .
but an easterly wind drove them from their course, and did not abate until they had passed through the Pillars of Heracles and came providentially to Tartessus.


4.152.3
5021
τὸ δὲ ἐμπόριον τοῦτο ἦν ἀκήρατον τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον , ὥστε ἀπονοστήσαντες οὗτοι ὀπίσω μέγιστα δὴ Ἑλλήνων πάντων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἀτρεκείην ἴδμεν ἐκ φορτίων ἐκέρδησαν , μετά γε Σώστρατον τὸν Λαοδάμαντος Αἰγινήτην ·
Now this was at that time an untapped market; hence, the Samians, of all the Greeks whom we know with certainty, brought back from it the greatest profit on their wares except Sostratus of Aegina, son of Laodamas;


4.152.3
5022
τούτῳ γὰρ οὐκ οἷά τε ἐστὶ ἐρίσαι ἄλλον .
no one could compete with him.


4.152.4
5023
οἱ δὲ Σάμιοι τὴν δεκάτην τῶν ἐπικερδίων ἐξελόντες ἓξ τάλαντα ἐποιήσαντο χαλκήιον κρητῆρος Ἀργολικοῦ τρόπον ·
The Samians took six talents, a tenth of their profit, and made a bronze vessel with it, like an Argolic cauldron.


4.152.4
5024
πέριξ δὲ αὐτοῦ γρυπῶν κεφαλαὶ πρόκροσσοί εἰσι .
 There are griffins' heads projecting from the rim all around;


4.152.4
5025
καὶ ἀνέθηκαν ἐς τὸ Ἥραιον , ὑποστήσαντες αὐτῶ τρεῖς χαλκέους κολοσσοὺς ἑπταπήχεας τοῖσι γούνασι ἐρηρεισμένους .
they set this up in their temple of Hera, supporting it with three colossal kneeling figures of bronze, each twelve feet high.


4.152.5
5026
Κυρηναίοισι δὲ καὶ Θηραίοισι ἐς Σαμίους ἀπὸ τούτου τοῦ ἔργου πρῶτα φιλίαι μεγάλαι συνεκρήθησαν .
What the Samians had done was the beginning of a close friendship between them and the men of  Cyrene and  Thera.


4.153.1
5027
οἱ δὲ Θηραῖοι ἐπείτε τὸν Κορώβιον λιπόντες ἐν τῇ νήσῳ ἀπίκοντο ἐς τὴν Θήρην , ἀπήγγελλον ὥς σφι εἴη νῆσος ἐπὶ Λιβύῃ ἐκτισμένη .
As for the Theraeans, when they came to Thera after leaving Corobius on the island, they brought word that they had established a settlement on an island off Libya.


4.153.1
5028
Θηραίοισι δὲ ἕαδε ἀδελφεόν τε ἀπ’ ἀδελφεοῦ πέμπειν πάλῳ λαγχάνοντα καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν χώρων ἁπάντων ἑπτὰ ἐόντων ἄνδρας , εἶναι δὲ σφέων καὶ ἡγεμόνα καὶ βασιλέα Βάττον .
The Theraeans determined to send out men from their seven regions, taking by lot one of every pair of brothers, and making Battus leader and king of all.


4.153.1
5029
οὕτω δὴ στέλλουσι δύο πεντηκοντέρους ἐς τὴν Πλατέαν .
Then they manned two fifty-oared ships and sent them to Platea.


4.154.1
5030
ταῦτα δὲ Θηραῖοι λέγουσι , τὰ δ’ ἐπίλοιπα τοῦ λόγου συμφέρονται ἤδη Θηραῖοι Κυρηναίοισι .
This is what the Theraeans say; and now begins the part in which the Theraean and Cyrenaean stories agree,


4.154.1
5031
Κυρηναῖοι γὰρ τὰ περὶ Βάττον οὐδαμῶς ὁμολογέουσι Θηραίοισι λέγουσι γὰρ οὕτω .
but not until now, for the Cyrenaeans tell a wholly different story about Battus, which is this.


4.154.1
5032
ἔστι τῆς Κρήτης Ὀαξὸς πόλις , ἐν τῇ ἐγένετο Ἐτέαρχος βασιλεύς , ὃς ἐπὶ θυγατρὶ ἀμήτορι τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Φρονίμη , ἐπὶ ταύτῃ ἔγημε ἄλλην γυναῖκα .
There is a town in Crete called Oaxus, of which one Etearchus became ruler. He was a widower with a daughter whose name was Phronime, and he married a second wife.


4.154.2
5033
ἣ δὲ ἐπεσελθοῦσα ἐδικαίου καὶ τῷ ἔργῳ εἶναι μητρυιὴ τῇ Φρονίμῃ , παρέχουσα τε κακὰ καὶ πᾶν ἐπ’ αὐτῇ μηχανωμένη , καὶ τέλος μαχλοσύνην ἐπενείκασά οἱ πείθει τὸν ἄνδρα ταῦτα ἔχειν οὕτω .
When the second wife came into his house, she thought fit to be the proverbial stepmother to Phronime, ill-treating her and devising all sorts of evil against her;


4.154.2
5034
ὁ δὲ ἀναγνωσθεὶς ὑπὸ τῆς γυναικὸς ἔργον οὐκ ὅσιον ἐμηχανᾶτο ἐπὶ τῇ ;
at last she accused the girl of lewdness, and persuaded her husband that the charge was true.


4.154.2
5035
θυγατρί .
So Etearchus was persuaded by his wife and contrived a great sin against his daughter.


4.154.3
5036
ἦν γὰρ δὴ Θεμίσων ἀνὴρ Θηραῖος ἔμπορος ἐν τῇ Ὀαξῷ ·
There was at Oaxus a Theraean trader, one Themison;


4.154.3
5037
τοῦτον ὁ Ἐτέαρχος παραλαβὼν ἐπὶ ξείνια ἐξορκοῖ ἦ μέν οἱ διηκονήσειν ὅ τι ἂν δεηθῇ .
Etearchus made this man his guest and friend, and got him to swear that he would do him whatever service he desired;


4.154.3
5038
ἐπείτε δὴ ἐξώρκωσε , ἀγαγών οἱ παραδιδοῖ τὴν ἑωυτοῦ θυγατέρα καὶ ταύτην ἐκέλευε καταποντῶσαι ἀπαγαγόντα .
then he gave the man his own daughter, telling him to take her away and throw her into the sea.


4.154.4
5039
ὁ δὲ Θεμίσων περιημεκτήσας τῇ ἀπάτῃ τοῦ ὅρκου καὶ διαλυσάμενος τὴν ξεινίην ἐποίεε τοιάδε ·
But Themison was very angry at being thus tricked on his oath and renounced his friendship with Etearchus;


4.154.4
5040
παραλαβὼν τὴν παῖδα ἀπέπλεε ·
presently, he took the girl and sailed away,


4.154.4
5041
ὡς δὲ ἐγίνετο ἐν τῷ πελάγεϊ , ἀποσιεύμενος τὴν ἐξόρκωσιν τοῦ Ἐτεάρχου , σχοινίοισι αὐτὴν διαδήσας κατῆκε ἐς τὸ πέλαγος , ἀνασπάσας δὲ ἀπίκετο ἐς τὴν Θήρην .
and so as to fulfill the oath that he had sworn to Etearchus, when he was on the high seas he bound her with ropes and let her down into the sea and drew her up again, and presently arrived at Thera.


4.155.1
5042
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ τὴν Φρονίμην παραλαβὼν πολύμνηστος , ἐὼν τῶν Θηραίων ἀνὴρ δόκιμος , ἐπαλλακεύετο .
There Polymnestus, a notable Theraean, took Phronime and made her his concubine.


4.155.1
5043
χρόνου δὲ περιιόντος ἐξεγένετό οἱ παῖς ἰσχόφωνος καὶ τραυλός , τῷ οὔνομα ἐτέθη Βάττος , ὡς Θηραῖοι τε καὶ Κυρηναῖοι λέγουσι , ὡς μέντοι ἐγὼ δοκέω , ἄλλο τι ·
In time, a son of weak and stammering speech was born to him, to whom he gave the name Battus, as the Theraeans and Cyrenaeans say; but in my opinion the boy was given some other name,


4.155.2
5044
Βάττος δὲ μετωνομάσθη , ἐπείτε ἐς Λιβύην ἀπίκετο , ἀπό τε τοῦ χρηστηρίου τοῦ γενομένου ἐν Δελφοῖσι αὐτῷ καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς τιμῆς τὴν ἔσχε τὴν ἐπωνυμίην ποιεύμενος .
and changed it to Battus on his coming to Libya, taking this new name because of the oracle given to him at Delphi and the honorable office which he received.


4.155.2
5045
Λίβυες γὰρ βασιλέα βάττον καλέουσι , καὶ τούτου εἵνεκα δοκέω θεσπίζουσαν τὴν Πυθίην καλέσαι μιν Λιβυκῇ γλώσσῃ , εἰδυῖαν ὡς βασιλεὺς ἔσται ἐν Λιβύῃ .
For the Libyan word for king is “Battus,” and this (I believe) is why the Pythian priestess called him so in her prophecy, using a Libyan name because she knew that he was to be king in Libya.


4.155.3
5046
ἐπείτε γὰρ ἠνδρώθη οὗτος , ἦλθε ἐς Δελφοὺς περὶ τῆς φωνῆς ·
For when he grew to adulthood, he went to Delphi to inquire about his voice;


4.155.3
5047
ἐπειρωτῶντι δέ οἱ χρᾷ ἡ Πυθίη τάδε .
and the priestess in answer gave him this:


4.155.3
5048
Βάττ’ ἐπὶ φωνὴν ἦλθες .
"Battus, you have come for a voice;


4.155.3
5049
ἄναξ δέ σε Φοῖβος Ἀπόλλων ἐς Λιβύην πέμπει μηλοτρόφον οἰκιστῆρα , ὥσπερ εἰ εἴποι Ἑλλάδι γλώσσῃ χρεωμένη " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἐπὶ φωνὴν ἦλθες .
but Lord Phoebus Apollo Sends you to found a city in Libya, nurse of sheep,"


4.155.4
5050
" ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
just as if she addressed him using the Greek word for “king,” “Basileus, you have come for a voice,” et cetera.


4.155.4
5051
" ὦναξ , ἐγὼ μὲν ἦλθον παρὰ σὲ χρησάμενος περὶ τῆς φωνῆς , σὺ δέ μοι ἄλλα ἀδύνατα χρᾷς , κελεύων Λιβύην ἀποικίζειν τέῳ δυνάμι , κοίῃ χειρί " ;
But he answered: “Lord, I came to you to ask about my speech; but you talk of other matters, things impossible to do; you tell me to plant a colony in Libya; where shall I get the power or strength of hand for it?”


4.155.4
5052
ταῦτα λέγων οὐκὶ ἔπειθε ἄλλα οἱ χρᾶν ·
Battus spoke thus, but as the god would not give him another oracle and kept answering as before,


4.155.4
5053
ὡς δε κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ ἐθέσπιζέ οἱ καὶ πρότερον , οἴχετο μεταξὺ ἀπολιπὼν ὁ Βάττος ἐς τὴν Θήρην .
he departed while the priestess was still speaking, and went away to Thera.


4.156.1
5054
μετὰ δὲ αὐτῷ τε τούτῳ καὶ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι Θηραίοισι συνεφέρετο παλιγκότως .
But afterward things turned out badly for Battus and the rest of the Theraeans;


4.156.1
5055
ἀγνοεῦντες δὲ τὰς συμφορὰς οἱ Θηραῖοι ἔπεμπον ἐς Δελφοὺς περὶ τῶν παρεόντων κακῶν .
and when, ignorant of the cause of their misfortunes, they sent to Delphi to ask about their present ills,


4.156.2
5056
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη σφι ἔχρησε συγκτίζουσι Βάττῳ Κυρήνην τῆς Λιβύης ἄμεινον πρήξειν .
the priestess declared that they would fare better if they helped Battus plant a colony at Cyrene in Libya.


4.156.2
5057
ἀπέστελλον μετὰ ταῦτα τὸν Βάττον οἱ Θηραῖοι δύο πεντηκοντέροισι .
Then the Theraeans sent Battus with two fifty-oared ships;


4.156.2
5058
πλώσαντες δὲ ἐς τὴν Λιβύην οὗτοι , οὐ γὰρ εἶχον ὅ τι ποιέωσι ἄλλο , ὀπίσω ἀπαλλάσσοντο ἐς τὴν Θήρην .
these sailed to Libya, but, not knowing what else to do, presently returned to Thera.


4.156.3
5059
οἱ δὲ Θηραῖοι καταγομένους ἔβαλλον καὶ οὐκ ἔων τῇ γῇ προσίσχειν , ἀλλ’ ὀπίσω πλώειν ἐκέλευον .
There, the Theraeans shot at them as they came to land and would not let the ship put in, telling them to sail back;


4.156.3
5060
οἳ δὲ ἀναγκαζόμενοι ὀπίσω ἀπέπλεον καὶ ἔκτισαν νῆσον ἐπὶ Λιβύῃ κειμένην , τῇ οὔνομα , ὡς καὶ πρότερον εἰρέθη , ἐστὶ Βλατέα .
which they did under constraint of necessity, and planted a colony on an island off the Libyan coast called (as I have said already) Platea.


4.156.3
5061
λέγεται δὲ ἴση εἶναι ἡ νῆσος τῆ νῦν Κυρηναίων πόλι .
This island is said to be as big as the city of Cyrene is now.


4.157.1
5062
ταύτην οἰκέοντες δύο ἔτεα , οὐδὲν γάρ σφι χρηστὸν συνεφέρετο , ἕνα αὐτῶν καταλιπόντες οἱ λοιποὶ πάντες ἀπέπλεον ἐς Δελφούς , ἀπικόμενοι δὲ ἐπὶ τὸ χρηστήριον ἐχρέωντο , φάμενοι οἰκέειν τε τὴν Λιβύην καὶ οὐδὲν ἄμεινον πρήσσειν οἰκεῦντες .
Here they lived for two years; but as everything went wrong, the rest sailed to  Delphi leaving one behind, and on their arrival questioned the oracle, and said that they were living in  Libya, but that they were no better off for that.


4.157.2
5063
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη σφι πρὸς ταῦτα χρᾷ τάδε .
Then the priestess gave them this reply:


4.157.2
5064
αἰ τὺ ἐμεῦ Λιβύην μηλοτρόφον οἶδας ἄμεινον , μὴ ἐλθὼν ἐλθόντος , ἄγαν ἄγαμαι σοφίην σεῦ .
"If you know Libya nurse of sheep better than I, Though I have been there and you have not, then I am very much astonished at your knowledge."


4.157.2
5065
ἀκούσαντες δὲ τούτων οἱ ἀμφὶ τὸν Βάττον ἀπέπλωον ὀπίσω ·
Hearing this, Battus and his men sailed back again;


4.157.2
5066
οὐ γὰρ δή σφεας ἀπίει ὁ θεὸς τῆς ἀποικίης , πρὶν δὴ ἀπίκωνται ἐς αὐτὴν Λιβύην .
for the god would not let them do anything short of colonizing Libya itself;


4.157.3
5067
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ ἐς τὴν νῆσον καὶ ἀναλαβόντες τὸν ἔλιπον , ἔκτισαν αὐτῆς τῆς Λιβύης χῶρον ἀντίον τῆς νήσου τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Ἄζιρις ·
and having come to the island and taken aboard the one whom they had left there, they made a settlement at a place in Libya itself, opposite the island which was called Aziris.


4.157.3
5068
τὸν νάπαι τε κάλλισται ἐπ’ ἀμφότερα συγκληίουσι καὶ ποταμὸς τὰ ἐπὶ θάτερα παραρρέει .
This is a place enclosed on both sides by the fairest of groves, with a river flowing along one side of it.


4.158.1
5069
τοῦτον οἴκεον τὸν χῶρον ἓξ ἔτεα , ἑβδόμῳ δὲ σφέας ἔτει παραιτησάμενοι οἱ Λίβυες ὡς ἐς ἀμείνονα χῶρον ἄξουσι , ἀνέγνωσαν ἐκλιπεῖν .
Here they dwelt for six years; but in the seventh, the Libyans got them to leave the place, saying that they would lead them to a better;


4.158.2
5070
ἦγον δὲ σφέας ἐνθεῦτεν οἱ Λίβυες ἀναστήσαντες πρὸς ἑσπέρην , καὶ τὸν κάλλιστον τῶν χώρων ἵνα διεξιόντες οἱ Ἕλληνες μὴ ἴδοιεν , συμμετρησάμενοι τὴν ὥρην τῆς ἡμέρης νυκτὸς παρῆγον .
and they brought the Greeks from Aziris and led them west, so calculating the hours of daylight that they led the Greeks past the fairest place in their country, called Irasa, at night, lest the Greeks see it in their journey.


4.158.2
5071
ἔστι δὲ τῷ χώρῳ τούτω οὔνομα Ἴρασα .
and they brought the Greeks from Aziris and led them west, so calculating the hours of daylight that they led the Greeks past the fairest place in their country, called Irasa, at night, lest the Greeks see it in their journey.


4.158.3
5072
ἀγαγόντες δὲ σφέας ἐπὶ κρήνην λεγομένην εἶναι Ἀπόλλωνος εἶπαν " ἄνδρες Ἕλληνες , ἐνθαῦτα ὑμῖν ἐπιτήδεον οἰκέειν .
Then they brought the Greeks to what is called the Fountain of Apollo, and said to them: “Here, Greeks, it is suitable for you to live; for here the sky is torn.”


4.158.3
5073
ἐνθαῦτα γὰρ ὁ οὐρανὸς τέτρηται " .
Then they brought the Greeks to what is called the Fountain of Apollo, and said to them: “Here, Greeks, it is suitable for you to live; for here the sky is torn.”


4.159.1
5074
ἐπὶ μέν νυν Βάττου τε τοῦ οἰκιστέω τῆς ζόης , ἄρξαντος ἐπὶ τεσσεράκοντα ἔτεα , καὶ τοῦ παιδὸς αὐτοῦ Ἀρκεσίλεω ἄρξαντος ἑκκαίδεκα ἔτεα , οἴκεον οἱ Κυρηναῖοι ἐόντες τοσοῦτοι ὅσοι ἀρχὴν ἐς τὴν ἀποικίην ἐστάλησαν .
Now in the time of Battus the founder of the colony, who ruled for forty years, and of his son Arcesilaus who ruled for sixteen, the inhabitants of  Cyrene were no more in number than when they had first gone out to the colony.


4.159.2
5075
ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ τρίτου , Βάττου τοῦ εὐδαίμονος καλεομένου , Ἕλληνας πάντας ὥρμησε χρήσασα ἡ Πυθίη πλέειν συνοικήσοντας Κυρηναίοισι Λιβύην ·
But in the time of the third ruler, Battus, who was called the Fortunate, the Pythian priestess warned all Greeks by an oracle to cross the sea and live in Libya with the Cyrenaeans;


4.159.2
5076
ἐπεκαλέοντο γὰρ οἱ Κυρηναῖοι ἐπὶ γῆς ἀναδασμῷ ·
for the Cyrenaeans invited them, promising a distribution of land;


4.159.3
5077
ἔχρησε δὲ ὧδε ἔχοντα .
and this was the oracle:


4.159.3
5078
ὃς δέ κεν ἐς Λιβύην πολυήρατον ὕστερον ἔλθῃ γᾶς ἀναδαιομένας , μετὰ οἷ ποκα φαμὶ μελήσειν .
"Whoever goes to beloved Libya after the fields are divided, I say shall be sorry afterward."


4.159.4
5079
συλλεχθέντος δὲ ὁμίλου πολλοῦ ἐς τὴν Κυρήνην , περιταμνόμενοι γῆν πολλὴν οἱ περίοικοι Λίβυες καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς αὑτῶν τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Ἀδικράν , οἷα τῆς τε χώρης στερισκόμενοι καὶ περιυβριζόμενοι ὑπὸ τῶν Κυρηναίων , πέμψαντες ἐς Αἴγυπτον ἔδοσαν σφέας αὐτοὺς Ἀπρίῃ τῷ Αἰγύπτου βασιλέι .
So a great multitude gathered at  Cyrene, and cut out great tracts of land from the territory of the neighboring Libyans. Robbed of their lands and treated violently by the Cyrenaeans, these then sent to  Egypt together with their king, whose name was Adicran, and put their affairs in the hands of Apries, the king of that country.


4.159.5
5080
ὁ δὲ συλλέξας στρατὸν Αἰγυπτίων πολλὸν ἔπεμψε ἐπὶ τὴν Κυρήνην .
Apries mustered a great force of Egyptians and sent it against Cyrene;


4.159.5
5081
οἱ δὲ Κυρηναῖοι ἐκστρατευσάμενοι ἐς Ἴρασα χῶρον καὶ ἐπὶ κρήνην Θέστην συνέβαλόν τε τοῖσι Αἰγυπτίοισι καὶ ἐνίκησαν τῇ συμβολῇ .
the Cyrenaeans marched out to Irasa and the Thestes spring, and there fought with the Egyptians and beat them;


4.159.6
5082
ἅτε γὰρ οὐ πεπειρημένοι πρότερον οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι Ἑλλήνων καὶ παραχρεώμενοι διεφθάρησαν οὕτω ὥστε ὀλίγοι τινὲς αὐτῶν ἀπενόστησαν ἐς Αἴγυπτον .
for the Egyptians had as yet had no experience of Greeks, and despised their enemy;


4.159.6
5083
ἀντὶ τούτων Αἰγύπτιοι καὶ ταῦτα ἐπιμεμφόμενοι Ἀπρίῃ ἀπέστησαν ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ .
as a result of which, they were so utterly destroyed that few of them returned to Egypt. Because of this misfortune, and because they blamed him for it, the Egyptians revolted from Apries.


4.160.1
5084
τούτου δὲ τοῦ Βάττου παῖς γίνεται Ἀρκεσίλεως .
This Battus had a son Arcesilaus;


4.160.1
5085
ὃς βασιλεύσας πρῶτα τοῖσι ἑωυτοῦ ἀδελφεοῖσι ἐστασίασε , ἐς ὅ μιν οὗτοι ἀπολιπόντες οἴχοντο ἐς ἄλλον χῶρον τῆς Λιβύης καὶ ἐπ’ ἑωυτῶν βαλόμενοι ἔκτισαν πόλιν ταύτην ἣ τότε καὶ νῦν Βάρκη κλέεται ·
on his first coming to reign, he quarrelled with his brothers, until they left him and went away to another place in Libya, where they founded a city for themselves, which was then and is now called Barce;


4.160.1
5086
κτίζοντες δὲ ἅμα αὐτὴν ἀπιστᾶσι ἀπὸ τῶν Κυρηναίων τοὺς Λίβυας .
and while they were founding it, they persuaded the Libyans to revolt from the Cyrenaeans.


4.160.2
5087
μετὰ δὲ Ἀρκεσίλεως ἐς τοὺς ὑποδεξαμένους τε τῶν Λιβύων καὶ ἀποστάντας τοὺς αὐτοὺς τούτους ἐστρατεύετο ·
Then Arcesilaus led an army into the country of the Libyans who had received his brothers and had also revolted;


4.160.2
5088
οἱ δὲ Λίβυες δείσαντες αὐτὸν οἴχοντο φεύγοντες πρὸς τοὺς ἠοίους τῶν Λιβύων .
and they fled in fear of him to the eastern Libyans.


4.160.3
5089
ὁ δὲ Ἀρκεσίλεως εἵπετο φεύγουσι , ἐς οὗ ἐν Λεύκωνί τε τῆς Λιβύης ἐγίνετο ἐπιδιώκων καὶ ἔδοξε τοῖσι Λίβυσι ἐπιθέσθαι οἱ .
Arcesilaus pursued them until he came in his pursuit to Leucon in Libya, where the Libyans resolved to attack him;


4.160.3
5090
συμβαλόντες δὲ ἐνίκησαν τοὺς Κυρηναίους τοσοῦτο ὥστε ἑπτακισχιλίους ὁπλίτας Κυρηναίων ἐνθαῦτα πεσεῖν .
they engaged, and so wholly overcame the Cyrenaeans that seven thousand Cyrenaean soldiers were killed there.


4.160.4
5091
μετὰ δὲ τὸ τρῶμα τοῦτο Ἀρκεσίλεων μὲν κάμνοντά τε καὶ φάρμακον πεπωκότα ὁ ἀδελφεὸς Ἁλίαρχος ἀποπνίγει , Ἁλίαρχον δὲ ἡ γυνὴ ἡ Ἀρκεσίλεω δόλῳ κτείνει , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Ἐρυξώ .
After this disaster, Arcesilaus, being worn down and having taken a drug, was strangled by his brother Learchus; Learchus was deftly killed by Arcesilaus' wife, Eryxo.


4.161.1
5092
διεδέξατο δὲ τὴν βασιληίην τοῦ Ἀρκεσίλεω ὁ παῖς Βάττος , χωλός τε ἐὼν καὶ οὐκ ἀρτίπους .
Arcesilaus' kingship passed to his son Battus, who was lame and infirm in his feet.


4.161.1
5093
οἱ δὲ Κυρηναῖοι πρὸς τὴν καταλαβοῦσαν συμφορὴν ἔπεμπον ἐς Δελφοὺς ἐπειρησομένους ὅντινα τρόπον καταστησάμενοι κάλλιστα ἂν οἰκέοιεν .
The Cyrenaeans, in view of the affliction that had overtaken them, sent to Delphi to ask what political arrangement would enable them to live best;


4.161.2
5094
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη ἐκέλευε ἐκ Μαντινέης τῆς Ἀρκάδων καταρτιστῆρα ἀγαγέσθαι .
the priestess told them bring a mediator from Mantinea in Arcadia.


4.161.2
5095
αἴτεον ὦν οἱ Κυρηναῖοι , καὶ οἱ Μαντινέες ἔδοσαν ἄνδρα τῶν ἀστῶν δοκιμώτατον , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Δημῶναξ .
When the Cyrenaeans sent their request, the Mantineans gave them their most valued citizen, whose name was Demonax.


4.161.3
5096
οὗτος ὦν ὡνὴρ ἀπικόμενος ἐς τὴν Κυρήνην καὶ μαθὼν ἕκαστα τοῦτο μὲν τριφύλους ἐποίησε σφεας , τῇδε διαθείς ·
When this man came to Cyrene and learned everything, he divided the people into three tribes;


4.161.3
5097
Θηραίων μὲν καὶ τῶν περιοίκων μίαν μοῖραν ἐποίησε , ἄλλην δὲ Πελοποννησίων καὶ Κρητῶν , τρίτην δὲ νησιωτέων πάντων .
of which the Theraeans and dispossessed Libyans were one, the Peloponnesians and Cretans the second, and all the islanders the third;


4.161.3
5098
τοῦτο δὲ τῷ βασιλέι Βάττῳ τεμένεα ἐξελὼν καὶ ἱρωσύνας , τὰ ἄλλα πάντα τὰ πρότερον εἶχον οἱ βασιλέες ἐς μέσον τῷ δήμῳ ἔθηκε .
furthermore, he set apart certain domains and priesthoods for their king Battus, but all the rest, which had belonged to the kings, were now to be held by the people in common.


4.162.1
5099
ἐπὶ μὲν δὴ τούτου τοῦ Βάττου οὕτω διετέλεε ἐόντα , ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ τούτου παιδὸς Ἀρκεσίλεω πολλὴ ταραχὴ περὶ τῶν τιμέων ἐγένετο .
During the life of this Battus, these ordinances held good, but in the time of his son Arcesilaus much contention arose about the king's rights.


4.162.2
5100
Ἀρκεσίλεως γὰρ ὁ Βάττου τε τοῦ χωλοῦ καὶ Φερετίμης οὐκ ἔφη ἀνέξεσθαι κατὰ τὰ ὁ Μαντινεὺς Δημῶναξ ἔταξε , ἀλλὰ ἀπαίτεε τὰ τῶν προγόνων γέρεα .
Arcesilaus, son of the lame Battus and Pheretime, would not abide by the ordinances of Demonax, but demanded back the prerogatives of his forefathers,


4.162.2
5101
ἐνθεῦτεν στασιάζων ἑσσώθη καὶ ἔφυγε ἐς Σάμον , ἡ δὲ μήτηρ οἱ ἐς Σαλαμῖνα τῆς Κύπρου ἔφυγε .
and made himself head of a faction; but he was defeated and banished to Samos, and his mother fled to Salamis in Cyprus.


4.162.3
5102
τῆς δὲ Σαλαμῖνος τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ἐπεκράτεε Εὐέλθων , ὃς τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖσι θυμιητήριον , ἐὸν ἀξιοθέητον ἀνέθηκε , τὸ ἐν τῷ Κορινθίων θησαυρῷ κέεται .
Now Salamis at this time was ruled by Evelthon, who dedicated that marvellous censer at Delphi which stands in the treasury of the Corinthians.


4.162.3
5103
ἀπικομένη δὲ παρὰ τοῦτον ἡ Φερετίμη ἐδέετο στρατιῆς ἣ κατάξει σφέας ἐς τὴν Κυρήνην .
Pheretime came to him, asking him for an army to bring her and her son back to Cyrene;


4.162.4
5104
ὁ δὲ Εὐέλθων πᾶν μᾶλλον ἢ στρατιήν οἱ ἐδίδου ·
Evelthon was willing to give her everything else, only not an army,


4.162.4
5105
ἣ δὲ λαμβάνουσα τὸ διδόμενον καλὸν μὲν ἔφη καὶ τοῦτο εἶναι , κάλλιον δὲ ἐκεῖνο , τὸ δοῦναί οἱ δεομένῃ στρατιήν .
and when she accepted what he gave her, she said that it was fine, but it would be better to give her an army as she asked.


4.162.5
5106
τοῦτο ἐπὶ παντὶ γὰρ τῷ διδομένῳ ἔλεγε , τελευταῖόν οἱ ἐξέπεμψε δῶρον ὁ Εὐέλθων ἄτρακτον χρύσεον καὶ ἠλακάτην , προσῆν δε καὶ εἴριον .
This she said whatever the gift, until at last Evelthon sent her a golden spindle and distaff, and wool,


4.162.5
5107
ἐπειπάσης δὲ αὖτις τῆς Φερετίμης τ- αὐτὸ ἔπος , ὁ Εὐέλθων ἔφη τοιούτοισι γυναῖκας δωρέεσθαι ἀλλ’ οὐ στρατιῇ .
and when Pheretime uttered the same words as before, he answered that these, and not armies, were gifts for women.


4.163.1
5108
ὁ δὲ Ἀρκεσίλεως τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ἐὼν ἐν Σάμῳ συνήγειρε πάντα ἄνδρα ἐπὶ γῆς ἀναδασμῷ ·
Meanwhile Arcesilaus was in Samos, collecting all the men that he could and promising them a new division of land;


4.163.1
5109
συλλεγομένου δὲ στρατοῦ πολλοῦ , ἐστάλη ἐς Δελφοὺς Ἀρκεσίλεως χρησόμενος τῷ χρηστηρίῳ περὶ κατόδου .
and while a great army was thus gathering, he made a journey to Delphi, to ask the oracle about his return.


4.163.2
5110
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη οἱ χρᾷ τάδε .
The priestess gave him this answer:


4.163.3
5111
" ἐπὶ μὲν τέσσερας Βᾶττους καὶ Ἀρκεσίλεως τέσσερας , ὀκτὼ ἀνδρῶν γενεάς , διδοῖ ὑμῖν Λοξίης βασιλεύειν Κυρήνης , πλέον μέντοι τούτου οὐδὲ πειρᾶσθαι παραινέει .
“For the lifetimes of four Battuses and four Arcesilauses, eight generations of men, Loxias grants to your house the kingship of Cyrene; more than this he advises you not even to try.


4.163.3
5112
σὺ μέντοι ἥσυχος εἶναι κατελθὼν ἐς τὴν σεωυτοῦ .
But you, return to your country and live there in peace.


4.163.3
5113
ἢν δὲ τὴν κάμινον εὕρῃς πλέην ἀμφορέων , μὴ ἐξοπτήσῃς τοὺς ἀμφορέας ἀλλ’ ἀπόπεμπε κατ’ οὖρον ·
But if you find the oven full of amphora, do not bake the amphora, but let them go unscathed.


4.163.3
5114
εἰ δὲ ἐξοπτήσεις τὴν κάμινον ,μὴ ἐσέλθῃς ἐς τὴν ἀμφίρρυτον ·
And if you bake them in the oven, do not go into the tidal place;


4.163.3
5115
εἰ δὲ μὴ ἀποθανέαι καὶ αὐτὸς καὶ ταῦρος ὁ καλλιστεύων " .
for if you do, then you shall be killed yourself, and also the bull that is fairest of the herd.”


4.163.3
5116
ταῦτα ἡ Πυθίη Ἀρκεσίλεῳ χρᾷ .
This was the oracle given by the priestess to Arcesilaus.


4.164.1
5117
ὁ δὲ παραλαβὼν τοὺς ἐκ τῆς Σάμου κατῆλθε ἐς τὴν Κυρήνην , καὶ ἐπικρατήσας τῶν πρηγμάτων τοῦ μαντηίου οὐκ ἐμέμνητο , ἀλλὰ δίκας τοὺς ἀντιστασιώτας αἴτεε τῆς ἑωυτοῦ φυγῆς .
But he returned to  Cyrene with the men from  Samos, and having made himself master of it he forgot the oracle, and demanded justice upon his enemies for his banishment.


4.164.2
5118
τῶν δὲ οἳ μὲν τὸ παράπαν ἐκ τῆς χώρης ἀπαλλάσσοντο , τοὺς δὲ τινὰς χειρωσάμενος ὁ Ἀρκεσίλεως ἐς Κύπρον ἀπέστειλε ἐπὶ διαφθορῇ .
Some of these left the country altogether;


4.164.2
5119
τούτους μέν νυν Κνίδιοι ἀπενειχθέντας πρὸς τὴν σφετέρην ἐρρύσαντο καὶ ἐς Θήρην ἀπέστειλαν ·
others, Arcesilaus seized and sent away to Cyprus to be killed there.


4.164.2
5120
ἑτέρους δὲ τινὰς τῶν Κυρηναίων ἐς πύργον μέγαν Ἀγλωμάχου καταφυγόντας ἰδιωτικὸν ὕλην περινήσας ὁ Ἀρκεσίλεως ἐνέπρησε .
These were carried off their course to Cnidus, where the Cnidians saved them and sent them to Thera.


4.164.3
5121
μαθὼν δὲ ἐπ’ ἐξεργασμένοισι τὸ μαντήιον ἐὸν τοῦτο , ὅτι μιν ἡ Πυθίη οὐκ ἔα εὑρόντα ἐν τῇ καμίνῳ τοὺς ἀμφορέας ἐξοπτῆσαι , ἔργετο ἑκὼν τῆς τῶν Κυρηναίων πόλιος , δειμαίνων τε τὸν κεχρησμένον θάνατον καὶ δοκέων ἀμφίρρυτον τὴν Κυρήνην εἶναι .
Then, perceiving too late that this was the meaning of the Delphic oracle which forbade him to bake the amphora if he found them in the oven, he deliberately refrained from going into the city of the Cyrenaeans, fearing the death prophesied and supposing the tidal place to be  Cyrene.


4.164.4
5122
εἶχε δὲ γυναῖκα συγγενέα ἑωυτοῦ , θυγατέρα δὲ τῶν Βαρκαίων τοῦ βασιλέος , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Ἀλάζειρ ·
Now he had a wife who was a relation of his, a daughter of Alazir king of the Barcaeans,


4.164.4
5123
παρὰ τοῦτον ἀπικνέεται , καί μιν Βαρκαῖοί τε ἄνδρες καὶ τῶν ἐκ Κυρήνης φυγάδων τινὲς καταμαθόντες ἀγοράζοντα κτείνουσι , πρὸς δὲ καὶ τὸν πενθερὸν αὐτοῦ Ἀλάζειρα .
and Arcesilaus went to Alazir; but men of Barce and some of the exiles from Cyrene were aware of him and killed him as he walked in the town, and Alazir his father-in-law too.


4.164.4
5124
Ἀρκεσίλεως μέν νυν εἴτε ἑκὼν εἴτε ἀέκων ἁμαρτὼν τοῦ χρησμοῦ ἐξέπλησε μοῖραν τὴν ἑωυτοῦ .
So Arcesilaus whether with or without meaning to missed the meaning of the oracle and fulfilled his destiny.


4.165.1
5125
ἡ δὲ μήτηρ Φερετίμη , ἕως μὲν ὁ Ἀρκεσίλεως ἐν τῇ Βάρκῃ διαιτᾶτο ἐξεργασμένος ἑωυτῷ κακόν , ἣ δὲ εἶχε αὐτὴ τοῦ παιδὸς τὰ γέρεα ἐν Κυρήνῃ καὶ τ- ἄλλα νεμομένη καὶ ἐν βουλῇ παρίζουσα .
While Arcesilaus was living at  Barce, accomplishing his own destruction, his mother Pheretime held her son's prerogative at  Cyrene, where she administered all his business and sat with others in council.


4.165.2
5126
ἐπείτε δὲ ἔμαθε ἐν τῇ Βάρκῃ ἀποθανόντα οἱ τὸν παῖδα , φεύγουσα οἰχώκεε ἐς Αἴγυπτον .
But when she learned of her son's death at Barce, she made her escape to Egypt,


4.165.2
5127
ἦσαν γάρ οἱ ἐκ τοῦ Ἀρκεσίλεω εὐεργεσίαι ἐς Καμβύσεα τὸν Κύρου πεποιημέναι ·
trusting to the good service which Arcesilaus had done Cambyses the son of Cyrus;


4.165.2
5128
οὗτος γὰρ ἦν ὁ Ἀρκεσίλεως ὃς Κυρήνην Καμβύσῃ ἔδωκε καὶ φόρον ἐτάξατο .
for this was the Arcesilaus who gave Cyrene to Cambyses and agreed to pay tribute.


4.165.3
5129
ἀπικομένη δὲ ἐς τὴν Αἴγυπτον ἡ Φερετίμη Ἀρυάνδεω ἱκέτις ἵζετο , τιμωρῆσαι ἑωυτῇ κελεύουσα , προισχομένη πρόφασιν ὡς διὰ τὸν μηδισμὸν ὁ παῖς οἱ τέθνηκε .
So, on her arrival in  Egypt, Pheretime supplicated Aryandes, asking that he avenge her, on the plea that her son had been killed for allying himself with the Medes.


4.166.1
5130
ὁ δὲ Ἀρυάνδης ἦν οὗτος τῆς Αἰγύπτου ὕπαρχος ὑπὸ Καμβύσεω κατεστεώς , ὃς ὑστέρῳ χρόνῳ τούτων παρισούμενος Δαρείῳ διεφθάρη .
This Aryandes had been appointed viceroy of Egypt by Cambyses;


4.166.1
5131
πυθόμενος γὰρ καὶ ἰδὼν Δαρεῖον ἐπιθυμέοντα μνημόσυνον ἑωυτοῦ λιπέσθαι τοῦτο τὸ μὴ ἄλλῳ εἴη βασιλέι κατεργασμένον , ἐμιμέετο τοῦτον , ἐς οὗ ἔλαβε τὸν μισθόν .
at a later day, he was put to death for making himself equal to Darius.


4.166.2
5132
Δαρεῖος μὲν γὰρ χρυσίον καθαρώτατον ἀπεψήσας ἐς τὸ δυνατώτατον νόμισμα ἐκόψατο , Ἀρυάνδης δὲ ἄρχων Αἰγύπτου ἀργύριον τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἐποίεε , καὶ νῦν ἐστὶ ἀργύριον καθαρώτατον τὸ Ἀρυανδικόν .
for Darius had coined money out of gold refined to an extreme purity,


4.166.2
5133
μαθὼν δέ μιν Δαρεῖος ταῦτα ποιεῦντα , αἰτίην οἱ ἄλλην ἐπενείκας ὥς οἱ ἐπανίσταιτο , ἀπέκτεινε .
and Aryandes, then ruling Egypt, made a similar silver coinage; and now there is no silver money so pure as is the Aryandic.


4.167.1
5134
τότε δὲ οὗτος ὁ Ἀρυάνδης κατοικτείρας Φερετίμην διδοῖ αὐτῇ στρατὸν τὸν ἐξ Αἰγύπτου ἅπαντα καὶ τὸν πεζὸν καὶ τὸν ναυτικόν ·
At this time, Aryandes took pity on Pheretime and gave her all the Egyptian land and sea forces,


4.167.1
5135
στρατηγὸν δὲ τοῦ μὲν πεζοῦ Ἄμασιν ἀπέδεξε ἄνδρα Μαράφιον , τοῦ δὲ ναυτικοῦ Βάδρην ἐόντα Πασαργάδην γένος .
appointing Amasis, a Maraphian, general of the army, and Badres of the tribe of the Pasargadae, admiral of the fleet.


4.167.2
5136
πρὶν δὲ ἢ ἀποστεῖλαι τὴν στρατιήν , ὁ Ἀρυάνδης πέμψας ἐς τὴν Βάρκην κήρυκα ἐπυνθάνετο τίς εἴη ὁ Ἀρκεσίλεων ἀποκτείνας .
But before despatching the troops, Aryandes sent a herald to Barce to ask who it was who had killed Arcesilaus.


4.167.2
5137
οἱ δὲ Βαρκαῖοι αὐτοὶ ὑπεδέκοντο πάντες ·
The Barcaeans answered that it was the deed of the whole city,


4.167.2
5138
πολλά τε γὰρ καὶ κακὰ πάσχειν ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ .
for the many wrongs that Arcesilaus had done them;


4.167.2
5139
πυθόμενος δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Ἀρυάνδης οὕτω δὴ τὴν στρατιὴν ἀπέστειλε ἅμα τῇ Φερετίμῃ .
when he heard this, Aryandes sent his troops with Pheretime.


4.167.3
5140
αὕτη μέν νυν αἰτίη πρόσχημα τοῦ στόλου ἐγίνετο , ἀπεπέμπετο δὲ ἡ στρατιή , ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέειν , ἐπὶ Λιβύης καταστροφῇ .
This was the pretext; but I myself think that the troops were sent to subjugate Libya.


4.167.3
5141
Λιβύων γὰρ δὴ ἔθνεα πολλὰ καὶ παντοῖα ἐστι , καὶ τὰ μὲν αὐτῶν ὀλίγα βασιλέος ἦν ὑπήκοα , τὰ δὲ πλέω ἐφρόντιζε Δαρείου οὐδέν .
For the Libyan tribes are many and of different kinds, and though a few of them were the king's subjects, the greater part cared nothing for Darius.


4.168.1
5142
οἰκέουσι δὲ κατὰ τάδε Λίβυες .
Now, concerning the lands inhabited by Libyans,


4.168.1
5143
ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου ἀρξάμενοι πρῶτοι Ἀδυρμαχίδαι Λιβύων κατοίκηνται , οἳ νόμοισι μὲν τὰ πλέω Αἰγυπτίοισι χρέωνται , ἐσθῆτα δὲ φορέουσι οἵην περ οἱ ἄλλοι Λίβυες .
the Adyrmachidae are the people that live nearest to Egypt; they follow Egyptian customs for the most part, but dress like other Libyans.


4.168.1
5144
αἱ δὲ γυναῖκες αὐτῶν ψέλιον περὶ ἑκατέρῃ τῶν κνημέων φορέουσι χάλκεον ·
Their women wear twisted bronze ornaments on both legs; their hair is long;


4.168.1
5145
τὰς κεφαλὰς δὲ κομῶσαι , τοὺς φθεῖρας ἐπεὰν λάβωσι τοὺς ἑωυτῆς ἑκάστη ἀντιδάκνει καὶ οὕτω ῥίπτει .
each catches her own lice, then bites and throws them away.


4.168.2
5146
οὗτοι δὲ μοῦνοι Λιβύων τοῦτο ἐργάζονται , καὶ τῷ βασιλέι μοῦνοι τὰς παρθένους μελλούσας συνοικέειν ἐπιδεικνύουσι .
They are the only Libyans that do this, and who show the king all virgins that are to be married;


4.168.2
5147
ἣ δὲ ἂν τῷ βασιλέι ἀρεστὴ γένηται , ὑπὸ τούτου διαπαρθενεύεται .
the king then takes the virginity of whichever of these pleases him.


4.168.2
5148
παρήκουσι δὲ οὗτοι οἱ Ἀδυρμαχίδαι ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου μέχρι λιμένος τῷ οὔνομα Πλυνός ἐστι .
These Adyrmachidae extend from Egypt to the harbor called Plynus.


4.169.1
5149
τούτων δὲ ἔχονται Γιλιγάμαι , νεμόμενοι τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρην χώρηνμέχρι Ἀφροδισιάδος νήσου .
Next to them are the Giligamae, who inhabit the country to the west as far as the island of Aphrodisias;


4.169.1
5150
ἐν δὲ τῷ μεταξὺ τούτου χώρῳ ἥ τε Πλατέα νῆσος ἐπικέεται , τὴν ἔκτισαν οἱ Κυρηναῖοι , καὶ ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ Μενέλαος λιμήν ἐστι καὶ Ἄζιρις , τὴν οἱ Κυρηναῖοι οἴκεον , καὶ τὸ σίλφιον ἄρχεται ἀπὸ τούτου ·
in between lies the island of Platea, which the Cyrenaeans colonized, and on the mainland is the harbor called Menelaus, and the Aziris which was a settlement of the Cyrenaeans. Here the country of silphium begins,


4.169.2
5151
παρήκει δὲ ἀπὸ Πλατέης νήσου μέχρι τοῦ στόματος τῆς Σύρτιος τὸ σίλφιον .
which reaches from the island of Platea to the entrance of the Syrtis.


4.169.2
5152
νόμοισι δὲ χρέωνται οὗτοι παραπλησίοισι τοῖσι ἑτέροισι .
This people is like the others in its customs.


4.170.1
5153
Γιλιγαμέων δὲ ἔχονται τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρης Ἀσβύσται .
The next people west of the Giligamae are the Asbystae, who live inland of Cyrene,


4.170.1
5154
οὗτοι ὑπὲρ Κυρήνης οἰκέουσι .
not coming down to the coast, for that is Cyrenaean territory.


4.170.1
5155
ἐπὶ θάλασσαν δὲ οὐ κατήκουσι Ἀσβύσται τὸ γὰρ παρὰ θάλασσαν Κυρηναῖοι νέμονται .
These drive four-horse chariots to a greater extent than any other Libyans;


4.170.1
5156
τεθριπποβάται δὲ οὐκ ἥκιστα ἀλλὰ μάλιστα Λιβύων εἰσί , νόμους δὲ τοὺς πλεῦνας μιμέεσθαι ἐπιτηδεύουσι τοὺς Κυρηναίων .
it is their practice to imitate most of the Cyrenaean customs.


4.171.1
5157
Ἀσβυστέων δὲ ἔχονται τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρης Αὐσχίσαι ·
Next west of the Asbystae are the Auschisae, dwelling inland of Barce,


4.171.1
5158
οὗτοι ὑπὲρ Βάρκης οἰκέουσι , κατήκοντες ἐπὶ θάλασσαν κατ’ Εὐεσπερίδας .
and touching the coast at Euhesperidae.


4.171.1
5159
Αὐσχισέων δὲ κατὰ μέσον τῆς χώρης οἰκέουσι Βάκαλες , ὀλίγον ἔθνος , κατήκοντες ἐπὶ θάλασσαν κατὰ Ταύχειρα πόλιν τῆς Βαρκαίης ·
About the middle of the land of the Auschisae lives the little tribe of the Bacales, whose territory comes down to the sea at Tauchira, a town in the Barcaean country;


4.171.1
5160
νόμοισι δὲ τοῖσι αὐτοῖσι χρέωνται τοῖσι καὶ οἱ ὑπὲρ Κυρήνης .
their customs are the same as those of the dwellers inland of Cyrene.


4.172.1
5161
Αὐσχισέων δὲ τούτων τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρης ἔχονται Νασαμῶνες , ἔθνος ἐὸν πολλόν , οἳ τὸ θέρος καταλείποντες ἐπὶ τῇ θαλάσσῃ τὰ πρόβατα ἀναβαίνουσι ἐς Αὔγιλα χῶρον ὀπωριεῦντες τοὺς φοίνικας .
Next west of these Auschisae is the populous country of the Nasamones,


4.172.1
5162
οἳ δὲ πολλοὶ καὶ ἀμφιλαφέες πεφύκασι , πάντες ἐόντες καρποφόροι .
who in summer leave their flocks by the sea and go up to the land called Augila to gather dates from the palm-trees that grow there in great abundance and all bear fruit.


4.172.1
5163
τοὺς δὲ ἀττελέβους ἐπεὰν θηρεύσωσι , αὐήναντες πρὸς τὸν ἥλιον καταλέουσι καὶ ἔπειτα ἐπὶ γάλα ἐπιπάσσοντες πίνουσι .
They hunt locusts, which they dry in the sun, and after grinding sprinkle them into milk and drink it.


4.172.2
5164
γυναῖκας δὲ νομίζοντες πολλὰς ἔχειν ἕκαστος ἐπίκοινον αὐτέων τὴν μῖξιν ποιεῦνται τρόπῳ παραπλησίῳ τῷ καὶ Μασσαγέται ·
It is their custom for every man to have many wives; their intercourse with women is promiscuous, as among the Massagetae;


4.172.2
5165
ἐπεὰν σκίπωνα προστήσωνται , μίσγονται .
a staff is placed before the dwelling, and then they have intercourse.


4.172.2
5166
πρῶτον δὲ γαμέοντος Νασαμῶνος ἀνδρὸς νόμος ἐστὶ τὴν νύμφην νυκτὶ τῇ πρώτῃ διὰ πάντων διεξελθεῖν τῶν δαιτυμόνων μισγομένην ·
When a man of the Nasamones weds, on the first night the bride must by custom lie with each of the whole company in turn;


4.172.2
5167
τῶν δὲ ὡς ἕκαστος οἱ μιχθῇ , διδοῖ δῶρον τὸ ἂν ἔχῃ φερόμενος ἐξ οἴκου .
and each man after intercourse gives her whatever gift he has brought from his house.


4.172.3
5168
ὁρκίοισι δὲ καὶ μαντικῇ χρέωνται τοιῇδε ·
As for their manner of swearing and divination, they lay their hands on the graves of the men reputed to have been the most just and good among them, and by these men they swear;


4.172.3
5169
ὀμνύουσι μὲν τοὺς παρὰ σφίσι ἄνδρας δικαιοτάτους καὶ ἀρίστους λεγομένους γενέσθαι , τούτους , τῶν τύμβων ἁπτόμενοι ·
their practice of divination is to go to the tombs of their ancestors, where after making prayers they lie down to sleep,


4.172.3
5170
μαντεύονται δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν προγόνων φοιτέοντες τὰ σήματα , καὶ κατευξάμενοι ἐπικατακοιμῶνται ·
and take for oracles whatever dreams come to them.


4.172.3
5171
τὸ δ’ ἂν ἴδη ἐν τῇ , ὄψι ἐνύπνιον , τούτῳ χρᾶται .
and take for oracles whatever dreams come to them.


4.172.4
5172
πίστισι δὲ τοιῇσιδε χρέωνται ·
They give and receive pledges by each drinking from the hand of the other party;


4.172.4
5173
ἐκ τῆς χειρὸς διδοῖ πιεῖν καὶ αὐτὸς ἐκ τῆς τοῦ ἑτέρου πίνει .
and if they have nothing liquid, they take the dust of the earth and lick it up.


4.172.4
5174
ἢν δὲ μὴ ἔχωσι ὑγρὸν μηδέν , οἳ δὲ τῆς χαμᾶθεν σποδοῦ λαβόντες λείχουσι .
They give and receive pledges by each drinking from the hand of the other party; and if they have nothing liquid, they take the dust of the earth and lick it up.


4.173.1
5175
Νασαμῶσι δὲ προσόμουροι εἰσὶ Ψύλλοι .
On the borders of the Nasamones is the country of the Psylli,


4.173.1
5176
οὗτοι ἐξαπολώλασι τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
who perished in this way:


4.173.1
5177
ὁ νότος σφι πνέων ἄνεμος τὰ ἔλυτρα τῶν ὑδάτων ἐξηύηνε , ἡ δὲ χώρη σφι ἅπασα ἐντὸς ἐοῦσα τῆς Σύρτιος ἦν ἄνυδρος .
the force of the south wind dried up their water-tanks, and all their country, lying in the region of the Syrtis, was waterless.


4.173.1
5178
οἳ δὲ βουλευσάμενοι κοινῷ λόγῳ ἐστρατεύοντο ἐπὶ τὸν νότον ( λέγω δὲ ταῦτα τὰ λέγουσι Λίβυες ) , καὶ ἐπείτε ἐγίνοντο ἐν τῇ ψάμμῳ , πνεύσας ὁ νότος κατέχωσε σφέας .
After deliberating together, they marched south (I tell the story as it is told by the Libyans), and when they came into the sandy desert, a strong south wind buried them.


4.173.1
5179
ἐξαπολομένων δὲ τούτων ἔχουσι τὴν χώρην οἱ Νασαμῶνες .
So they perished utterly, and the Nasamones have their country.


4.174.1
5180
τούτων δὲ κατύπερθε πρὸς νότον ἄνεμον ἐν τῇ , θηριώδεϊ οἰκέουσι Γαράμαντες , οἳ πάντα ἄνθρωπον φεύγουσι καὶ παντὸς ὁμιλίην , καὶ οὔτε ὅπλον ἐκτέαται ἀρήιον οὐδὲν οὔτε ἀμύνεσθαι ἐπιστέαται .
Inland of these to the south, the Garamantes live in wild beast country. They shun the sight and fellowship of men, and have no weapons of war, nor know how to defend themselves.


4.175.1
5181
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ κατύπερθε οἰκέουσι Νασαμώνων ·
These live inland of the Nasamones;


4.175.1
5182
τὸ δὲ παρὰ τὴν θάλασσαν ἔχονται τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρης Μάκαι , οἳ λόφους κείρονται , τὸ μὲν μέσον τῶν τριχῶν ἀνιέντες αὔξεσθαι , τὰ δὲ ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν κείροντες ἐν χροΐ , ἐς δὲ τὸν πόλεμον στρουθῶν καταγαίων δορὰς φορέουσι προβλήματα .
the neighboring seaboard to the west is the country of the Macae, who shave their hair to a crest, leaving that on the top of their heads to grow and shaving clean off what is on either side; in war they carry shields made of ostrich skins.


4.175.2
5183
διὰ δὲ αὐτῶν Κῖνυψ ποταμὸς ῥέων ἐκ λόφου καλευμένου Χαρίτων ἐς θάλασσαν ἐκδιδοῖ .
The Cinyps river empties into their sea through their country from a hill called the Hill of the Graces.


4.175.2
5184
ὁ δὲ λόφος οὗτος ὁ Χαρίτων δασὺς ἴδῃσι ἐστί , ἐούσης τῆς ἄλλης τῆς προκαταλεχθείσης Λιβύης ψιλῆς ·
This hill is thickly wooded, while the rest of Libya of which I have spoken is bare of trees;


4.175.2
5185
ἀπὸ θαλάσσης δὲ ἐς αὐτὸν στάδιοι διηκόσιοι εἰσί .
it is twenty-five miles from the sea.


4.176.1
5186
Μακέων δὲ τούτων ἐχόμενοι Γινδᾶνες εἰσί , τῶν αἱ γυναῖκες περισφύρια δερμάτων πολλὰ ἑκάστη φορέει κατὰ τοιόνδε τι , ὡς λέγεται ·
Next to these Macae are the Gindanes, where every woman wears many leather anklets,


4.176.1
5187
κατ’ ἄνδρα ἕκαστον μιχθέντα περισφύριον περιδέεται ·
because (so it is said) she puts on an anklet for every man with whom she has had intercourse;


4.176.1
5188
ἣ δὲ ἂν πλεῖστα ἔχῃ , αὕτη ἀρίστη δέδοκται εἶναι ὡς ὑπὸ πλείστων ἀνδρῶν φιληθεῖσα .
and she who wears the most is reputed to be the best, because she has been loved by the most men.


4.177.1
5189
ἀκτὴν δὲ προέχουσαν ἐς τὸν πόντον τούτων τῶν Γινδάνων νέμονται Λωτοφάγοι , οἳ τὸν καρπὸν μοῦνον τοῦ λωτοῦ τρώγοντες ζώουσι .
There is a headland jutting out into the sea from the land of the Gindanes; on it live the Lotus Eaters, whose only fare is the lotus.


4.177.1
5190
ὁ δὲ τοῦ λωτοῦ καρπὸς ἐστὶ μέγαθος ὅσον τε τῆς σχίνου , γλυκύτητα δὲ τοῦ φοίνικος τῷ καρπῷ προσείκελος .
The lotus fruit is the size of a mastich-berry: it has a sweet taste like the fruit of a date-palm;


4.177.1
5191
ποιεῦνται δὲ ἐκ τοῦ καρποῦ τούτου οἱ Λωτοφάγοι καὶ οἶνον .
the Lotus Eaters not only eat it, but make wine of it.


4.178.1
5192
λωτοφάγων δὲ τὸ παρὰ θάλασσαν ἔχονται Μάχλυες , τῷ λωτῷ μὲν καὶ οὗτοι χρεώμενοι , ἀτὰρ ἧσσον γε τῶν πρότερον λεχθέντων , κατήκουσι δὲ ἐπὶ ποταμὸν μέγαν τῷ οὔνομα Τρίτων ἐστί ·
Next to these along the coast are the Machlyes, who also use the lotus, but less than the aforesaid people.


4.178.1
5193
ἐκδιδοῖ δὲ οὗτος ἐς λίμνην μεγάλην Τριτωνίδα .
Their country reaches to a great river called the Triton, which empties into the great Tritonian lake,


4.178.1
5194
ἐν δὲ αὐτῇ , νῆσος ἔνι τῇ , οὔνομα Φλά .
in which is an island called Phla.


4.178.1
5195
ταύτην δὲ τὴν νῆσον Λακεδαιμονίοισι φασὶ λόγιον εἶναι κτίσαι .
It is said that the Lacedaemonians were told by an oracle to plant a settlement on this island.


4.179.1
5196
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ὅδε λόγος λεγόμενος .
The following story is also told:


4.179.1
5197
Ἰήσονα , ἐπείτε οἱ ἐξεργάσθη ὑπὸ τῷ Πηλίῳ ἡ Ἀργώ , ἐσθέμενον ἐς αὐτὴν ἄλλην τε ἑκατόμβην καὶ δὴ καὶ τρίποδα χάλκεον περιπλώειν Πελοπόννησον , βουλόμενον ἐς Δελφοὺς ἀπικέσθαι .
it is said that Jason, when the Argo had been built at the foot of Pelion, put aboard besides a hecatomb a bronze tripod, and set out to sail around the Peloponnese, to go to Delphi.


4.179.2
5198
καί μιν , ὡς πλέοντα γενέσθαι κατὰ Μαλέην , ὑπολαβεῖν ἄνεμον βορέην καὶ ἀποφέρειν πρὸς τὴν Λιβύην ·
But when he was off Malea, a north wind caught and carried him away to Libya;


4.179.2
5199
πρὶν δὲ κατιδέσθαι γῆν , ἐν τοῖσι βράχεσι γενέσθαι λίμνης τῆς Τριτωνίδος .
and before he saw land, he came into the shallows of the Tritonian lake.


4.179.2
5200
καί οἱ ἀπορέοντι τὴν ἐξαγωγὴν λόγος ἐστὶ φανῆναι Τρίτωνα καὶ κελεύειν τὸν Ἰήσονα ἑωυτῷ δοῦναι τὸν τρίποδα , φάμενόν σφι καὶ τὸν πόρον δέξειν καὶ ἀπήμονας ἀποστελέειν .
There, while he could find no way out yet, Triton (the story goes) appeared to him and told Jason to give him the tripod, promising to show the sailors the channel and send them on their way unharmed.


4.179.3
5201
πειθομένου δὲ τοῦ Ἰήσονος , οὕτω δὴ τόν τε διέκπλοον τῶν βραχέων δεικνύναι τὸν Τρίτωνά σφι καὶ τὸν τρίποδα θεῖναι ἐν τῷ ἑωυτοῦ ἱρῷ , ἐπιθεσπίσαντά τε τῷ τρίποδι καὶ τοῖσι σὺν Ἰήσονι σημήναντα τὸν πάντα λόγον , ὡς ἐπεὰν τὸν τρίποδα κομίσηται τῶν ἐκγόνων τις τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀργοῖ συμπλεόντων , τότε ἑκατὸν πόλιας οἰκῆσαι περὶ τὴν Τριτωνίδα λίμνην Ἑλληνίδας πᾶσαν εἶναι ἀνάγκην .
Jason did, and Triton then showed them the channel out of the shallows and set the tripod in his own temple; but first he prophesied over it, declaring the whole matter to Jason's comrades:


4.179.3
5202
ταῦτα ἀκούσαντας τοὺς ἐπιχωρίους τῶν Λιβύων κρύψαι τὸν τρίποδα .
namely, that should any descendant of the Argo's crew take away the tripod, then a hundred Greek cities would be founded on the shores of the Tritonian lake. Hearing this (it is said) the Libyan people of the country hid the tripod.


4.180.1
5203
τούτων δὲ ἔχοντας τῶν Μαχλύων Αὐσέες ·
Next to these Machlyes are the Auseans;


4.180.1
5204
οὗτοι δὲ καὶ οἱ Μάχλυες πέριξ τὴν Τριτωνίδα λίμνην οἰκέουσι , τὸ μέσον δέ σφι οὐρίζει ὁ Τρίτων .
these and the Machlyes, separated by the Triton, live on the shores of the Tritonian lake.


4.180.1
5205
καὶ οἱ μὲν Μάχλυες τὰ ὀπίσω κομῶσι τῆς κεφαλῆς , οἱ δὲ Αὐσέες τὰ ἔμπροσθε .
The Machlyes wear their hair long behind, the Auseans in front.


4.180.2
5206
ὁρτῇ δὲ ἐνιαυσίῃ Ἀθηναίης αἱ παρθένοι αὐτῶν δίχα διαστᾶσαι μάχονται πρὸς ἀλλήλας λίθοισί τε καὶ ξύλοισι , τῷ αὐθιγενέι θεῷ λέγουσαι τὰ πάτρια ἀποτελέειν , τὴν Ἀθηναίην καλέομεν .
They celebrate a yearly festival of Athena, where their maidens are separated into two bands and fight each other with stones and sticks, thus (they say) honoring in the way of their ancestors that native goddess whom we call Athena.


4.180.2
5207
τὰς δὲ ἀποθνησκούσας τῶν παρθένων ἐκ τῶν τρωμάτων ψευδοπαρθένους καλέουσι .
Maidens who die of their wounds are called false virgins.


4.180.3
5208
πρὶν δὲ ἀνεῖναι αὐτὰς μάχεσθαι , τάδε ποιεῦσι κοινῇ .
Before the girls are set fighting, the whole people choose the fairest maid,


4.180.3
5209
παρθένον τὴν καλλιστεύουσαν ἑκάστοτε κοσμήσαντες κυνέῃ τε Κορινθίῃ καὶ πανοπλίῃ Ἑλληνικῇ καὶ ἐπ’ ἅρμα ἀναβιβάσαντες περιάγουσι τὴν λίμνην κύκλῳ .
and arm her with a Corinthian helmet and Greek panoply, to be then mounted on a chariot and drawn all along the lake shore.


4.180.4
5210
ὁτέοισι δὲ τὸ πάλαι ἐκόσμεον τὰς παρθένους πρὶν ἤ σφι Ἕλληνας παροικισθῆναι , οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν , δοκέω δ’ ὦν Αἰγυπτίοισι ὅπλοισι κοσμέεσθαι αὐτάς ·
With what armor they equipped their maidens before Greeks came to live near them, I cannot say;


4.180.4
5211
ἀπὸ γὰρ Αἰγύπτου καὶ τὴν ἀσπίδα καὶ τὸ κράνος φημὶ ἀπῖχθαι ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας .
but I suppose the armor was Egyptian; for I maintain that the Greeks took their shield and helmet from Egypt.


4.180.5
5212
τὴν δὲ Ἀθηναίην φασὶ Ποσειδέωνος εἶναι θυγατέρα καὶ τῆς Τριτωνίδος λίμνης , καί μιν μεμφθεῖσάν τι τῷ πατρὶ δοῦναι ἑωυτὴν τῷ Διί , τὸν δὲ Δία ἑωυτοῦ μιν ποιήσασθαι θυγατέρα .
As for Athena, they say that she was daughter of Poseidon and the Tritonian lake, and that, being for some reason angry at her father, she gave herself to Zeus, who made her his own daughter.


4.180.5
5213
ταῦτα μὲν λέγουσι , μῖξιν δὲ ἐπίκοινον τῶν γυναικῶν ποιέονται , οὔτε συνοικέοντες κτηνηδόν τε μισγόμενοι .
Such is their tale. The intercourse of men and women there is promiscuous; they do not cohabit but have intercourse like cattle.


4.180.6
5214
ἐπεὰν δὲ γυναικὶ τὸ παιδίον ἁδρὸν γένηται , συμφοιτῶσι ἐς τ- αὐτὸ οἱ ἄνδρες τρίτου μηνός , καὶ τῷ ἂν οἴκῃ τῶν ἀνδρῶν τὸ παιδίον , τούτου παῖς νομίζεται .
When a woman's child is well grown, the men assemble within three months and the child is adjudged to be that man's whom it is most like.


4.181.1
5215
οὗτοι μὲν οἱ παραθαλάσσιοι τῶν νομάδων Λιβύων εἰρέαται , ὑπὲρ δὲ τούτων ἐς μεσόγαιαν ἡ θηριώδης ἐστὶ Λιβύη , ὑπὲρ δὲ τῆς θηριώδεος ὀφρύη ψάμμης κατήκει παρατείνουσα ἀπὸ Θηβέων τῶν Αἰγυπτιέων ἐπ’ Ἡρακλέας στήλας .
I have now described all the nomadic Libyans who live on the coast. Farther inland than these is that Libyan country which is haunted by wild beasts, and beyond this wild beasts' haunt runs a ridge of sand that stretches from  Thebes of  Egypt to the Pillars of Heracles.


4.181.2
5216
ἐν δὲ τῇ ὀφρύῃ ταύτῃ μάλιστα διὰ δέκα ἡμερέων ὁδοῦ ἁλός ἐστι τρύφεα κατὰ χόνδρους μεγάλους ἐν κολωνοῖσι , καὶ ἐν κορυφῇσι ἑκάστου τοῦ κολωνοῦ ἀνακοντίζει ἐκ μέσου τοῦ ἁλὸς ὕδωρ ψυχρὸν καὶ γλυκύ , περὶ δὲ αὐτὸν ἄνθρωποι οἰκέουσι ἔσχατοι πρὸς τῆς ἐρήμου καὶ ὑπὲρ τῆς θηριώδεος , πρῶτοι μὲν ἀπὸ Θηβέων διὰ δέκα ἡμερέων ὁδοῦ Ἀμμώνιοι , ἔχοντες τὸ ἱρὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ Θηβαιέος Διός ·
At intervals of about ten days' journey along this ridge there are masses of great lumps of salt in hills;


4.181.2
5217
καὶ γὰρ τὸ ἐν Θήβῃσι , ὡς καὶ πρότερον εἴρηταί μοι , κριοπρόσωπον τοῦ Διὸς τ- ἄγαλμα ἐστί .
on the top of every hill, a fountain of cold sweet water shoots up from the midst of the salt; men live around it who are farthest away toward the desert and inland from the wild beasts' country. The first on the journey from Thebes, ten days distant from there, are the Ammonians, who follow the worship of the Zeus of Thebes; for, as I have said before, the image of Zeus at Thebes has the head of a ram.


4.181.3
5218
τυγχάνει δὲ καὶ ἄλλο σφι ὕδωρ κρηναῖον ἐὸν , τὸ τὸν μὲν ὄρθρον γίνεται χλιαρόν , ἀγορῆς δὲ πληθυούσης ψυχρότερον , μεσαμβρίη τε ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ κάρτα γίνεται ψυχρόν ·
They have another spring of water besides, which is warm at dawn, and colder at market-time, and very cold at noon;


4.181.4
5219
τηνικαῦτα δὲ ἄρδουσι τοὺς κήπους ·
and it is then that they water their gardens;


4.181.4
5220
ἀποκλινομένης δὲ τῆς ἡμέρης ὑπίεται τοῦ ψυχροῦ , ἐς οὗ δύεταί τε ὁ ἥλιος καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ γίνεται χλιαρόν .
as the day declines, the coldness abates, until at sunset the water grows warm.


4.181.4
5221
ἐπὶ δὲ μᾶλλον ἰὸν ἐς τὸ θερμὸν ἐς μέσας νύκτας πελάζει , τηνικαῦτα δὲ ζέει ἀμβολάδην ·
It becomes ever hotter and hotter until midnight, and then it boils and bubbles;


4.181.4
5222
παρέρχονται τε μέσαι νύκτες καὶ ψύχεται μέχρι ἐς ἠῶ .
after midnight it becomes ever cooler until dawn.


4.181.4
5223
ἐπίκλησιν δὲ αὕτη ἡ κρήνη καλέεται ἡλίου .
This spring is called the Spring of the Sun.


4.182.1
5224
μετὰ δὲ Ἀμμωνίους διὰ τῆς ὀφρύης τῆς ψάμμου δι’ ἀλλέων δέκα ἡμερέων ὁδοῦ κολωνός τε ἁλός ἐστι ὅμοιος τῷ Ἀμμωνίῳ καὶ ὕδωρ , καὶ ἄνθρωποι περὶ αὐτὸν οἰκέουσι ·
At a distance of ten days' journey again from the Ammonians along the sandy ridge, there is a hill of salt like that of the Ammonians, and springs of water, where men live;


4.182.1
5225
τῷ δὲ χώρῳ τούτῳ οὔνομα Αὔγιλα ἐστί .
this place is called Augila;


4.182.1
5226
ἐς τοῦτον τὸν χῶρον οἱ Νασαμῶνες ὀπωριεῦντες τοὺς φοίνικας φοιτῶσι .
it is to this that the Nasamones come to gather palm-fruit.


4.183.1
5227
ἀπὸ δὲ Αὐγίλων διὰ δέκα ἡμερέων ἀλλέων ὁδοῦ ἕτερος ἁλὸς κολωνὸς καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ φοίνικες καρποφόροι πολλοί , κατά περ καὶ ἐν τοῖσι ἑτέροισι ·
After ten days' journey again from Augila there is yet another hill of salt and springs of water and many fruit-bearing palms, as at the other places;


4.183.1
5228
καὶ ἄνθρωποι οἰκέουσι ἐν αὐτῷ τοῖσι οὔνομα Γαράμαντες ἐστί , ἔθνος μέγα ἰσχυρῶς , οἳ ἐπὶ τὸν ἅλα γῆν ἐπιφορέοντες οὕτω σπείρουσι .
men live there called Garamantes, an exceedingly great nation, who sow in earth which they have laid on the salt.


4.183.2
5229
συντομώτατον δ’ ἐστὶ ἐς τοὺς Λωτοφάγους , ἐκ τῶν τριήκοντα ἡμερέων ἐς αὐτοὺς ὁδός ἐστι ·
The shortest way to the Lotus Eaters' country is from here, thirty days' journey distant.


4.183.2
5230
ἐν τοῖσι καὶ οἱ ὀπισθονόμοι βόες γίνονται ·
Among the Garamantes are the cattle that go backward as they graze,


4.183.2
5231
ὀπισθονόμοι δὲ διὰ τόδε εἰσι .
the reason being that their horns curve forward;


4.183.2
5232
τὰ κέρεα ἔχουσι κεκυφότα ἐς τὸ ἔμπροσθε ·
therefore, not being able to go forward, since the horns would stick in the ground, they walk backward grazing.


4.183.3
5233
διὰ τοῦτο ὀπίσω ἀναχωρέοντες νέμονται ·
therefore, not being able to go forward, since the horns would stick in the ground, they walk backward grazing.


4.183.3
5234
ἐς γὰρ τὸ ἔμπροσθε οὐκ οἷοι τε εἰσὶ προεμβαλλόντων ἐς τὴν γῆν τῶν κερέων .
Otherwise, they are like other cattle,


4.183.3
5235
ἄλλο δὲ οὐδὲν διαφέρουσι τῶν ἄλλων βοῶν ὅτι μὴ τοῦτο καὶ τὸ δέρμα ἐς παχύτητά τε καὶ τρῖψιν .
except that their hide is thicker and harder to the touch.


4.183.4
5236
οἱ Γαράμαντες δὴ οὗτοι τοὺς τρωγλοδύτας Αἰθίοπας θηρεύουσι τοῖσι τεθρίπποισι ·
These Garamantes go in their four-horse chariots chasing the cave-dwelling Ethiopians:


4.183.4
5237
οἱ γὰρ τρωγλοδύται Αἰθίοπες πόδας τάχιστοι ἀνθρώπων πάντων εἰσὶ τῶν ἡμεῖς πέρι λόγους ἀποφερομένους ἀκούομεν .
for the Ethiopian cave-dwellers are swifter of foot than any men of whom tales are brought to us.


4.183.4
5238
σιτέονται δὲ οἱ τρωγλοδύται ὄφις καὶ σαύρους καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα τῶν ἑρπετῶν ·
They live on snakes and lizards and such-like creeping things.


4.183.4
5239
γλῶσσαν δὲ οὐδεμιῇ ἄλλῃ παρομοίην νενομίκασι , ἀλλὰ τετρίγασι κατά περ αἱ νυκτερίδες .
Their speech is like no other in the world: it is like the squeaking of bats.


4.184.1
5240
ἀπὸ δὲ Γαραμάντων δι’ ἀλλέων δέκα ἡμερέων ὁδοῦ ἄλλος ἁλός τε κολωνὸς καὶ ὕδωρ , καὶ ἄνθρωποι περὶ αὐτὸν οἰκέουσι τοῖσι οὔνομα ἐστὶ Ἀτάραντες , οἳ ἀνώνυμοι εἰσὶ μοῦνοι ἀνθρώπων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν ·
Another ten days' journey from the Garamantes there is again a salt hill and water, where men live called Atarantes.


4.184.1
5241
ἁλέσι μὲν γάρ σφι ἐστὶ Ἀτάραντες οὔνομα , ἑνὶ δὲ ἑκάστῳ αὐτῶν οὔνομα οὐδὲν κέεται .
These are the only men whom we know who have no names; for the whole people are called Atarantes, but no man has a name of his own.


4.184.2
5242
οὗτοι τῷ ἡλίῳ ὑπερβάλλοντι καταρῶνται καὶ πρὸς τούτοισι πάντα τὰ αἰσχρὰ λοιδορέονται , ὅτι σφέας καίων ἐπιτρίβει , αὐτούς τε τοὺς ἀνθρώπους καὶ τὴν χώρην αὐτῶν .
When the sun is high, they curse and very foully revile him, because his burning heat afflicts their people and their land.


4.184.3
5243
μετὰ δὲ δι’ ἀλλέων δέκα ἡμερέων ἄλλος κολωνὸς ἁλὸς καὶ ὕδωρ , καὶ ἄνθρωποι περὶ αὐτὸν οἰκέουσι .
After another ten days' journey there is again a hill of salt, and water, and men living there.


4.184.3
5244
ἔχεται δὲ τοῦ ἁλὸς Τούτου ὄρος τῷ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Ἄτλας , ἔστι δὲ στεινὸν καὶ κυκλοτερὲς πάντη , ὑψηλὸν δὲ οὕτω δή τι λέγεται ὡς τὰς κορυφὰς αὐτοῦ οὐκ οἶά τε εἶναι ἰδέσθαι .
Near to this salt is a mountain called Atlas, whose shape is slender and conical; and it is said to be so high that its heights cannot be seen,


4.184.3
5245
οὐδέκοτε γὰρ αὐτὰς ἀπολείπειν νέφεα οὔτε θέρεος οὔτε χειμῶνος .
for clouds are always on them winter and summer.


4.184.3
5246
τοῦτο τὸν κίονα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ λέγουσι οἱ ἐπιχώριοι εἶναι .
The people of the country call it the pillar of heaven.


4.184.4
5247
ἐπὶ τούτου τοῦ ὄρεος οἱ ἄνθρωποι οὗτοι ἐπώνυμοι ἐγένοντο ·
These men get their name,  from this mountain.


4.184.4
5248
καλέονται γὰρ δὴ Ἄτλαντες .
Its name is  Atlantes,


4.184.4
5249
λέγονται δὲ οὔτε ἔμψυχον οὐδὲν σιτέεσθαι οὔτε ἐνύπνια ὁρᾶν .
It is said that they eat no living creature, and see no dreams in their sleep.


4.185.1
5250
μέχρι μὲν δὴ τῶν Ἀτλάντων τούτων ἔχω τὰ οὐνόματα τῶν ἐν τῇ ὀφρύῃ κατοικημένων καταλέξαι , τὸ δ’ ἀπὸ τούτων οὐκέτι .
I know and can tell the names of all the peoples that live on the ridge as far as the Atlantes, but no farther than that.


4.185.1
5251
διήκει δ’ ὦν ἡ ὀφρύη μέχρι Ἡρακλέων στηλέων καὶ τὸ ἔξω τουτέων .
But I know this, that the ridge reaches as far as the Pillars of Heracles and beyond them.


4.185.2
5252
ἔστι δὲ ἁλός τε μέταλλον ἐν αὐτῇ διὰ δέκα ἡμερέων ὁδοῦ καὶ ἄνθρωποι οἰκέοντες .
There is a mine of salt on it every ten days' journey, and men live there.


4.185.2
5253
τὰ δὲ οἰκία τούτοισι πᾶσι ἐκ τῶν ἁλίνων χόνδρων οἰκοδομέαται .
Their houses are all built of blocks of the salt;


4.185.2
5254
ταῦτα γὰρ ἤδη τῆς Λιβύης ἄνομβρα ἐστί ·
for these are parts of Libya where no rain falls;


4.185.2
5255
οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἠδυνέατο μένειν οἱ τοῖχοι ἐόντες ἅλινοι , εἰ ὗε .
for the walls, being of salt, could not stand firm if there were rain.


4.185.3
5256
ὁ δὲ ἃλς αὐτόθι καὶ λευκὸς καὶ πορφύρεος τὸ εἶδος ὀρύσσεται .
The salt there is both white and purple.


4.185.3
5257
ὑπὲρ δὲ τῆς ὀφρύης τὸ πρὸς νότου καὶ ἐς μεσόγαιαν τῆς Λιβύης ἔρημος καὶ ἄνυδρος καὶ ἄθηρος καὶ ἄνομβρος καὶ ἄξυλος ἐστὶ ἡ χώρη , καὶ ἰκμάδος ἐστὶ ἐν αὐτῇ οὐδέν .
Beyond this ridge, the southern and inland parts of Libya are desolate and waterless: there are no wild beasts, no rain, no forests; this region is wholly without moisture.


4.186.1
5258
οὕτω μὲν μέχρι τῆς Τριτωνίδος λίμνης ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου νομάδες εἰσὶ κρεοφάγοι τε καὶ γαλακτοπόται Λίβυες , καὶ θηλέων τε βοῶν οὔτι γευόμενοι , διότι περ οὐδὲ Αἰγύπτιοι , καὶ ὗς οὐ τρέφοντες .
Thus from  Egypt to the Tritonian lake, the Libyans are nomads that eat meat and drink milk; for the same reason as the Egyptians too profess, they will not touch the flesh of cows; and they rear no swine.


4.186.2
5259
βοῶν μέν νυν θηλέων οὐδ’ αἱ Κυρηναίων γυναῖκες δικαιοῦσι πατέεσθαι διὰ τὴν ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ Ἶσιν , ἀλλὰ καὶ νηστηίας αὐτῇ καὶ ὁρτὰς ἐπιτελέουσι .
The women of Cyrene, too, consider it wrong to eat cows' flesh, because of the Isis of Egypt; and they even honor her with fasts and festivals;


4.186.2
5260
αἱ δὲ τῶν Βαρκαίων γυναῖκες οὐδὲ ὑῶν πρὸς τῇσι βουσὶ γεύονται .
and the Barcaean women refuse to eat swine too, as well as cows.


4.187.1
5261
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ οὕτω ἔχει .
Thus it is with this region.


4.187.1
5262
τὸ δὲ πρὸς ἑσπέρης τῆς Τριτωνίδος λίμνης οὐκέτι νομάδες εἰσὶ Λίβυες οὐδὲ νόμοισι τοῖσι αὐτοῖσι χρεώμενοι , οὐδὲ κατὰ τὰ παιδία ποιεῦντες οἷον τι καὶ οἱ νομάδες ἐώθασι ποιέειν .
But west of the Tritonian lake the Libyans are not nomads; they do not follow the same customs, or treat their children as the nomads do.


4.187.2
5263
οἱ γὰρ δὴ τῶν Λιβύων νομάδες , εἰ μὲν πάντες , οὐκ ἔχω ἀτρεκέως τοῦτο εἰπεῖν , ποιεῦσι δὲ αὐτῶν συχνοὶ τοιάδε ·
For the practice of many Libyan nomads (I cannot say absolutely whether it is the practice of all) is to do the following.


4.187.2
5264
τῶν παιδίων τῶν σφετέρων , ἐπεὰν τετραέτεα γένηται , οἴσπῃ προβάτων καίουσι τὰς ἐν τῇσι κορυφῇσι φλέβας , μετεξέτεροι δὲ αὐτῶν τὰς ἐν τοῖσι κροτάφοισι , τοῦδε εἵνεκα ὡς μή σφεας ἐς τὸν πάντα χρόνον καταρρέον φλέγμα ἐκ τῆς κεφαλῆς δηλέηται .
They take their children when four years old, and burn the veins of their scalps or sometimes of their temples with grease of sheep's wool, so that the children may never afterward be afflicted by phlegm draining from the head.


4.187.3
5265
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο σφέας λέγουσι εἶναι ὑγιηροτάτους ·
They say that this makes their children quite healthy.


4.187.3
5266
εἰσὶ γὰρ ὡς ἀληθέως οἱ Λίβυες ἀνθρώπων πάντων ὑγιηρότατοι τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν , εἰ μὲν διὰ τοῦτο , οὐκ ἔχω ἀτρεκέως εἰπεῖν , ὑγιηρότατοι δ’ ὦν εἰσί .
In fact, the Libyans are the healthiest of all men whom we know; whether it is because of this practice, I cannot say absolutely; but they certainly are healthy.


4.187.3
5267
ἢν δὲ καίουσι τὰ παιδία σπασμὸς ἐπιγένηται , ἐξεύρηταί σφι ἄκος ·
When the children smart from the pain of the burning, the Libyans have found a remedy;


4.187.3
5268
τράγου γὰρ οὖρον σπείσαντες ῥύονται σφέα .
they soothe them by applications of goats' urine.


4.187.3
5269
λέγω δὲ τὰ λέγουσι αὐτοὶ Λίβυες .
This is what the Libyans themselves say.


4.188.1
5270
θυσίαι δὲ τοῖσι νομάσι εἰσὶ αἵδε .
The nomads' way of sacrificing is as follows.


4.188.1
5271
ἐπεὰν τοῦ ὠτὸς ἀπάρξωνται τοῦ κτήνεος , ῥιπτέουσι ὑπὲρ τὸν δόμον , τοῦτο δὲ ποιήσαντες ἀποστρέφουσι τὸν αὐχένα αὐτοῦ ·
They cut a piece from the victim's ear for first-fruits and throw it over the house; then they wring the victim's neck.


4.188.1
5272
θύουσι δὲ ἡλίῳ καὶ σελήνῃ μούνοισι .
They sacrifice to no gods except the sun and moon;


4.188.1
5273
τούτοισι μέν νυν πάντες Λίβυες θύουσι , ἀτὰρ οἱ περὶ τὴν Τριτωνίδα λίμνην νέμοντες τῇ Ἀθηναίῃ μάλιστα , μετὰ δὲ τῷ ;
that is, this is the practice of the whole nation; but the dwellers by the Tritonian lake sacrifice to Athena chiefly, and next


4.188.1
5274
Τρίτωνι καὶ τῷ Ποσειδέωνι .
to Triton and Poseidon.


4.189.1
5275
τὴν δὲ ἄρα ἐσθῆτα καὶ τὰς αἰγίδας τῶν ἀγαλμάτων τῆς Ἀθηναίης ἐκ τῶν Λιβυσσέων ἐποιήσαντο οἱ Ἕλληνες ·
It would seem that the robe and aegis of the images of Athena were copied by the Greeks from the Libyan women;


4.189.1
5276
πλὴν γὰρ ἢ ὅτι σκυτίνη ἡ ἐσθὴς τῶν Λιβυσσέων ἐστὶ καὶ οἱ θύσανοι οἱ ἐκ τῶν αἰγίδων αὐτῇσι οὐκ ὄφιες εἰσὶ ἀλλὰ ἱμάντινοι , τά γε ἄλλα πάντα κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ ἔσταλται .
for except that Libyan women dress in leather, and that the tassels of their goatskin cloaks are not snakes but thongs of hide, in everything else their equipment is the same.


4.189.2
5277
καὶ δὴ καὶ τὸ οὔνομα κατηγορέει ὅτι ἐκ Λιβύης ἥκει ἡ στολὴ τῶν Παλλαδίων ·
And in fact, the very name betrays that the attire of the statues of Pallas has come from Libya;


4.189.2
5278
αἰγέας γὰρ περιβάλλονται ψιλὰς περὶ τὴν ἐσθῆτα θυσανωτὰς αἱ Λίβυσσαι κεχριμένας ἐρευθεδάνῳ , ἐκ δὲ τῶν αἰγέων τουτέων αἰγίδας οἱ Ἕλληνες μετωνόμασαν .
for Libyan women wear the hairless tasselled “aegea” over their dress, colored with madder, and the Greeks have changed the name of these aegeae into their “aegides.”


4.189.3
5279
δοκέει δ’ ἔμοιγε καὶ ὀλολυγὴ ἐν ἱροῖσι ἐνθαῦτα πρῶτον γενέσθαι ·
Furthermore, in my opinion the ceremonial chant first originated in Libya:


4.189.3
5280
κάρτα γὰρ ταύτῃ χρέωνται καλῶς αἱ Λίβυσσαι .
for the women of that country chant very tunefully.


4.189.3
5281
καὶ τέσσερας ἵππους συζευγνύναι παρὰ Λιβύων οἱ Ἕλληνες μεμαθήκασι .
And it is from the Libyans that the Greeks have learned to drive four-horse chariots.


4.190.1
5282
θάπτουσι δὲ τοὺς ἀποθνήσκοντας οἱ νομάδες κατά περ οἱ Ἕλληνες , πλὴν Νασαμώνων ·
The dead are buried by the nomads in Greek fashion, except by the Nasamones.


4.190.1
5283
οὗτοι δε κατημένους θάπτουσι , φυλάσσοντες , ἐπεὰν ἀπιῇ τὴν ψυχήν , ὅκως μιν κατίσουσι μηδὲ ὕπτιος ἀποθανέεται .
They bury their dead sitting, being careful to make the dying man sit when he releases his spirit, and not die lying supine.


4.190.1
5284
οἰκήματα δὲ σύμπηκτα ἐξ ἀνθερίκων ἐνειρμένων περὶ σχοίνους ἐστί , καὶ ταῦτα περιφορητά .
Their dwellings are constructed of asphodel stalks twined about reeds; they can be carried here and there.


4.190.1
5285
νόμοισι μὲν τοιούτοισι οὗτοι χρέωνται .
Such are the Libyan customs.


4.191.1
5286
τὸ δὲ πρὸς ἑσπέρης τοῦ Τρίτωνος ποταμοῦ Αὐσέων ἔχονται ἀροτῆρες ἤδη Λίβυες καὶ οἰκίας νομίζοντες ἐκτῆσθαι , τοῖσι οὔνομα κέεται Μάξυες .
West of the Triton river and next to the Aseans begins the country of Libyans who cultivate the soil and possess houses;


4.191.1
5287
οἳ τὰ ἐπὶ δεξιὰ τῶν κεφαλέων κομόωσι , τὰ δ’ ἐπ’ ἀριστερὰ κείρουσι , τὸ δὲ σῶμα χρίονται μίλτῳ .
they are called Maxyes; they wear their hair long on the right side of their heads and shave the left, and they paint their bodies with vermilion.


4.191.1
5288
φασὶ δὲ οὗτοι εἶναι τῶν ἐκ Τροίης ἀνδρῶν .
They claim to be descendants of the men of Troy.


4.191.2
5289
ἡ δὲ χώρη αὕτη τε καὶ ἡ λοιπὴ τῆς Λιβύης ἡ πρὸς ἑσπέρην πολλῷ θηριωδεστέρη τε καὶ δασυτέρη ἐστὶ τῆς τῶν νομάδων χώρης .
These claim descent from the men who came from  Troy. Their country, and the rest of the western part of  Libya, is much fuller of wild beasts and more wooded than the country of the nomads.


4.191.3
5290
ἡ μὲν γὰρ δὴ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ τῆς Λιβύης , τὴν οἱ νομάδες νέμουσι , ἐστὶ ταπεινή τε καὶ ψαμμώδης μέχρι τοῦ Τρίτωνος ποταμοῦ , ἡ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτου τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρην ἡ τῶν ἀροτήρων ὀρεινή τε κάρτα καὶ δασέα καὶ θηριώδης ·
For the eastern region of  Libya, which the nomads inhabit, is low-lying and sandy as far as the Triton river; but the land west of this, where the farmers live, is exceedingly mountainous and wooded and full of wild beasts.


4.191.4
5291
καὶ γὰρ οἱ ὄφιες οἱ ὑπερμεγάθεες καὶ οἱ λέοντες κατὰ τούτους εἰσὶ καὶ οἱ ἐλέφαντές τε καὶ ἄρκτοι καὶ ἀσπίδες τε καὶ ὄνοι οἱ τὰ κέρεα ἔχοντες καὶ οἱ κυνοκέφαλοι καὶ οἱ ἀκέφαλοι οἱ ἐν τοῖσι στήθεσι τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς ἔχοντες , ὡς δὴ λέγονταί γε ὑπὸ Λιβύων , καὶ οἱ ἄγριοι ἄνδρες καὶ γυναῖκες ἄγριαι , καὶ ἄλλα πλήθεϊ πολλὰ θηρία ἀκατάψευστα .
In that country are the huge snakes and the lions, and the elephants and bears and asps, the horned asses, the dog-headed and the headless men that have their eyes in their chests, as the Libyans say, and the wild men and women, besides many other creatures not fabulous.


4.192.1
5292
κατὰ τοὺς νομάδας δὲ ἐστὶ τούτων οὐδέν , ἀλλ’ ἄλλα τοιάδε , πύγαργοι καὶ ζορκάδες καὶ βουβάλιες καὶ ὄνοι , οὐκ οἱ τὰ κέρεα ἔχοντες ἀλλ’ ἄλλοι ἄποτοι ( οὐ γὰρ δὴ πίνουσι ) , καὶ ὄρυες , τῶν τὰ κέρεα τοῖσι φοίνιξι οἱ πήχεες ποιεῦνται ( μέγαθος δὲ τὸ θηρίον τοῦτο κατὰ βοῦν ἐστι ) , καὶ βασσάρια καὶ ὕαιναι καὶ ὕστριχες καὶ κριοὶ ἄγριοι καὶ δίκτυες καὶ θῶες καὶ πάνθηρες καὶ βόρυες , καὶ κροκόδειλοι ὅσον τε τριπήχεες χερσαῖοι , τῇσι σαύρῃσι ἐμφερέστατοι , καὶ στρουθοὶ κατάγαιοι , καὶ ὄφιες μικροί , κέρας ἓν ἕκαστος ἔχοντες ·
But in the nomads' country there are none of these; but there are others, white-rumped antelopes, gazelles, hartebeest, asses, not the horned asses, but those that are called “undrinking” (for indeed they never drink), the oryx, whose horns are made the horns of the lyre (this is a beast the size of a bull),


4.192.2
5293
ταῦτά τε δὴ αὐτόθι ἐστὶ θηρία καὶ τά περ τῇ ἄλλη , πλὴν ἐλάφου τε καὶ ὑὸς ἀγρίου ·
foxes, hyenas, porcupines, wild rams, the dictys, jackals, panthers, the borys, land crocodiles sixty inches long, very like lizards, and ostriches and little one-horned serpents;


4.192.2
5294
ἔλαφος δὲ καὶ ὗς ἄγριος ἐν Λιβύῃ πάμπαν οὐκ ἔστι .
all these beasts besides those that are elsewhere too, except deer and wild boar; of these two kinds there are none at all in Libya.


4.192.3
5295
μυῶν δὲ γένεα τριξὰ αὐτόθι ἔστι ·
There are in this country three kinds of mice,


4.192.3
5296
οἳ μὲν δίποδες καλέονται , οἳ δὲ ζεγέριες ( τὸ δὲ οὔνομα τοῦτο ἐστὶ μὲν Λιβυστικόν , δύναται δὲ κατ’ Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν βουνοί ) , οἳ δὲ ἐχινέες .
the two-footed, the “zegeries” (this is a Libyan word, meaning in our language “hills”), and the bristly-haired, as they are called.


4.192.3
5297
εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ γαλαῖ ἐν τῷ σιλφίῳ γινόμεναι τῇσι Ταρτησσίῃσι ὁμοιόταται .
There are also weasels found in the silphium, very like to the weasels of Tartessus.


4.192.3
5298
τοσαῦτα μέν νυν θηρία ἡ τῶν νομάδων Λιβύων γῆ ἔχει , ὅσον ἡμεῖς ἱστορέοντες ἐπὶ μακρότατον οἷοί τε ἐγενόμεθα ἐξικέσθαι .
So many are the wild creatures of the nomads' country, as far as by our utmost enquiry we have been able to learn.


4.193.1
5299
Μαξύων δὲ Λιβύων Ζαύηκες ἔχονται , τοῖσι αἱ γυναῖκες ἡνιοχεῦσι τὰ ἅρματα ἐς τὸν πόλεμον .
Next to the Maxyes of  Libya are the Zauekes, whose women drive their chariots to war.


4.194.1
5300
τούτων δὲ Γύζαντες ἔχονται , ἐν τοῖσι μέλι πολλὸν μὲν μέλισσαι κατεργάζονται , πολλῷ δ’ ἔτι πλέον λέγεται δημιοεργοὺς ἄνδρας ποιέειν .
Next to these are the Gyzantes, where much honey is made by bees, and much more yet (so it is said) by craftsmen.


4.194.1
5301
μιλτοῦνται δ’ ὦν πάντες οὗτοι καὶ πιθηκοφαγέουσι .
It is certain that they all paint themselves with vermilion and eat apes.


4.194.1
5302
οἳ δὲ σφι ἄφθονοι ὅσοι ἐν τοῖσι ὄρεσι γίνονται .
These are in ample supply for those who are in the mountains.


4.195.1
5303
κατὰ τούτους δὲ λέγουσι Καρχηδόνιοι κεῖσθαι νῆσον τῇ οὔνομα εἶναι Κύραυιν , μῆκος μὲν διηκοσίων σταδίων , πλάτος δὲ στεινήν , διαβατὸν ἐκ τῆς ἠπείρου , ἐλαιέων τε μεστὴν καὶ ἀμπέλων .
Off their coast (the Carthaginians say) lies an island called Cyrauis, twenty-five miles long and narrow across, accessible from the mainland; it is full of olives and vines.


4.195.2
5304
λίμνην δὲ ἐν αὐτῇ εἶναι , ἐκ τῆς αἱ παρθένοι τῶν ἐπιχωρίων πτεροῖσι ὀρνίθων κεχριμένοισι πίσσῃ ἐκ τῆς ἰλύος ψῆγμα ἀναφέρουσι χρυσοῦ .
It is said that there is a lake on this island from which the maidens of the country draw gold-dust out of the mud on feathers smeared with pitch.


4.195.2
5305
ταῦτα εἰ μὲν ἔστι ἀληθέως οὐκ οἶδα , τὰ δὲ λέγεται γράφω ·
I do not know whether this is true; I just write what is said.


4.195.2
5306
εἴη δ’ ἂν πᾶν , ὅκου καὶ ἐν Ζακύνθῳ ἐκ λίμνης καὶ ὕδατος πίσσαν ἀναφερομένην αὐτὸς ἐγὼ ὥρων .
But all things are possible; for I myself saw pitch drawn from the water of a pool in Zacynthus.


4.195.3
5307
εἰσὶ μὲν καὶ πλεῦνες αἱ λίμναι αὐτόθι , ἡ δ’ ὦν μεγίστη αὐτέων ἑβδομήκοντα ποδῶν πάντῃ , βάθος δὲ διόργυιος ἐστί ·
The pools there are numerous; the greatest of them is seventy feet long and broad, and twelve feet deep.


4.195.3
5308
ἐς ταύτην κοντὸν κατιεῖσι ἐπ’ ἄκρῳ μυρσίνην προσδήσαντες καὶ ἔπειτα ἀναφέρουσι τῇ μυρσίνῃ πίσσαν , ὀδμὴν μὲν ἔχουσαν ἀσφάλτου , τὰ δ’ ἄλλα τῆς Πιερικῆς πίσσης ἀμείνω .
Into this they drop a pole with a myrtle branch fastened to its end, and bring up pitch on the myrtle, smelling like asphalt, and for the rest better than the pitch of Pieria.


4.195.3
5309
ἐσχέουσι δὲ ἐς λάκκον ὀρωρυγμένον ἀγχοῦ τῆς λίμνης .
Then they pour it into a pit that they have dug near the pool;


4.195.3
5310
ἐπεὰν δὲ ἀθροίσωσι συχνήν , οὕτω ἐς τοὺς ἀμφορέας ἐκ τοῦ λάκκου καταχέουσι .
and when a fair amount is collected there, they fill their vessels from the pit.


4.195.4
5311
ὁ τι δ’ ἂν ἐσπέσῃ ἐς τὴν λίμνην , ὑπὸ γῆν ἰὸν ἀναφαίνεται ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ ·
Whatever falls into the pool is carried under the ground and appears again in the sea,


4.195.4
5312
ἣ δὲ ἀπέχει ὡς τέσσερα στάδια ἀπὸ τῆς λίμνης .
which is about a half a mile distant from the pool.


4.195.4
5313
οὕτω ὦν καὶ τὰ ἀπὸ τῆς νήσου τῆς ἐπὶ Λιβύῃ κειμένης οἰκότα ἐστὶ ἀληθείῃ .
So, then, the story that comes from the island lying off the Libyan coast is like the truth, too.


4.196.1
5314
λέγουσι δὲ καὶ τάδε Καρχηδόνιοι .
Another story is told by the Carthaginians.


4.196.1
5315
εἶναι τῆς Λιβύης χῶρόν τε καὶ ἀνθρώπους ἔξω Πρακλέων στηλέων κατοικημένους ·
There is a place in Libya, they say, where men live beyond the Pillars of Heracles;


4.196.1
5316
ἐς τοὺς ἐπεὰν ἀπίκωνται καὶ ἐξέλωνται τὰ φορτία , θέντες αὐτὰ ἐπεξῆς παρὰ τὴν κυματωγήν , ἐσβάντες ἐς τὰ πλοῖα τύφειν καπνόν .
they come here and unload their cargo; then, having laid it in order along the beach, they go aboard their ships and light a smoking fire.


4.196.1
5317
τοὺς δ’ ἐπιχωρίους ἰδομένους τὸν καπνὸν ἰέναι ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν καὶ ἔπειτα ἀντὶ τῶν φορτίων χρυσὸν τιθέναι καὶ ἐξαναχωρέειν πρόσω ἀπὸ τῶν φορτίων .
The people of the country see the smoke, and, coming to the sea, they lay down gold to pay for the cargo, and withdraw from the wares.


4.196.2
5318
τοὺς δὲ Καρχηδονίους ἐκβάντας σκέπτεσθαι , καὶ ἢν μὲν φαίνηταί σφι ἄξιος ὁ χρυσὸς τῶν φορτίων , ἀνελόμενοι ἀπαλλάσσονται , ἢν δὲ μὴ ἄξιος , ἐσβάντες ὀπίσω ἐς τὰ πλοῖα κατέαται ·
Then the Carthaginians disembark and examine the gold; if it seems to them a fair price for their cargo, they take it and go away; but if not, they go back aboard and wait,


4.196.2
5319
οἱ δὲ προσελθόντες ἄλλον πρὸς ὦν ἔθηκαν χρυσόν , ἐς οὗ ἂν πείθωσι .
and the people come back and add more gold until the sailors are satisfied.


4.196.2
5320
ἀδικέειν δὲ οὐδετέρους .
Neither cheats the other.


4.196.3
5321
οὔτε γὰρ αὐτοὺς τοῦ χρυσοῦ ἅπτεσθαι πρὶν ἄν σφι ἀπισωθῇ τῇ ἀξίῃ τῶν φορτίων , οὔτ’ ἐκείνους τῶν φορτίων ἅπτεσθαι πρότερον ἢ αὐτοὶ τὸ χρυσίον λάβωσι .
In this transaction, it is said, neither party defrauds the other: the Carthaginians do not touch the gold until it equals the value of their cargo, nor do the people touch the cargo until the sailors have taken the gold.


4.197.1
5322
οὗτοι μὲν εἶσὶ τοὺς ἡμεῖς ἔχομεν Λιβύων ὀνομάσαι , καὶ τούτων οἱ πολλοὶ βασιλέος τοῦ Μήδων οὔτε τι νῦν οὔτε τότε ἐφρόρτιζον οὐδέν .
These are all the Libyans whom we can name, and the majority of their kings cared nothing for the king of the Medes at the time of which I write, nor do they care for him now.


4.197.2
5323
τοσόνδε δὲ ἔτι ἔχω εἰπεῖν περὶ τῆς χώρης ταύτης , ὅτι τέσσερα ἔθνεα νέμεται αὐτὴν καὶ οὐ πλέω τούτων , ὅσον ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν , καὶ τὰ μὲν δύο αὐτόχθονα τῶν ἐθνέων τὰ δὲ δύο οὔ , Λίβυες μὲν καὶ Αἰθίοπες αὐτόχθονες , οἳ μὲν τὰ πρὸς βορέω οἳ δὲ τὰ πρὸς νότου τῆς Λιβύης οἰκέοντες , Φοίνικες δὲ καὶ Ἕλληνες ἐπήλυδες .
I have this much further to say of this country: four nations and no more, as far as we know, inhabit it, two of which are aboriginal and two not; the Libyans in the north and the Ethiopians in the south of  Libya are aboriginal; the Phoenicians and Greeks are later settlers.


4.198.1
5324
δοκέει δέ μοι οὐδ’ ἀρετὴν εἶναι τις ἡ Λιβύη σπουδαίη ὥστε ἢ Ἀσίῃ ἢ Εὐρώπῃ παραβληθῆναι , πλὴν Κίνυπος μούνης ·
In my opinion, there is in no part of Libya any great excellence for which it should be compared to Asia or Europe,


4.198.1
5325
τὸ γὰρ δὴ αὐτὸ οὔνομα ἡ γῆ τῷ ποταμῷ ἔχει .
except in the region which is called by the same name as its river, Cinyps.


4.198.2
5326
αὕτη δὲ ὁμοίη τῇ ἀρίστῃ γέων Δήμητρος καρπὸν ἐκφέρειν οὐδὲ ἔοικε οὐδὲν τῇ ἄλλῃ Λιβύῃ .
But this region is a match for the most fertile farmland in the world, nor is it at all like to the rest of Libya.


4.198.2
5327
μελάγγαιός τε γὰρ ἐστὶ καὶ ἔπυδρος πίδαξι , καὶ οὔτε αὐχμοῦ φροντίζουσα οὐδὲν οὔτε ὄμβρον πλέω πιοῦσα δεδήληται .
For the soil is black and well-watered by springs, and has no fear of drought, nor is it harmed by drinking excessive showers


4.198.2
5328
ὕεται γὰρ δὴ ταῦτα τῆς Λιβύης .
(there is rain in this part of Libya).


4.198.2
5329
τῶν δὲ ἐκφορίων τοῦ καρποῦ τ- αὐτὰ μέτρα τῇ Βαβυλωνίῃ γῇ κατίσταται .
Its yield of grain is of the same measure as in the land of Babylon.


4.198.2
5330
ἀγαθὴ δὲ γῆ καὶ τὴν Εὐεσπερῖται νέμονται ·
But this region is a match for the most fertile farmland in the world, nor is it at all like to the rest of Libya.


4.198.3
5331
ἐπ’ ἑκατοστὰ γάρ , ἐπεὰν αὐτὴ ἑωυτῆς ἄριστα ἐνείκῃ , ἐκφέρει , ἣ δὲ ἐν τῆ Κίνυπι ἐπὶ τριηκόσια .
The land inhabited by the Euhesperitae is also good; it yields at the most a hundredfold; but the land of the Cinyps region yields three hundredfold.


4.199.1
5332
ἔχει δὲ καὶ ἡ Κυρηναίη χώρη , ἐοῦσα ὑψηλοτάτη ταύτης τῆς Λιβύης τὴν οἱ νομάδες νέμονται , τρεῖς ὥρας ἐν ἑωυτῇ ἀξίας θώματος .
The country of Cyrene, which is the highest part of the Libya that the nomads inhabit, has the marvellous advantage of three harvest seasons.


4.199.1
5333
πρῶτα μὲν γὰρ τὰ παραθαλάσσια τῶν καρπῶν ὀργᾷ ἀμᾶσθαι τε καὶ τρυγᾶσθαι ·
The fruits of the earth are ripe for reaping and picking on the coast first;


4.199.1
5334
τούτων τε δὴ συγκεκομισμένων τὰ ὑπὲρ τῶν θαλασσιδίων χώρων τὰ μέσα ὀργᾷ συγκομίζεσθαι , τὰ βουνοὺς καλέουσι ·
when these have been gathered, the middle region above the coast, which they call the Hills, is ripe for gathering;


4.199.2
5335
συγκεκόμισται τε οὗτος ὁ μέσος καρπὸς καὶ ὁ ἐν τῇ κατυπερτάτῃ τῆς γῆς πεπαίνεταί τε καὶ ὀργᾷ , ὥστε ἐκπέποται τε καὶ καταβέβρωται ὁ πρῶτος καρπὸς καὶ ὁ τελευταῖος συμπαραγίνεται .
no sooner has this yield of the middle country been gathered than the highest-lying crops are mellow and ripe,


4.199.2
5336
οὕτω ἐπ’ ὀκτὼ μῆνας Κυρηναίους ὀπώρη ἐπέχει .
so that the latest fruits of the earth are coming in when the earliest are already spent by way of food and drink.


4.199.2
5337
ταῦτα μέν νυν ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον εἰρήσθω .
Thus the Cyrenaeans have a harvest lasting eight months.


4.200.1
5338
οἱ δὲ Φερετίμης τιμωροὶ Πέρσαι ἐπείτε ἐκ τῆς Αἰγύπτου σταλέντες ὑπὸ Ἀρυάνδεω ἀπίκατο ἐς τὴν Βάρκην , ἐπολιόρκεον τὴν πόλιν ἐπαγγελλόμενοι ἐκδιδόναι τοὺς αἰτίους τοῦ φόνου τοῦ Ἀρκεσίλεω ·
Enough of these matters, then.


4.200.1
5339
τῶν δὲ πᾶν γὰρ ἦν τὸ πλῆθος μεταίτιον , οὐκ ἐδέκοντο τοὺς λόγους .
Now when the Persians that Aryandes sent from Egypt to avenge Pheretime came to Barce, they laid siege to the city, demanding the surrender of those who were guilty of the murder of Arcesilaus:


4.200.2
5340
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ ἐπολιόρκεον τὴν Βάρκην ἐπὶ μῆνας ἐννέα , ὀρύσσοντες τε ὀρύγματα ὑπόγαια φέροντα ἐς τὸ τεῖχος καὶ προσβολὰς καρτερὰς ποιεύμενοι .
but the Barcaeans, whose whole people were accessory to the deed, would not yield. The Persians besieged Barce for nine months, digging underground passages leading to the walls, and making violent assaults.


4.200.2
5341
τὰ μέν νυν ὀρύγματα ἀνὴρ χαλκεὺς ἀνεῦρε ἐπιχάλκω ἀσπίδι , ὧδε ἐπιφρασθείς ·
As for the tunnels, a blacksmith discovered them by the means of a bronze shield, and this is how he found them:


4.200.2
5342
περιφέρων αὐτὴν ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχεος προσῖσχε πρὸς τὸ δάπεδον τῆς πόλιος .
carrying the shield around the inner side of the walls, he struck it against the ground of the city;


4.200.3
5343
τὰ μὲν δὴ ἄλλα ἔσκε κωφὰ πρὸς τὰ προσῖσχε , κατὰ δὲ τὰ ὀρυσσόμενα ἠχέεσκε ὁ χαλκὸς τῆς ἀσπίδος .
all the other places which he struck returned a dull sound; but where there were tunnels, the bronze of the shield rang clear.


4.200.3
5344
ἀντορύσσοντες δ’ ἂν ταύτῃ οἱ Βαρκαῖοι ἔκτεινον τῶν Περσέων τοὺς γεωρυχέοντας .
Here the Barcaeans made a counter-tunnel and killed those Persians who were digging underground.


4.200.3
5345
τοῦτο μὲν δὴ οὕτω ἐξευρέθη , τὰς δὲ προσβολὰς ἀπεκρούοντο οἱ Βαρκαῖοι .
Thus the tunnels were discovered, and the assaults were repelled by the townsfolk.


4.201.1
5346
χρόνον δὲ δὴ πολλὸν τριβομένων καὶ πιπτόντων ἀμφοτέρων πολλῶν καὶ οὐκ ἧσσον τῶν Περσέων , Ἄμασις ὁ στρατηγὸς τοῦ πεζοῦ μηχανᾶται τοιάδε .
When much time had been spent and many on both sides (not less of the Persians than of their enemies) slain, Amasis the general of the foot soldiers devised a plot,


4.201.1
5347
μαθὼν τοὺς Βορκαίους ὡς κατὰ μὲν τὸ ἰσχυρὸν οὐκ αἱρετοὶ εἶεν , δόλῳ δὲ αἱρετοί , ποιέει τοιάδε ·
knowing that Barce could not be taken by force but might be taken by guile: he dug by night a wide trench and laid frail planks across it,


4.201.1
5348
νυκτὸς τάφρην ὀρύξας εὐρέαν ἐπέτεινε ξύλα ἀσθενέα ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς , κατύπερθε δὲ ἐπιπολῆς τῶν ξύλων χοῦν γῆς ἐπεφόρησε ποιέων τῇ ἄλλῃ γῇ ἰσόπεδον .
which he then covered over with a layer of earth level with the ground about it.


4.201.2
5349
ἅμα ἡμέρῃ δὲ ἐς λόγους προεκαλέετο τοὺς Βαρκαίους ·
Then when day came, he invited the Barcaeans to confer with him,


4.201.2
5350
οἳ δὲ ἀσπαστῶς ὑπήκουσαν , ἐς ὅ σφι ἕαδε ὁμολογίῃ χρήσασθαι .
and they readily consented; at last all agreed to conditions of peace.


4.201.2
5351
τὴν δὲ ὁμολογίην ἐποιεῦντο τοιήνδε τινά , ἐπὶ τῆς κρυπτῆς τάφρου τάμνοντες ὅρκια , ἔστ’ ἂν ἡ γῆ αὕτη οὕτω ἔχῃ , μένειν τὸ ὅρκιον κατὰ χώρην , καὶ Βαρκαίους τε ὑποτελέειν φάναι ἀξίην βασιλέι καὶ Πέρσας μηδὲν ἄλλο νεοχμοῦν κατὰ Βαρκαίους .
This was done thus: standing on the hidden trench, they gave and accepted a sworn assurance that their treaty would hold good while the ground where they stood was unchanged; the Barcaeans promised to pay a due sum to the king, and the Persians to do the Barcaeans no harm.


4.201.3
5352
μετὰ δὲ τὸ ὅρκιον Βαρκαῖοι μὲν πιστεύσαντες τούτοισι αὐτοί τε ἐξῄσαν ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεος καὶ τῶν πολεμίων ἔων παριέναι ἐς τὸ τεῖχος τὸν βουλόμενον , τὰς πάσας πύλας ἀνοίξαντες .
When the sworn agreement was made, the townsfolk, trusting in it and opening all their gates, themselves came out of the city,


4.201.3
5353
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι καταρρήξαντες τὴν κρυπτὴν γέφυραν ἔθεον ἔσω ἐς τὸ τεῖχος .
and let all their enemies who so desired enter within the walls. But the Persians broke down the hidden bridge and ran into the city.


4.201.3
5354
κατέρρηξαν δὲ τοῦδε εἵνεκα τὴν ἐποίησαν γέφυραν , ἵνα ἐμπεδορκέοιεν , ταμόντες τοῖσι Βαρκαίοισι χρόνον μένειν αἰεὶ τὸ ὅρκιον ὅσον ἂν ἡ γῆ μένῃ κατὰ τότε εἶχε ·
They broke down the bridge that they had made, so that they might keep the oath which they had sworn to the Barcaeans: namely, that this treaty would hold good for as long as the ground remained as it was;


4.201.3
5355
καταρρήξασι δὲ οὐκέτι ἔμενε τὸ ὅρκιον κατὰ χώρην .
but if they broke the bridge the treaty held good no longer.


4.202.1
5356
τοὺς μέν νυν αἰτιωτάτους τῶν Βαρκαίων ἡ Φερετίμη , ἐπείτε οἱ ἐκ τῶν Περσέων παρεδόθησαν , ἀνεσκολόπισε κύκλῳ τοῦ τείχεος , τῶν δέ σφι γυναικῶν τοὺς μαζοὺς ἀποταμοῦσα περιέστιξε καὶ τούτοισι τὸ τεῖχος ·
When they were delivered to her by the Persians, Pheretime took the most guilty of the Barcaeans and set them impaled around the top of the wall; the breasts of their women she cut off and planted around the wall in like manner.


4.202.2
5357
τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς τῶν Βαρκαίων ληίην ἐκέλευε θέσθαι τοὺς Πέρσας , πλὴν ὅσοι αὐτῶν ἦσαν Βαττιάδαι τε καὶ τοῦ φόνου οὐ μεταίτιοι ·
As for the rest of the Barcaeans, she told the Persians to take them as their booty, except those who were of the house of Battus and not accessory to the murder:


4.202.2
5358
τούτοισι δὲ τὴν πόλιν ἐπέτρεψε ἡ Φερετίμη .
to these she turned over the city.


4.203.1
5359
τοὺς ὦν δὴ λοιποὺς τῶν Βαρκαίων οἱ Πέρσαι ἀνδραποδισάμενοι ἀπήισαν ὀπίσω ·
The Persians thus enslaved the rest of the Barcaeans, and went home.


4.203.1
5360
καὶ ἐπείτε ἐπὶ τῇ Κυρηναίων πόλι ἐπέστησαν , οἱ Κυρηναῖοι λόγιόν τι ἀποσιεύμενοι διεξῆκαν αὐτοὺς διὰ τοῦ ἄστεος .
When they appeared before the city of Cyrene, the Cyrenaeans let them pass through their city, so that a certain oracle might be fulfilled.


4.203.2
5361
διεξιούσης δὲ τῆς στρατιῆς Βάδρης μὲν ὁ τοῦ ναυτικοῦ στρατοῦ στρατηγὸς ἐκέλευε αἱρέειν τὴν πόλιν , Ἄμασις δὲ ὁ τοῦ πεζοῦ οὐκ ἔα ·
As the army was passing through, Badres the admiral of the fleet was for taking the city,


4.203.2
5362
ἐπὶ Βάρκην γὰρ ἀποσταλῆναι μούνην Ἑλληνίδα πόλιν ·
but Amasis the general of the land army would not consent, saying that he had been sent against Barce and no other Greek city;


4.203.2
5363
ἐς ὃ διεξελθοῦσι καὶ ἱζομένοισι ἐπὶ Διὸς Λυκαίου ὄχθον μετεμέλησέ σφι οὐ σχοῦσι τὴν Κυρήνην .
at last they passed through Cyrene and camped on the hill of Lycaean Zeus; there they regretted not having taken the city,


4.203.2
5364
καὶ ἐπειρῶντο τὸ δεύτερον παριέναι ἐς αὐτήν ·
and tried to enter it again,


4.203.2
5365
οἱ δὲ Κυρηναῖοι οὐ περιώρων .
but the Cyrenaeans would not let them.


4.203.3
5366
τοῖσι δὲ Πέρσῃσι οὐδενὸς μαχομένου φόβος ἐνέπεσε , ἀποδραμόντες τε ὅσον τε ἑξήκοντα στάδια ἵζοντο ·
Then, although no one attacked them, panic seized the Persians, and they fled to a place seven miles distant and camped there;


4.203.3
5367
ἱδρυθέντι δὲ τῷ στρατοπέδῳ ταύτῃ ἦλθε παρὰ Ἀρυνάνδεω ἄγγελος ἀποκαλέων αὐτούς .
and while they were there, a messenger from Aryandes came to the camp asking them to return.


4.203.3
5368
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι Κυρηναίων δεηθέντες ἐπόδιά σφι δοῦναι ἔτυχον , λαβόντες δὲ ταῦτα ἀπαλλάσσοντο ἐς τὴν Αἴγυπτον .
The Persians asked and received from the Cyrenaeans provisions for their march, after which they left to go to Egypt;


4.203.4
5369
παραλαβόντες δὲ τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν αὐτοὺς Λίβυες τῆς τε ἐσθῆτος εἵνεκα καὶ τῆς σκευῆς τοὺς ὑπολειπομένους αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπελκομένους ἐφόνευον , ἐς ὃ ἐς τὴν Αἴγυπτον ἀπίκοντο .
but then they fell into the hands of the Libyans, who killed the laggards and stragglers of the army for the sake of their garments and possessions; until at last they came to  Egypt.


4.204.1
5370
οὗτος ὁ Περσέων στρατὸς τῆς Λιβύης ἑκαστάτω ἐς Εὐεσπερίδας ἦλθε .
This Persian force advanced as far as Euhesperidae in Libya and no farther.


4.204.1
5371
τοὺς δὲ ἠνδραποδίσαντο τῶν Βαρκαίων , τούτους δὲ ἐκ τῆς Αἰγύπτου ἀνασπάστους ἐποίησαν παρὰ βασιλέα , βασιλεὺς δέ σφι Δαρεῖος ἔδωκε τῆς Βακτρίης χώρης κώμην ἐγκατοικῆσαι .
As for the Barcaeans whom they had taken for slaves, they carried them from Egypt into banishment and brought them to the king,


4.204.1
5372
οἳ δὲ τῇ κώμῃ ταύτῃ οὔνομα ἔθεντο Βάρκην , ἥ περ ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἦν οἰκεομένη ἐν γῇ τῇ Βακτρίῃ .
and Darius gave them a town of Bactria to live in. They gave this town the name Barce, and it remained an inhabited place in Bactria until my own lifetime.


4.205.1
5373
οὐ μὲν οὐδὲ ἡ Φερετίμη εὖ τὴν ζόην κατέπλεξε .
But Pheretime did not end well, either.


4.205.1
5374
ὡς γὰρ δὴ τάχιστα ἐκ τῆς Λιβύης τισαμένη τοὺς Βαρκαίους ἀπενόστησε ἐς τὴν Αἴγυπτον , ἀπέθανε κακῶς ·
For as soon as she had revenged herself on the Barcaeans and returned to Egypt, she met an awful death.


4.205.1
5375
ζῶσα γὰρ εὐλέων ἐξέζεσε , ὡς ἄρα ἀνθρώποισι αἱ λίην ἰσχυραὶ τιμωρίαι πρὸς θεῶν ἐπίφθονοι γίνονται ·ἐκ μὲν δὴ Φερετίμης τῆς Βάττου τοιαύτη τε καὶ τοσαύτη τιμωρίη ἐγένετο ἐς Βαρκαίους .
For while still alive she teemed with maggots: thus does over-brutal human revenge invite retribution from the gods. That of Pheretime, daughter of Battus, against the Barcaeans was revenge of this nature and this brutality.



5.1.1
5376
οἱ δὲ ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ τῶν Περσέων καταλειφθέντες ὑπὸ Δαρείου , τῶν ὁ Μεγάβαζος ἦρχε , πρώτους μὲν Περινθίους Ἑλλησποντίων οὐ βουλομένους ὑπηκόους εἶναι Δαρείου κατεστρέψαντο , περιεφθέντας πρότερον καὶ ὑπὸ Παιόνων τρηχέως .
Those Persians whom Darius had left in  Europe under the command of Megabazus, finding the Perinthians unwilling to be Darius' subjects, subdued them before any others of the people of the  Hellespont. These Perinthians had already been roughly handled by the Paeonians.


5.1.2
5377
οἱ γὰρ ὦν ἀπὸ Στρυμόνος Παίονες χρήσαντος τοῦ θεοῦ στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ Περινθίους , καὶ ἢν μὲν ἀντικατιζόμενοι ἐπικαλέσωνται σφέας οἱ Περίνθιοι ὀνομαστὶ βώσαντες , τοὺς δὲ ἐπιχειρέειν , ἢν δὲ μὴ ἐπιβώσωνται , μὴ ἐπιχειρέειν , ἐποίεον οἱ Παίονες ταῦτα .
For the oracle of the god ordered the Paeonians from the Strymon to march against Perinthus,


5.1.2
5378
ἀντικατιζομένων δὲ τῶν Περινθίων ἐν τῷ προαστείῳ , ἐνθαῦτα μουνομαχίη τριφασίη ἐκ προκλήσιός σφι ἐγένετο ·
and if the Perinthians, who were encamped opposite them, should call to them, crying out their name, then to attack them. If, however, there were no such call, they were not to attack. The Paeonians acted accordingly.


5.1.2
5379
καὶ γὰρ ἄνδρα ἀνδρὶ καὶ ἵππον ἵππῳ συνέβαλον καὶ κύνα κυνί .
When the Perinthians set up camp in front of their city, the armies then challenged each other to a threefold duel, in which man was matched against man, horse against horse, and dog against dog.


5.1.3
5380
νικώντων δὲ τὰ δύο τῶν Περινθίων , ὡς ἐπαιώνιζον κεχαρηκότες , συνεβάλοντο οἱ Παίονες τὸ χρηστήριον αὐτὸ τοῦτο εἶναι καὶ εἶπάν κου παρὰ σφίσι αὐτοῖσι " νῦν ἂν εἴη ὁ χρησμὸς ἐπιτελεόμενος ἡμῖν , νῦν ἡμέτερον ἔργον " .
The Perinthians were victorious in two of the combats and raised the cry of “Paean” in their joy.


5.1.3
5381
οὕτω τοῖσι Περινθίοισι παιωνίσασι ἐπιχειρέουσι οἱ Παίονες , καὶ πολλόν τε ἐκράτησαν καὶ ἔλιπον σφέων ὀλίγους .
The Paeonians reasoned that this was what the oracle had spoken of and must have said to each other, “This is surely the fulfillment of the prophecy; now it is time for us to act.”


5.2.1
5382
τὰ μὲν δὴ ἀπὸ Παιόνων πρότερον γενόμενα ὧδε ἐγένετο ·
Accordingly, the Paeonians set upon the Perinthians and won a great victory, leaving few of their enemies alive.


5.2.1
5383
τότε δὲ ἀνδρῶν ἀγαθῶν περὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίης γινομένων τῶν Περινθίων οἱ Πέρσαι τε καὶ ὁ Μεγάβαζος ἐπεκράτησαν πλήθεϊ .
This, then, is what the Perinthians had previously suffered at the hands of the Paeonians.


5.2.2
5384
ὡς δὲ ἐχειρώθη ἡ Πέρινθος , ἤλαυνε Μεγάβαζος τὸν στρατὸν διὰ τῆς Θρηίκης , πᾶσαν πόλιν καὶ πᾶν ἔθνος τῶν ταύτῃ οἰκημένων ἡμερούμενος βασιλέι .
Now they fought like brave men for their liberty, but Megabazus and the Persians overcame them by weight of numbers.


5.2.2
5385
ταῦτα γάρ οἱ ἐνετέταλτο ἐκ Δαρείου , Θρηίκην καταστρέφεσθαι .
When Perinthus had been taken, Megabazus marched his army through Thrace, subduing to the king’s will every city and every people of that region.


5.3.1
5386
Θρηίκων δὲ ἔθνος μέγιστον ἐστὶ μετά γε Ἰνδοὺς πάντων ἀνθρώπων ·
For this, the conquest of Thrace, was the charge given him by Darius.


5.3.1
5387
εἰ δὲ ὑπ’ ἑνὸς ἄρχοιτο ἢ φρονέοι κατὰ τ- αὐτό , ἄμαχόν τ’ ἂν εἴη καὶ πολλῷ κράτιστον πάντων ἐθνέων κατὰ γνώμην τὴν ἐμήν .
The Thracians are the biggest nation in the world, next to the Indians.


5.3.1
5388
ἀλλὰ γὰρ τοῦτο ἄπορόν σφι καὶ ἀμήχανον μή κοτε ἐγγένηται , εἰσὶ δὴ κατὰ τοῦτο ἀσθενέες .
If they were under one ruler, or united, they would, in my judgment, be invincible and the strongest nation on earth. Since, however, there is no way or means to bring this about, they are weak.


5.3.2
5389
οὐνόματα δ’ ἔχουσι πολλὰ κατὰ χώρας ἕκαστοι , νόμοισι δὲ οὗτοι παραπλησίοισι πάντες χρέωνται κατὰ πάντα , πλὴν Γετέων καὶ Τραυσῶν καὶ τῶν κατύπερθε Κρηστωναίων οἰκεόντων .
The Thracians have many names, each tribe according to its region, but they are very similar in all their customs, save the Getae, the Trausi, and those who dwell above the Crestonaeans.


5.4.1
5390
τούτων δὲ τὰ μὲν Γέται οἱ ἀθανατίζοντες ποιεῦσι , εἴρηταί μοι ·
As for the Getae, who claim to be immortal, I have already given an account of their practices.


5.4.1
5391
Τραυσοὶ δὲ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα πάντα κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι Θρήιξι ἐπιτελέουσι , κατὰ δὲ τὸν γινόμενόν σφι καὶ ἀπογινόμενον ποιεῦσι τοιάδε ·
The Trausi, who in all else conform to the customs of other Thracians, do as I will show at the times of birth and death.


5.4.2
5392
τὸν μὲν γενόμενον περιιζόμενοι οἱ προσήκοντες ὀλοφύρονται , ὅσα μιν δεῖ ἐπείτε ἐγένετο ἀναπλῆσαι κακά , ἀνηγεόμενοι τὰ ἀνθρωπήια πάντα πάθεα ·
When a child is born, the kinsmen sit around it and lament all the ills that it must endure from its birth onward, recounting all the sorrows of men.


5.4.2
5393
τὸν δ’ ἀπογενόμενον παίζοντές τε καὶ ἡδόμενοι γῇ κρύπτουσι , ἐπιλέγοντες ὅσων κακῶν ἐξαπαλλαχθεὶς ἐστὶ ἐν πάσῃ εὐδαιμονίῃ .
The dead, however, they bury with celebration and gladness, asserting that he is rid of so many ills and has achieved a state of complete blessedness.


5.5.1
5394
οἱ δὲ κατύπερθε Κρηστωναίων ποιεῦσι τοιάδε .
Those who dwell above the Crestonaeans have yet other practices.


5.5.1
5395
ἔχει γυναῖκας ἕκαστος πολλά , ·
Each man has many wives,


5.5.1
5396
ἐπεὰν ὦν τις αὐτῶν ἀποθάνῃ , κρίσις γίνεται μεγάλη τῶν γυναικῶν καὶ φίλων σπουδαὶ ἰσχυραὶ περὶ τοῦδε , ἥτις αὐτέων ἐφιλέετο μάλιστα ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀνδρός ·
and at his death there is both great rivalry among his wives and eager contention on their friends’ part to prove which wife was best loved by her husband.


5.5.1
5397
ἣ δ’ ἂν κριθῇ καὶ τιμηθῇ , ἐγκωμιασθεῖσα ὑπό τε ἀνδρῶν καὶ γυναικῶν σφάζεται ἐς τὸν τάφον ὑπὸ τοῦ οἰκηιοτάτου ἑωυτῆς , σφαχθεῖσα δὲ συνθάπτεται τῷ ἀνδρί .
She to whom the honor is adjudged is praised by men and women alike and then slain over the tomb by her nearest of kin. After the slaying she is buried with the husband.


5.5.1
5398
αἱ δὲ ἄλλαι συμφορὴν μεγάλην ποιεῦνται ·
The rest of the wives are greatly displeased by this, believing themselves to be deeply dishonored.


5.5.1
5399
ὄνειδος γάρ σφι τοῦτο μέγιστον γίνεται .
Among the rest of the Thracians, it is the custom to sell their children for export and to take no care of their maidens, allowing them to have intercourse with any man they wish.


5.6.1
5400
τῶν δὲ δὴ ἄλλων Θρηίκων ἐστὶ ὅδε νόμος ·
Their wives, however, they strictly guard, and buy them for a price from the parents.


5.6.1
5401
πωλεῦσι τὰ τέκνα ἐπ’ ἐξαγωγῇ , τὰς δὲ παρθένους οὐ φυλάσσουσι , ἀλλ’ ἐῶσι τοῖσι αὐταὶ βούλονται ἀνδράσι μίσγεσθαι ·
To be tattooed is a sign of noble birth, while to bear no such marks is for the baser sort.


5.6.1
5402
τὰς δὲ γυναῖκας ἰσχυρῶς φυλάσσουσι καὶ ὠνέονται τὰς γυναῖκας παρὰ τῶν γονέων χρημάτων μεγάλων .
The idler is most honored, the tiller of the soil most scorned;


5.6.2
5403
καὶ τὸ μὲν ἐστίχθαι εὐγενὲς κέκριται , τὸ δὲ ἄστικτον ἀγεννές .
To be tattooed is a sign of noble birth, while to bear no such marks is for the baser sort.


5.6.2
5404
ἀργὸν εἶναι κάλλιστον , γῆς δὲ ἐργάτην ἀτιμότατον ·
The idler is most honored, the tiller of the soil most scorned;


5.6.2
5405
τὸ ζῆν ἀπὸ πολέμου καὶ ληιστύος κάλλιστον .
he is held in highest honor who lives by war and robbery.


5.7.1
5406
οὗτοι μὲν σφέων οἱ ἐπιφανέστατοι νόμοι εἰσί , θεοὺς δὲ σέβονται μούνους τούσδε , Ἄρεα καὶ Διόνυσον καὶ Ἄρτεμιν .
These are most notable of their usages. They worship no gods but Ares, Dionysus, and Artemis.


5.7.1
5407
οἱ δὲ βασιλέες αὐτῶν , πάρεξ τῶν ἄλλων πολιητέων , σέβονται Ἑρμέην μάλιστα θεῶν , καὶ ὀμνύουσι μοῦνον τοῦτον , καὶ λέγουσι γεγονέναι ἀπὸ Ἑρμέω ἑωυτούς .
Their princes, however, unlike the rest of their countrymen, worship Hermes above all gods and swear only by him, claiming him for their ancestor.


5.8.1
5408
ταφαὶ δὲ τοῖσι εὐδαίμοσι αὐτῶν εἰσὶ αἵδε ·
The wealthy have the following funeral practices.


5.8.1
5409
τρεῖς μὲν ἡμέρας προτιθεῖσι τὸν νεκρόν , καὶ παντοῖα σφάξαντες ἱρήια εὐωχέονται , προκλαύσαντες πρῶτον ·
First they lay out the dead for three days, and after killing all kinds of victims and making lamentation, they feast.


5.8.1
5410
ἔπειτα δὲ θάπτουσι κατακαύσαντες ἢ ἄλλως γῇ κρύψαντες , χῶμα δὲ χέαντες ἀγῶνα τιθεῖσι παντοῖον , ἐν τῷ τὰ μέγιστα ἄεθλα τίθεται κατὰ λόγον μουνομαχίης .
After that they do away with the body either by fire or else by burial in the earth, and when they have built a barrow, they initiate all kinds of contests, in which the greatest prizes are offered for the hardest type of single combat.


5.8.1
5411
ταφαὶ μὲν δὴ Θρηίκων εἰσὶ αἵδε .
Such are the Thracian funeral rites.


5.9.1
5412
τὸ δὲ πρὸς βορέω τῆς χώρης ἔτι ταύτης οὐδεὶς ἔχει φράσαι τὸ ἀτρεκὲς οἵτινες εἰσὶ ἄνθρωποι οἰκέοντες αὐτήν , ἀλλὰ τὰ πέρην ἤδη τοῦ Ἴστρου ἔρημος χώρη φαίνεται ἐοῦσα καὶ ἄπειρος .
As for the region which lies north of this country, none can tell with certainty what men dwell there, but what lies beyond the Ister is a desolate and infinitely large tract of land.


5.9.1
5413
μούνους δὲ δύναμαι πυθέσθαι οἰκέοντας πέρην τοῦ Ἴστρου ἀνθρώπους τοῖσι οὔνομα εἶναι Σιγύννας , ἐσθῆτι δὲ χρεωμένους Μηδικῇ ·
I can learn of no men dwelling beyond the Ister save certain that are called Sigynnae and wear Median dress.


5.9.2
5414
τοὺς δὲ ἵππους αὐτῶν εἶναι λασίους ἅπαν τὸ σῶμα ἐπὶ πέντε δακτύλους τὸ βάθος τῶν τριχῶν , μικροὺς δὲ καὶ σιμοὺς καὶ ἀδυνάτους ἄνδρας φέρειν , ζευγνυμένους δὲ ὑπ’ ἅρματα εἶναι ὀξυτάτους ·
Their horses are said to be covered all over with shaggy hair five fingers' breadth long, and to be small, blunt-nosed, and unable to bear men on their backs, but very swift when yoked to chariots.


5.9.2
5415
ἁρματηλατέειν δὲ πρὸς ταῦτα τοὺς ἐπιχωρίους .
It is for this reason that driving chariots is the usage of the country.


5.9.2
5416
κατήκειν δὲ τούτων τοὺς οὔρους ἀγχοῦ Ἐνετῶν τῶν ἐν τῷ Ἀδρίῃ .
These men's borders, it is said, reach almost as far as the Eneti on the Adriatic Sea.


5.9.3
5417
εἶναι δὲ Μήδων σφέας ἀποίκους λέγουσι .
They call themselves colonists from Media.


5.9.3
5418
ὅκως δὲ οὗτοι Μήδων ἄποικοι γεγόνασι , ἐγὼ μὲν οὐκ ἔχω ἐπιφράσασθαι , γένοιτο δ’ ἂν πᾶν ἐν τῷ μακρῷ χρόνῳ .
How this has come about I myself cannot understand, but all is possible in the long passage of time.


5.9.3
5419
Σιγύννας δ’ ὦν καλέουσι Δίγυες οἱ ἄνω ὑπὲρ Μασσαλίης οἰκέοντες τοὺς καπήλους , Κύπριοι δὲ τὰ δόρατα .
However that may be, we know that the Ligyes who dwell inland of Massalia use the word “sigynnae” for hucksters, and the Cyprians use it for spears.


5.10.1
5420
ὡς δὲ Θρήικες λέγουσι , μέλισσαι κατέχουσι τὰ πέρην τοῦ Ἴστρου , καὶ ὑπὸ τουτέων οὐκ εἶναι διελθεῖν τὸ προσωτέρω .
According to the Thracians, all the land beyond the Ister is full of bees, and that by reason of these none can travel there.


5.10.1
5421
ἐμοὶ μέν νυν ταῦτα λέγοντες δοκέουσι λέγειν οὐκ οἰκότα ·
This, to my mind, is not a credible tale,


5.10.1
5422
τὰ γὰρ ζῷα ταῦτα φαίνεται εἶναι δύσριγα ·
for those creatures are ill able to bear cold.


5.10.1
5423
ἀλλά μοι τὰ ὑπὸ τὴν ἄρκτον ἀοίκητα δοκέει εἶναι διὰ τὰ ψύχεα .
It appears to me rather that it is by reason of the cold that the northern lands are not inhabited.


5.10.1
5424
ταῦτα μέν νυν τῆς χώρης ταύτης πέρι λέγεται ·
Such, then, are the stories about this region.


5.10.1
5425
τὰ παραθαλάσσια δ’ ὦν αὐτῆς Μεγάβαζος Περσέων κατήκοα ἐποίεε .
Whatever the truth may be, Megabazus made its coastal area subject to the Persians.


5.11.1
5426
Δαρεῖος δὲ ὡς διαβὰς τάχιστα τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἀπίκετο ἐς Σάρδις , ἐμνήσθη τῆς ἐξ Ἱστιαίου τε τοῦ Μιλησίου εὐεργεσίης καὶ τῆς παραινέσιος τοῦ Μυτιληναίου Κώεω , μεταπεμψάμενος δὲ σφέας ἐς Σάρδις ἐδίδου αὐτοῖσι αἵρεσιν .
As soon as Darius had crossed the  Hellespont and come to  Sardis, he remembered the good service done him by Histiaeus of  Miletus and the counsel of Coes the Mytilenaean, and after sending for them to come to  Sardis, he offered them a choice of whatever they wanted.


5.11.2
5427
ὁ μὲν δὴ Ἱστιαῖος , ἅτε τυραννεύων τῆς Μιλήτου , τυραννίδος μὲν οὐδεμιῆς προσεχρήιζε , αἰτέει δὲ Μύρκινον τὴν Ἠδωνῶν , βουλόμενος ἐν αὐτῇ πόλιν κτίσαι .
Histiaeus, seeing that he was tyrant of Miletus, desired no further sovereignty than that, but asked for Myrcinus in the Edonian land so that he might build a city there.


5.11.2
5428
οὗτος μὲν δὴ ταύτην αἱρέεται , ὁ δὲ Κώης , οἷά τε οὐ τύραννος δημότης τε ἐών , αἰτέει Μυτιλήνης τυραννεῦσαι .
This, then, was Histiaeus' choice, but Coes, inasmuch as he was no tyrant but a plain citizen, asked that he might be made tyrant of Mytilene.


5.12.1
5429
τελεωθέντων δὲ ἀμφοτέροισι , οὗτοι μὲν κατὰ τὰ εἵλοντο ἐτράποντο , Δαρεῖον δὲ συνήνεικε πρῆγμα τοιόνδε ἰδόμενον ἐπιθυμῆσαι ἐντείλασθαι Μεγαβάζῳ Παίονας ἑλόντα ἀνασπάστους ποιῆσαι ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης .
When the wishes of each had been granted, they made their way to the places of their choice, but Darius, as it fell out, saw a sight which put it in his mind to bid Megabazus take the Paeonians and take them from their homes out of Europe into Asia.


5.12.1
5430
ἦν Πίγρης καὶ Μαντύης ἄνδρες Παίονες , οἳ ἐπείτε Δαρεῖος διέβη ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην , αὐτοὶ ἐθέλοντες Παιόνων τυραννεύειν ἀπικνέονται ἐς Σάρδις , ἅμα ἀγόμενοι ἀδελφεὴν μεγάλην τε καὶ εὐειδέα .
There were two Paeonians, Pigres and Mantyes, who themselves desired to be rulers of their countrymen. When Darius had crossed into Asia, they came to Sardis, bringing with them their sister, a tall and beautiful woman.


5.12.2
5431
φυλάξαντες δὲ Δαρεῖον προκατιζόμενον ἐς τὸ προάστειον τὸ τῶν Λυδῶν ἐποίησαν τοιόνδε ·
There, waiting till Darius should be sitting in state in the suburb of the Lydian city,


5.12.2
5432
σκευάσαντες τὴν ἀδελφεὴν ὡς εἶχον ἄριστα , ἐπ’ ὕδωρ ἔπεμπον ἄγγος ἐπὶ τῇ κεφαλῇ ἔχουσαν καὶ ἐκ τοῦ βραχίονος ἵππον ἐπέλκουσαν καὶ κλώθουσαν λίνον .
they put on their sister the best adornment they had, and sent her to draw water, bearing a vessel on her head, leading a horse by the bridle and spinning flax at the same time.


5.12.3
5433
ὡς δὲ παρεξήιε ἡ γυνή , ἐπιμελὲς τῷ Δαρείῳ ἐγένετο ·
Darius took note of the woman as she passed by him,


5.12.3
5434
οὔτε γὰρ Περσικὰ ἦν οὔτε Λύδια τὰ ποιεύμενα ἐκ τῆς γυναικός , οὔτε πρὸς τῶν ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης οὐδαμῶν .
for what she did was not in the manner of the Persians or Lydians or any of the peoples of Asia.


5.12.3
5435
ἐπιμελὲς δὲ ὥς οἱ ἐγένετο , τῶν δορυφόρων τινὰς πέμπει κελεύων φυλάξαι ὅ τι χρήσεται τῷ ἵππῳ ἡ γυνή .
Having taken note of this, he sent some of his guards, bidding them watch what the woman would do with the horse.


5.12.4
5436
οἳ μὲν δὴ ὄπισθε εἵποντο ·
They, accordingly, followed behind her,


5.12.4
5437
ἣ δὲ ἐπείτε ἀπίκετο ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμόν , ἦρσε τὸν ἵππον , ἄρσασα δὲ καὶ τὸ ἄγγος τοῦ ὕδατος ἐμπλησαμένη τὴν αὐτὴν ὁδὸν παρεξήιε , φέρουσα τὸ ὕδωρ ἐπὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς καὶ ἐπέλκουσα ἐκ τοῦ βραχίονος τὸν ἵππον καὶ στρέφουσα τὸν ἄτρακτον .
and she, coming to the river, watered the horse. When she had done this and had filled her vessel with water, she passed back again by the same way, bearing the water on her head, leading the horse on her arm, and plying her distaff.


5.13.1
5438
θωμάζων δὲ ὁ Δαρεῖος τά τε ἤκουσε ἐκ τῶν κατασκόπων καὶ τὰ αὐτὸς ὥρα , ἄγειν αὐτὴν ἐκέλευε ἑωυτῷ ἐς ὄψιν .
Marvelling at what he heard from his watchers and what he saw for himself, Darius bade the woman be brought before him.


5.13.1
5439
ὡς δὲ ἄχθη , παρῆσαν καὶ οἱ ἀδελφεοὶ αὐτῆς οὔ κῃ πρόσω σκοπιὴν ἔχοντες τούτων .
When she had been brought, her brothers, who watched all this from a place nearby, came too.


5.13.1
5440
εἰρωτῶντος δὲ τοῦ Δαρείου ὁποδαπὴ εἴη , ἔφασαν οἱ νεηνίσκοι εἶναι Παίονες καὶ ἐκείνην εἶναι σφέων ἀδελφεήν .
Darius asked of what nation she was, and the young men told him that they were Paeonians and that she was their sister.


5.13.2
5441
ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο , τίνες δὲ οἱ Παίονες ἄνθρωποι εἰσὶ καὶ κοῦ γῆς οἰκημένοι , καὶ τί κεῖνοι ἐθέλοντες ἔλθοιεν ἐς Σάρδις .
“But who,” he answered, “are the Paeonians, and where do they dwell, and with what intent have you come to Sardis?”


5.13.2
5442
οἳ δέ οἱ ἔφραζον ὡς ἔλθοιεν μὲν ἐκείνῳ δώσοντες σφέας αὐτούς , εἴη δὲ ἡ Παιονίη ἐπὶ τῷ Στρυμόνι ποταμῷ πεπολισμένη , ὁ δὲ Στρυμὼν οὐ πρόσω τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου , εἴησαν δὲ Τευκρῶν τῶν ἐκ Τροίης ἄποικοι .
They told him, that they had come to be his men, that the towns of Paeonia lay on the Strymon, a river not far from the Hellespont, and that they were colonists from the Teucrians of Troy.


5.13.3
5443
οἳ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἕκαστα ἔλεγον , ὁ δὲ εἰρώτα εἰ καὶ πᾶσαι αὐτόθι αἱ γυναῖκες εἴησαν οὕτω ἐργάτιδες .
So they told him all this, and the king asked them if all the women of their country were so industrious.


5.13.3
5444
οἳ δὲ καὶ τοῦτο ἔφασαν προθύμως οὕτω ἔχειν ·
To this too they very readily answered that it was indeed so.


5.13.3
5445
αὐτοῦ γὰρ ὦν τούτου εἵνεκα καὶ ἐποιέετο .
For it was for this very purpose that they had come.


5.14.1
5446
ἐνθαῦτα Δαρεῖος γράφει γράμματα Μεγαβάζῳ , τὸν ἔλιπε ἐν τῇ Θρηίκῃ στρατηγόν , ἐντελλόμενος ἐξαναστῆσαι ἐξ ἠθέων Παίονας καὶ παρ’ ἑωυτὸν ἀγαγεῖν καὶ αὐτοὺς καὶ τὰ τέκνα τε καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας αὐτῶν .
Then Darius wrote a letter to Megabazus, whom he had left as his general in  Thrace, bidding him take the Paeonians from their houses, and bring them to him, men, women, and children.


5.14.2
5447
αὐτίκα δὲ ἱππεὺς ἔθεε φέρων τὴν ἀγγελίην ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον , περαιωθεὶς δὲ διδοῖ τὸ βυβλίον τῷ Μεγαβάζῳ .
Immediately a horseman sped with this message to the Hellespont, and upon crossing it, gave the letter to Megabazus,


5.14.2
5448
ὁ δὲ ἐπιλεξάμενος καὶ λαβὼν ἡγεμόνας ἐκ τῆς Θρηίκης ἐστρατεύετο ἐπὶ τὴν Παιονίην .
who, after reading it, took guides from Thrace and led his army to Paeonia.


5.15.1
5449
πυθόμενοι δὲ οἱ Παίονες τοὺς Πέρσας ἐπὶ σφέας ἰέναι , ἁλισθέντες ἐξεστρατεύσαντο πρὸς θαλάσσης , δοκέοντες ταύτῃ ἐπιχειρήσειν τοὺς Πέρσας ἐμβάλλοντας .
When the Paeonians learned that the Persians were coming against them, they gathered together and marched away to the sea, thinking that the Persians would attempt to attack them by that way.


5.15.2
5450
οἱ μὲν δὴ Παίονες ἦσαν ἕτοιμοι τὸν Μεγαβάζου στρατὸν ἐπιόντα ἐρύκειν ·
So the Paeonians were ready to withstand the onset of Megabazus' army,


5.15.2
5451
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι πυθόμενοι συναλίσθαι τοὺς Παίονας καὶ τὴν πρὸς θαλάσσης ἐσβολὴν φυλάσσοντας , ἔχοντες ἡγεμόνας τὴν ἄνω ὁδὸν τρέπονται , λαθόντες δὲ τοὺς Παίονας ἐσπίπτουσι ἐς τὰς πόλιας αὐτῶν ἐούσας ἀνδρῶν ἐρήμους ·
but the Persians, learning that the Paeonians had gathered their forces and were guarding the coast route into their country, got guides and marched instead by the highland road. They accordingly took the Paeonians unaware and won entrance into their cities, which were left without men,


5.15.2
5452
οἷα δὲ κεινῇσι ἐπιπεσόντες εὐπετέως κατέσχον .
and finding these empty at their attack, they easily gained them.


5.15.3
5453
οἱ δὲ Παίονες ὡς ἐπύθοντο ἐχομένας τὰς πόλιας , αὐτίκα διασκεδασθέντες κατ’ ἑωυτοὺς ἕκαστοι ἐτράποντο καὶ παρεδίδοσαν σφέας αὐτοὺς τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι .
The Paeonians, learning that their towns had been taken, straightway disbanded, each going his own way, and surrendered themselves to the Persians.


5.15.3
5454
οὕτω δὴ Παιόνων Σιριοπαίονές τε καὶ Παιόπλαι καὶ οἱ μέχρι τῆς Πρασιάδος λίμνης ἐξ ἠθέων ἐξαναστάντες ἤγοντο ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην .
Thus of the Paeonians the Siriopaeones and Paeoplae and all who lived as far as the Prasiad lake were taken away from their homes and led into Asia.


5.16.1
5455
οἱ δὲ περί τε Πάγγαιον ὄρος καὶ Δόβηρας καὶ Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ Ὀδομάντουσκαὶ αὐτὴν τὴν λίμνην τὴν Πρασιάδα οὐκ ἐχειρώθησαν ἀρχὴν ὑπὸ Μεγαβάζου ·
But those near the Pangaean mountains and the country of the Doberes and the Agrianes and the Odomanti and the Prasiad lake itself were never subdued at all by Megabazus.


5.16.1
5456
ἐπειρήθη δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἐν τῇ λίμνῃ κατοικημένους ἐξαιρέειν ὧδε .
He did in fact try to take the lake-dwellers and did so in the following manner.


5.16.1
5457
ἴκρια ἐπὶ σταυρῶν ὑψηλῶν ἐζευγμένα ἐν μέσῃ ἕστηκε τῇ λίμνῃ , ἔσοδον ἐκ τῆς ἠπείρου στεινὴν ἔχοντα μιῇ γεφύρῃ .
There is set in the midst of the lake a platform made fast on tall piles, to which one bridge gives a narrow passage from the land.


5.16.2
5458
τοὺς δὲ σταυροὺς τοὺς ὑπεστεῶτας τοῖσι ἰκρίοισι τὸ μέν κου ἀρχαῖον ἔστησαν κοινῇ πάντες οἱ πολιῆται , μετὰ δὲ νόμῳ χρεώμενοι ἱστᾶσι τοιῷδε ·
In olden times all the people working together set the piles which support the platform there, but they later developed another method of setting them.


5.16.2
5459
κομίζοντες ἐξ ὄρεος τῷ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Ὄρβηλος , κατὰ γυναῖκα ἑκάστην ὁ γαμέων τρεῖς σταυροὺς ὑπίστησι ·
The men bring the piles from a mountain called Orbelus,


5.16.2
5460
ἄγεται δὲ ἕκαστος συχνὰς γυναῖκας .
 and every man plants three for each of the three women that he weds.


5.16.3
5461
οἰκέουσι δὲ τοιοῦτον τρόπον , κρατέων ἕκαστος ἐπὶ τῶν ἰκρίων καλύβης τε ἐν τῇ διαιτᾶται καὶ θύρης καταπακτῆς διὰ τῶν ἰκρίων κάτω φερούσης ἐς τὴν λίμνην .
Each man has both a hut on the platform and a trap-door in the platform leading down into the lake.


5.16.3
5462
τὰ δὲ νήπια παιδία δέουσι τοῦ ποδὸς σπάρτῳ , μὴ κατακυλισθῇ δειμαίνοντες .
They make a cord fast to the feet of their little children out of fear that they will fall into the water.


5.16.4
5463
τοῖσι δὲ ἵπποισι καὶ τοῖσι ὑποζυγίοισι παρέχουσι χόρτον ἰχθῦς ·
They give fish as fodder to their horses and beasts of burden,


5.16.4
5464
τῶν δὲ πλῆθος ἐστὶ τοσοῦτο ὥστε , ὅταν τὴν θύρην τὴν καταπακτὴν ἀνακλίνῃ , κατιεῖ σχοίνῳ σπυρίδα κεινὴν ἐς τὴν λίμνην , καὶ οὐ πολλόν τινα χρόνον ἐπισχὼν ἀνασπᾷ πλήρεα ἰχθύων .
and there is such an abundance of fish that a man can open his trap-door, let down an empty basket by a line into the lake, and draw it up after a short time full of fish.


5.16.4
5465
τῶν δὲ ἰχθύων ἐστὶ γένεα δύο , τοὺς καλέουσι πάπρακάς τε καὶ τίλωνας .
There are two kinds of these, some called “paprakes,” some “tilones.”


5.17.1
5466
παιόνων μὲν δὴ οἱ χειρωθέντες ἤγοντο ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην .
So those of the Paeonians who had been captured were taken into Asia.


5.17.1
5467
Μεγάβαζος δὲ ὡς ἐχειρώσατο τοὺς Παίονας , πέμπει ἀγγέλους ἐς Μακεδονίην ἄνδρας ἑπτὰ Πέρσας , οἳ μετ’ αὐτὸν ἐκεῖνον ἦσαν δοκιμώτατοι ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ ·
Then Megabazus, having made the Paeonians captive, sent as messengers into Macedonia the seven Persians who (after himself) were the most honorable in his army.


5.17.1
5468
ἐπέμποντο δὲ οὗτοι παρὰ Ἀμύντην αἰτήσοντες γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ Δαρείῳ βασιλέι .
These were sent to Amyntas to demand earth and water for Darius the king.


5.17.2
5469
ἔστι δὲ ἐκ τῆς Πρασιάδος λίμνης σύντομος κάρτα ἐς τὴν Μακεδονίην ·
Now there is a very straight way from the Prasiad lake to Macedonia.


5.17.2
5470
πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ ἔχεται τῆς λίμνης τὸ μέταλλον ἐξ οὗ ὕστερον τούτων τάλαντον ἀργυρίου Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἡμέρης ἑκάστης ἐφοίτα , μετὰ δὲ τὸ μέταλλον Δύσωρον καλεόμενον ὄρος ὑπερβάντα εἶναι ἐν Μακεδονίν .
First there is near the lake that mine from which Alexander later drew a daily revenue of a talent of silver, and when a person has passed the mine, he need only cross the mountain called Dysorum to be in Macedonia.


5.18.1
5471
οἱ ὦν Πέρσαι οἱ πεμφθέντες οὗτοι παρὰ τὸν Ἀμύντην ὡς ἀπίκοντο , αἴτεον ἐλθόντες ἐς ὄψιν τὴν Ἀμύντεω Δαρείῳ βασιλέι γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ .
The Persians who had been sent as envoys came to Amyntas and demanded earth and water for Darius the king.


5.18.1
5472
ὁ δὲ ταῦτά τε ἐδίδου καὶ σφεας ἐπὶ ξείνια καλέει , παρασκευασάμενος δὲ δεῖπνον μεγαλοπρεπὲς ἐδέκετο τοὺς Πέρσας φιλοφρόνως .
He readily gave to them what they asked and invited them to be his guests, preparing a dinner of great splendor and receiving them hospitably.


5.18.2
5473
ὡς δὲ ἀπὸ δείπνου ἐγένοντο , διαπίνοντες εἶπαν οἱ Πέρσαι τάδε .
After dinner, the Persians said to Amyntas as they sat drinking together,


5.18.2
5474
" ξεῖνε Μακεδών , ἡμῖν νόμος ἐστὶ τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι , ἐπεὰν δεῖπνον προτιθώμεθα μέγα , τότε καὶ τὰς παλλακὰς καὶ τὰς κουριδίας γυναῖκας ἐσάγεσθαι παρέδρους .
“Macedonian, our host, it is our custom in Persia to bring in also the concubines and wedded wives to sit by the men after the giving of any great banquet.


5.18.2
5475
σύ νυν , ἐπεί περ προθύμως μὲν ἐδέξαο μεγάλως δὲ ξεινίζεις , διδοῖς δὲ βασιλέι Δαρείῳ γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ , ἕπεο νόμῳ τῷ ἡμετέρῳ " .
We ask you, then, (since you have received us heartily, are entertaining us nobly and are giving Darius our king earth and water) to follow our custom.”


5.18.3
5476
εἶπε πρὸς ταῦτα Ἀμύντης " ὦ Πέρσαι , νόμος μὲν ἡμῖν γε ἐστὶ οὐκ οὗτος , ἀλλὰ κεχωρίσθαι ἄνδρας γυναικῶν ·
To this Amyntas replied, “We have no such custom, Persians. Among us, men and women sit apart,


5.18.3
5477
ἐπείτε δὲ ὑμεῖς ἐόντες δεσπόται προσχρηίζετε τούτων , παρέσται ὑμῖν καὶ ταῦτα " .
but since you are our masters and are making this request, it shall be as you desire.”


5.18.3
5478
εἴπας τοσαῦτα ὁ Ἀμύντης μετεπέμπετο τὰς γυναῖκας ·
With that, Amyntas sent for the women.


5.18.3
5479
αἳ δ’ ἐπείτε καλεόμεναι ἦλθον , ἐπεξῆς ἀντίαι ἵζοντο τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι .
Upon being called, the women entered and sat down in a row opposite the Persians.


5.18.4
5480
ἐνθαῦτα οἱ Πέρσαι ἰδόμενοι γυναῖκας εὐμόρφους ἔλεγον πρὸς Ἀμύντην φάμενοι τὸ ποιηθὲν τοῦτο οὐδὲν εἶναι σοφόν ·
Then the Persians, seeing beautiful women before them, spoke to Amyntas and said that there was no sense in what he had done.


5.18.4
5481
κρέσσον γὰρ εἶναι ἀρχῆθεν μὴ ἐλθεῖν τὰς γυναῖκας ἢ ἐλθούσας καὶ μὴ παριζομένας ἀντίας ἵζεσθαι ἀλγηδόνας σφίσι ὀφθαλμῶν .
It would be better if the women had never come at all than that they should come and not sit beside the men, but sit opposite them to torment their eyes.


5.18.5
5482
ἀναγκαζόμενος δὲ ὁ Ἀμύντης ἐκέλευε παρίζειν ·
Amyntas, now feeling compelled to do so, bade the women sit beside them.


5.18.5
5483
πειθομενέων δὲ τῶν γυναικῶν αὐτίκα οἱ Πέρσαι μαστῶν τε ἅπτοντο οἷα πλεόνως οἰνωμένοι , καί κού τις καὶ φιλέειν ἐπειρᾶτο .
When the women had done as they were bidden, the Persians, flushed as they were with excess of wine, at once laid hands on the women's breasts, and one or another tried to kiss them.


5.19.1
5484
Ἀμύντης μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ὁρέων ἀτρέμας εἶχε , καίπερ δυσφορέων , οἷα ὑπερδειμαίνων τοὺς Πέρσας ·
This Amyntas saw, but held his peace despite his anger because he greatly feared the Persians.


5.19.1
5485
Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ὁ Ἀμύντεω παρεών τε καὶ ὁρέων ταῦτα , ἅτε νέος τε ἐὼν καὶ κακῶν ἀπαθής , οὐδαμῶς ἔτι κατέχειν οἷος τε ἦν , ὥστε δὲ βαρέως φέρων εἶπε πρὸς Ἀμύντην τάδε .
Amyntas' son Alexander, however, because of his youth and ignorance of ill deeds, could not bear it longer and said to Amyntas in great wrath,


5.19.1
5486
" ὦ πάτερ , σὺ μὲν εἶκε τῇ ἡλικίῃ ἀπιών τε ἀναπαύεο , μηδὲ λιπάρεε τῇ πόσι ·
“My father, do as your age demands. Leave us and take your rest; do not continue drinking.


5.19.1
5487
ἐγὼ δὲ προσμένων αὐτοῦ τῇδε πάντα τὰ ἐπιτήδεα παρέξω τοῖσι ξείνοισι " .
I will stay here and give our guests all that is needful.”


5.19.2
5488
πρὸς ταῦτα συνιεὶς Ἀμύντης ὅτι νεώτερα πρήγματα πρήσσειν μέλλοι ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος , λέγει " ὦ παῖ , σχεδὸν γάρ σευ ἀνακαιομένου συνίημι τοὺς λόγους , ὅτι ἐθέλεις ἐμὲ ἐκπέμψας ποιέειν τι νεώτερον ·
At this Amyntas saw that Alexander had some wild deed in mind and said,


5.19.2
5489
ἐγὼ ὦν σευ χρηίζω μηδὲν νεοχμῶσαι κατ’ ἄνδρας τούτους , ἵνα μὴ ἐξεργάσῃ ἡμέας , ἀλλὰ ἀνέχευ ὁρέων τὰ ποιεύμενα ·
“My son, you are angered, and if I guess your meaning correctly, you are sending me away so that you may do some violent deed. I for my part, for fear that you will bring about our undoing, entreat you not to act rashly against these men, but to bear patiently the sight of what they do.


5.19.2
5490
ἀμφὶ δὲ ἀπόδῳ τῇ ἐμῇ πείσομαί τοι " .
If you want me to leave, to that I consent.”


5.20.1
5491
ὡς δὲ ὁ Ἀμύντης χρηίσας τούτων οἰχώκεε , λέγει ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος πρὸς τοὺς Πέρσας " γυναικῶν τουτέων , ὦ ξεῖνοι , ἔστι ὑμῖν πολλὴ εὐπετείη , καὶ εἰ πάσῃσι βούλεσθε μίσγεσθαι καὶ ὁκόσῃσι ὦν αὐτέων .
When Amyntas made this request and had gone his way, Alexander said to the Persians, “Sirs, you have full freedom to deal with these women, and may have intercourse with all or any of them.


5.20.2
5492
τούτου μὲν πέρι αὐτοὶ ἀποσημανέετε ·
As to that, you may make your own decision, but now, since the hour of your rest is drawing near and I see that you are all completely drunk,


5.20.2
5493
νῦν δέ , σχεδὸν γὰρ ἤδη τῆς κοίτης ὥρη προσέρχεται ὑμῖν καὶ καλῶς ἔχοντας ὑμέας ὁρῶ μέθης , γυναῖκας ταύτας , εἰ ὑμῖν φίλον ἐστί , ἄπετε λούσασθαι , λουσαμένας δὲ ὀπίσω προσδέκεσθε " .
allow these women to depart and wash, if this is your desire. When they have washed, wait for them to come to you again.”


5.20.3
5494
εἴπας ταῦτα , συνέπαινοι γὰρ ἦσαν οἱ Πέρσαι , γυναῖκας μὲν ἐξελθούσας ἀπέπεμπε ἐς τὴν γυναικηίην , αὐτὸς δὲ ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ἴσους τῇσι γυναιξὶ ἀριθμὸν ἄνδρας λειογενείους τῇ τῶν γυναικῶν ἐσθῆτι σκευάσας καὶ ἐγχειρίδια δοὺς ἦγε ἔσω , παράγων δὲ τούτους ἔλεγε τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι τάδε .
When he had said this and the Persians had given their consent, he sent the women out and away to their apartments. Alexander then took as many beardless men as there were women, dressed them in the women's clothes, and gave them daggers. These he brought in, and said to the Persians,


5.20.4
5495
" ὦ Πέρσαι , οἴκατε πανδαισίῃ τελέῃ ἱστιῆσθαι ·
“I believe, men of Persia, that you have feasted to your hearts' content.


5.20.4
5496
τά τε γὰρ ἄλλα ὅσα εἴχομεν , καὶ πρὸς τὰ οἷά τε ἦν ἐξευρόντας παρέχειν , πάντα ὑμῖν πάρεστι , καὶ δὴ καὶ τόδε τὸ πάντων μέγιστον , τάς τε ἑωυτῶν μητέρας καὶ τὰς ἀδελφεὰς ἐπιδαψιλευόμεθα ὑμῖν , ὡς παντελέως μάθητε τιμώμενοι πρὸς ἡμέων τῶν περ ἐστὲ ἄξιοι , πρὸς δὲ καὶ βασιλέι τῷ πέμψαντι ἀπαγγείλητε ὡς ἀνὴρ Ἕλλην Μακεδόνων ὕπαρχος εὖ ὑμέας ἐδέξατο καὶ τραπέζῃ καὶ κοίτῃ " .
All that we had and all besides that we could find to give you has been set before you, and now we make you a free gift of our best and most valued possession, our own mothers and sisters. Be aware that in so doing we are giving you all the honor that you deserve, and tell your king who sent you how his Greek viceroy of Macedonia has received you hospitably, providing food and bedfellows.”


5.20.5
5497
ταῦτα εἴπας ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος παρίζει Πέρσῃ ἀνδρὶ ἄνδρα Μακεδόνα ὡς γυναῖκα τῷ λόγῳ ·
With that, Alexander seated each of his Macedonians next to a Persian, as though they were women,


5.20.5
5498
οἳ δέ , ἐπείτε σφέων οἱ Πέρσαι ψαύειν ἐπειρῶντο , διεργάζοντο αὐτούς .
and when the Persians began to lay hands on them, they were killed by the Macedonians.


5.21.1
5499
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν τούτῳ τῷ μόρῳ διεφθάρησαν , καὶ αὐτοὶ καὶ ἡ θεραπηίη αὐτῶν ·
This was the way in which they perished, they and all their retinue.


5.21.1
5500
εἵπετο γὰρ δή σφι καὶ ὀχήματα καὶ θεράποντες καὶ ἡ πᾶσα πολλὴ παρασκευή ·
Carriages too had come with them, and servants, and all the great train they had.


5.21.1
5501
πάντα δὴ ταῦτα ἅμα πᾶσι ἐκείνοισι ἠφάνιστο .
The Macedonians made away with all that, as well as with all the envoys themselves.


5.21.2
5502
μετὰ δὲ χρόνῳ οὐ πολλῷ ὕστερον ζήτησις τῶν ἀνδρῶν τούτων μεγάλη ἐκ τῶν Περσέων ἐγίνετο , καί σφεας Ἀλέξανδρος κατέλαβε σοφίῃ , χρήματά τε δοὺς πολλὰ καὶ τὴν ἑωυτοῦ ἀδελφεὴν τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Γυγαίη ·
No long time afterwards the Persians made a great search for these men,


5.21.2
5503
δοὺς δὲ ταῦτα κατέλαβε ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος Βουβάρῃ ἀνδρὶ Πέρσῃ , τῶν διζημένων τοὺς ἀπολομένους τῷ στρατηγῷ .
but Alexander had cunning enough to put an end to it by the gift of a great sum and his own sister Gygaea to Bubares, a Persian and the general of those who were looking for the slain men.


5.22.1
5504
ὁ μέν νυν τῶν Περσέων τούτων θάνατος οὕτω καταλαμφθεὶς ἐσιγήθη .
Now that these descendants of Perdiccas are Greeks, as they themselves say, I myself chance to know and will prove it in the later part of my history.


5.22.1
5505
Ἕλληνας δὲ εἶναι τούτους τοὺς ἀπὸ Περδίκκεω γεγονότας , κατά περ αὐτοὶ λέγουσι , αὐτός τε οὕτω τυγχάνω ἐπιστάμενος καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐν τοῖσι ὄπισθε λόγοισι ἀποδέξω ὡς εἰσὶ Ἕλληνες , πρὸς δὲ καὶ οἱ τὸν ἐν Ὀλυμπίῃ διέποντες ἀγῶνα Ἑλληνοδίκαι οὕτω ἔγνωσαν εἶναι .
Furthermore, the Hellenodicae who manage the contest at Olympia determined that it is so,


5.22.2
5506
Ἀλεξάνδρου γὰρ ἀεθλεύειν ἑλομένου καὶ καταβάντος ἐπ’ αὐτὸ τοῦτο , οἱ ἀντιθευσόμενοι Ἑλλήνων ἐξεῖργόν μιν , φάμενοι οὐ βαρβάρων ἀγωνιστέων εἶναι τὸν ἀγῶνα ἀλλὰ Ἑλλήνων ·
for when Alexander chose to contend and entered the lists for that purpose, the Greeks who were to run against him wanted to bar him from the race, saying that the contest should be for Greeks and not for foreigners.


5.22.2
5507
Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἐπειδὴ ἀπέδεξε ὡς εἴη Ἀργεῖος , ἐκρίθη τε εἶναι Ἕλλην καὶ ἀγωνιζόμενος στάδιον συνεξέπιπτε τῷ πρώτῳ .
Alexander, however, proving himself to be an Argive, was judged to be a Greek. He accordingly competed in the furlong race and tied step for first place.


5.23.1
5508
ταῦτα μέν νυν οὕτω κῃ ἐγένετο .
This, then, is approximately what happened.


5.23.1
5509
Μεγάβαζος δὲ ἄγων τοὺς Παίονας ἀπίκετο ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήποντον ·
Megabazus, bringing with him the Paeonians, came to the Hellespont,


5.23.1
5510
ἐνθεῦτεν διαπεραιωθεὶς ἀπίκετο ἐς τὰς Σάρδις .
and after crossing it from there, he came to Sardis.


5.23.1
5511
ἅτε δὲ τειχέοντος ἤδη Ἱστιαίου τοῦ Μιλησίου τὴν παρὰ Δαρείου αἰτήσας ἔτυχε μισθὸν δωρεὴν φυλακῆς τῆς σχεδίης , ἐόντος δὲ τοῦ χώρου τούτου παρὰ Στρυμόνα ποταμὸν τῷ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Μύρκινος , μαθὼν ὁ Μεγάβαζος τὸ ποιεύμενον ἐκ τοῦ Ἱστιαίου , ὡς ἦλθε τάχιστα ἐς τὰς Σάρδις ἄγων τοὺς Παίονας , ἔλεγε Δαρείῳ τάδε .
Histiaeus the Milesian was by this time fortifying the place which he had asked of Darius as his reward for guarding the bridge, a place called Myrcinus by the river Strymon. Megabazus discovered what he was doing, and upon his arrival at Sardis with the Paeonians, he said to Darius,


5.23.2
5512
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , κοῖόν τι χρῆμα ἐποίησας , ἀνδρὶ Ἕλληνι δεινῷ τε καὶ σοφῷ δοὺς ἐγκτίσασθαι πόλιν ἐν Θρηίκῃ , ἵνα ἴδη τε ναυπηγήσιμος ἐστὶ ἄφθονος καὶ πολλοὶ κωπέες καὶ μέταλλα ἀργύρεα , ὅμιλός τε πολλὸς μὲν Ἕλλην περιοικέει πολλὸς δὲ βάρβαρος , οἳ προστάτεω ἐπιλαβόμενοι ποιήσουσι τοῦτο τὸ ἂν κεῖνος ἐξηγέηται καὶ ἡμέρης καὶ νυκτός .
” Sire, what is this that you have done? You have permitted a clever and cunning Greek to build a city in  Thrace, where there are abundant forests for ship-building, much wood for oars, mines of silver, and many people both Greek and foreign dwelling around, who, when they have a champion to lead them, will carry out all his orders by day or by night.


5.23.3
5513
σύ νυν τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα παῦσον ταῦτα ποιεῦντα , ἵνα μὴ οἰκηίῳ πολέμῳ συνέχῃ ·
Stop this man, then, from doing these things so that you will not be entangled in a war with your own subjects,


5.23.3
5514
τρόπῳ δὲ ἠπίῳ μεταπεμψάμενος παῦσον .
but use gentle means to do so.


5.23.3
5515
ἐπεὰν δὲ αὐτὸν περιλάβῃς , ποιέειν ὅκως μηκέτι κεῖνος ἐς Ἕλληνας ἀπίξεται " .
When you have him in your grasp, see to it that he never returns to Hellas.”


5.24.1
5516
ταῦτα λέγων ὁ Μεγάβαζος εὐπετέως ἔπειθε Δαρεῖον ὡς εὖ προορῶν τὸ μέλλον γίνεσθαι .
Megabazus easily persuaded Darius, who believed that his vision of the future was correct.


5.24.1
5517
μετὰ δὲ πέμψας ἄγγελον ἐς τὴν Μύρκινον ὁ Δαρεῖος ἔλεγε τάδε .
Presently the king sent a message to Myrcinus which read as follows:


5.24.1
5518
" Ἱστιαῖε , βασιλεὺς Δαρεῖος τάδε λέγει .
“Histiaeus, these are the words of Darius the king:


5.24.1
5519
ἐγὼ φροντίζων εὑρίσκω ἐμοί τε καὶ τοῖσι ἐμοῖσι πρήγμασι εἶναι οὐδένα σεῦ ἄνδρα εὐνοέστερον ·
my thoughts can show me no man who is more devoted to me and my affairs.


5.24.1
5520
τοῦτο δὲ οὐ λόγοισι ἀλλ’ ἔργοισι οἶδα μαθών .
Not words but deeds have proven this to me.


5.24.2
5521
νῦν ὦν , ἐπινοέω γὰρ πρήγματα μεγάλα κατεργάσασθαι , ἀπίκεό μοι πάντως , ἵνα τοι αὐτὰ ὑπερθέωμαι " .
Now, therefore, let nothing prevent you from coming to me so that I may inform you of certain great purposes which I have in mind.”


5.24.2
5522
τούτοισι τοῖσι ἔπεσι πιστεύσας ὁ Ἱστιαῖος , καὶ ἅμα μέγα ποιεύμενος βασιλέος σύμβουλος γενέσθαι , ἀπίκετο ἐς τὰς Σάρδις ·
Trusting these words, and proud, moreover, that he would be the king's counsellor, Histiaeus came to Sardis.


5.24.3
5523
ἀπικομένῳ δέ οἱ ἔλεγε Δαρεῖος τάδε .
When he had come, Darius said to him,


5.24.3
5524
" Ἱστιαῖε , ἐγώ σε μετεπεμψάμην τῶνδε εἵνεκεν .
“Histiaeus, I will tell you the reason why I sent for you.


5.24.3
5525
ἐπείτε τάχιστα ἐνόστησα ἀπὸ Σκυθέων καὶ σύ μοι ἐγένεο ἐξ ὀφθαλμῶν , οὐδέν κω ἄλλο χρῆμα οὕτω ἐν βραχέι ἐπεζήτησα ὡς σὲ ἰδεῖν τε καὶ ἐς λόγους μοι ἀπικέσθαι , ἐγνωκὼς ὅτι κτημάτων πάντων ἐστὶ τιμιώτατον ἀνὴρ φίλος συνετός τε καὶ εὔνοος , τά τοι ἐγὼ καὶ ἀμφότερα συνειδὼς ἔχω μαρτυρέειν ἐς πρήγματα τὰ ἐμά .
As soon as I returned from Scythia and you were gone from my sight, there was nothing which I longed for so much as seeing you and speaking with you, for I knew that the most precious of all possessions is a wise and loyal friend. That you are such I can bear witness to as regards my affairs.


5.24.4
5526
νῦν ὦν , εὖ γὰρ ἐποίησας ἀπικόμενος , τάδε τοι ἐγὼ προτείνομαι ·
Now, since you have done well in coming here, I make you this proposal.


5.24.4
5527
Μίλητον μὲν ἔα καὶ τὴν νεόκτιστον ἐν Θρηίκῃ πόλιν , σὺ δέ μοι ἑπόμενος ἐς Σοῦσα ἔχε τά περ ἂν ἐγὼ ἔχω , ἐμός τε σύσσιτος ἐὼν καὶ σύμβουλος " .
Leave Miletus and your newly founded Thracian city and follow me to Susa, where you will have all that is mine, sharing my table and my counsels.”


5.25.1
5528
ταῦτα Δαρεῖος εἴπας , καὶ καταστήσας Ἀρταφρένεα ἀδελφεὸν ἑωυτοῦ ὁμοπάτριον ὕπαρχον εἶναι Σαρδίων , ἀπήλαυνε ἐς Σοῦσα ἅμα ἀγόμενος Ἱστιαῖον , Ὀτάνεα δὲ ἀποδέξας στρατηγὸν εἶναι τῶν παραθαλασσίων ἀνδρῶν ·
This, then, is what Darius said, and after appointing Artaphrenes, his father's son, to be viceroy of Sardis, he rode away to Susa, taking Histiaeus with him.


5.25.1
5529
τοῦ τὸν πατέρα Σισάμνην βασιλεὺς Καμβύσης γενόμενον τῶν βασιληίων δικαστέων , ὅτι ἐπὶ χρήμασι δίκην ἄδικον ἐδίκασε , σφάξας ἀπέδειρε πᾶσαν τὴν ἀνθρωπέην , σπαδίξας δὲ αὐτοῦ τὸ δέρμα ἱμάντας ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἔταμε καὶ ἐνέτεινε τὸν θρόνον ἐς τὸν ἵζων ἐδίκαζε ·
First, however, he made Otanes governor of the people on the coast. Otanes' father Sisamnes had been one of the royal judges, and Cambyses had cut his throat and flayed off all his skin because he had been bribed to give an unjust judgment. Then he cut leather strips of the skin which had been torn away and with these he covered the seat upon which Sisamnes had sat to give judgment.


5.25.2
5530
ἐντανύσας δὲ ὁ Καμβύσης ἀπέδεξε δικαστὴν εἶναι ἀντὶ τοῦ Σισάμνεω , τὸν ἀποκτείνας ἀπέδειρε , τὸν παῖδα τοῦ Σισάμνεω , ἐντειλάμενός οἱ μεμνῆσθαι ἐν τῷ κατίζων θρόνῳ δικάζει .
After doing this, Cambyses appointed the son of this slain and flayed Sisamnes to be judge in his place, admonishing him to keep in mind the nature of the throne on which he was sitting.


5.26.1
5531
οὗτος ὦν ὁ Ὀτάνης ὁ ἐγκατιζόμενος ἐς τοῦτον τὸν θρόνον , τότε διάδοχος γενόμενος Μεγαβάζῳ τῆς στρατηγίης , Βυζαντίους τε εἷλε καὶ Καλχηδονίους , εἷλε δὲ Ἄντανδρον τὴν ἐν τῇ Τρῳάδι γῇ , εἷλε δὲ Λαμπώνιον , λαβὼν δὲ παρὰ Λεσβίων νέας εἷλε Λῆμνόν τε καὶ Ἴμβρον , ἀμφοτέρας ἔτι τότε ὑπὸ Πελασγῶν οἰκεομένας .
This Otanes, then, who sat upon that seat, was now made successor to Megabazus in his governorship. He captured  Byzantium, Calchedon, Antandrus in the  Troad, and Lamponium, and with ships he had taken from the Lesbians, he took  Lemnos and Imbros, both of which were still inhabited by Pelasgians.


5.27.1
5532
οἱ μὲν δὴ Λήμνιοι καὶ ἐμαχέσαντο εὖ καὶ ἀμυνόμενοι ἀνὰ χρόνον ἐκακώθησαν , τοῖσι δὲ περιεοῦσι αὐτῶν οἱ Πέρσαι ὕπαρχον ἐπιστᾶσι Λυκάρητον τὸν Μαιανδρίου τοῦ βασιλεύσαντος Σάμου ἀδελφεόν .
The Lemnians fought well and defended themselves, till at last they were brought to evil plight, and the Persians set as governor over those that were left of them Lycaretus the brother of Maeandrius who had been king of  Samos.


5.27.2
5533
οὗτος ὁ Λυκάρητος ἄρχων ἐν Λήμνῳ τελευτᾷ .
This Lycaretus met his end while ruling in Lemnos


5.27.2
5534
αἰτίη δὲ τούτου ἥδε ·
because he tried to enslave and subdue all the people,


5.27.2
5535
πάντας ἠνδραποδίζετο καὶ κατεστρέφετο τοὺς μὲν λιποστρατίης ἐπὶ Σκύθας αἰτιώμενος , τοὺς δὲ σίνασθαι τὸν Δαρείου στρατὸν ἀπὸ Σκυθέων ὀπίσω ἀποκομιζόμενον .
accusing some of shunning service against the Scythians and others of plundering Darius' army on its way back from Scythia.


5.28.1
5536
οὗτος δὲ τοσαῦτα ἐξεργάσατο στρατηγήσας .
All this Otanes achieved when he had been made governor.


5.28.1
5537
μετὰ δὲ οὐ πολλὸν χρόνον ἄνεσις κακῶν ἦν , καὶ ἤρχετο τὸ δεύτερον ἐκ Νάξου τε καὶ Μιλήτου Ἴωσι γίνεσθαι κακά .
After only a short period of time without evils, trouble began once more to come on the Ionians, and this from Naxos and Miletus.


5.28.1
5538
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ ἡ Νάξος εὐδαιμονίῃ τῶν νήσων προέφερε , τοῦτο δὲ κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον ἡ Μίλητος αὐτή τε ἑωυτῆς μάλιστα δὴ τότε ἀκμάσασα καὶ δὴ καὶ τῆς Ἰωνίης ἦν πρόσχημα , κατύπερθε δὲ τούτων ἐπὶ δύο γενεὰς ἀνδρῶν νοσήσασα ἐς τὰ μάλιστα στάσι , μέχρι οὗ μιν Πάριοι κατήρτισαν ·
Naxos surpassed all the other islands in prosperity, and at about the same time Miletus, at the height of her fortunes, was the glory of Ionia. Two generations before this, however, she had been very greatly troubled by factional strife, till the Parians made peace among them.


5.28.1
5539
τούτους γὰρ καταρτιστῆρας ἐκ πάντων Ἑλλήνων εἵλοντο οἱ Μιλήσιοι .
For the Milesians had chosen these out of all the Greeks as mediators.


5.29.1
5540
κατήλλαξαν δὲ σφέας ὧδε Πάριοι .
The Parians reconciled them in the following manner.


5.29.1
5541
ὡς ἀπίκοντο αὐτῶν ἄνδρες οἱ ἄριστοι ἐς τὴν Μίλητον , ὥρων γὰρ δή σφεας δεινῶς οἰκοφθορημένους , ἔφασαν αὐτῶν βούλεσθαι διεξελθεῖν τὴν χώρην ·
Their best men came to Miletus, and seeing the Milesian households sadly wasted, they said that they desired to go about the country.


5.29.1
5542
ποιεῦντες δὲ ταῦτα καὶ διεξιόντες πᾶσαν τὴν Μιλησίην , ὅκως τινὰ ἴδοιεν ἐν ἀνεστηκυίῃ τῇ χώρῃ ἀγρὸν εὖ ἐξεργασμένον , ἀπεγράφοντο τὸ οὔνομα τοῦ δεσπότεω τοῦ ἀγροῦ .
They then made their way through all the territory of Miletus, and whenever they found any well-tilled farm in the desolation of the land, they wrote down the name of the owner of that farm.


5.29.2
5543
διεξελάσαντες δὲ πᾶσαν τὴν χώρην καὶ σπανίους εὑρόντες τούτους , ὡς τάχιστα κατέβησαν ἐς τὸ ἄστυ , ἁλίην ποιησάμενοι ἀπέδεξαν τούτους μὲν πόλιν νέμειν τῶν εὗρον τοὺς ἀγροὺς εὖ ἐξεργασμένους ·
After travelling over the whole country and finding only a few such men, they assembled the people immediately upon their return to the city and appointed as rulers of the state those whose lands they had found well tilled.


5.29.2
5544
δοκέειν γὰρ ἔφασαν καὶ τῶν δημοσίων οὕτω δή σφεας ἐπιμελήσεσθαι ὥσπερ τῶν σφετέρων ·
This they did in the belief that these men were likely to take as good care of public affairs as they had of their own,


5.29.2
5545
τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους Μιλησίους τοὺς πρὶν στασιάζοντας τούτων ἔταξαν πείθεσθαι .
and they ordained that the rest of the Milesians who had been at feud should obey these men.


5.30.1
5546
Πάριοι μέν νυν Μιλησίους οὕτω κατήρτισαν .
It was in this way that the Parians made peace in Miletus,


5.30.1
5547
τότε δὲ ἐκ τουτέων τῶν πολίων ὧδε ἤρχετο κακὰ γίνεσθαι τῇ Ἰωνίῃ .
but now these cities began to bring trouble upon Ionia.


5.30.1
5548
ἐκ Νάξου ἔφυγον ἄνδρες τῶν παχέων ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου , φυγόντες δὲ ἀπίκοντο ἐς Μίλητον .
Certain men of substance who had been banished by the common people, went in exile to Miletus.


5.30.2
5549
τῆς δὲ Μιλήτου ἐτύγχανε ἐπίτροπος ἐὼν Ἀρισταγόρης ὁ Μολπαγόρεω , γαμβρός τε ἐὼν καὶ ἀνεψιὸς Ἱστιαίου τοῦ Λυσαγόρεω , τὸν ὁ Δαρεῖος ἐν Σούσοισι κατεῖχε ·
Now it chanced that the deputy ruling Miletus was Aristagoras son of Molpagoras, son-in-law and cousin of that Histiaeus son of Lysagoras whom Darius kept with him at Susa.


5.30.2
5550
ὁ γὰρ Ἱστιαῖος τύραννος ἦν Μιλήτου καὶ ἐτύγχανε τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ἐὼν ἐν Σούσοισι , ὅτε οἱ Νάξιοι ἦλθον ξεῖνοι πρὶν ἐόντες τῷ Ἱστιαίῳ .
Histiaeus was tyrant of Miletus but was at Susa when the Naxians, who had been his guests and friends, arrived.


5.30.3
5551
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ οἱ Νάξιοι ἐς τὴν Μίλητον ἐδέοντο τοῦ Ἀρισταγόρεω , εἴ κως αὐτοῖσι παράσχοι δύναμίν τινα καὶ κατέλθοιεν ἐς τὴν ἑωυτῶν .
When the Naxians came to Miletus, they asked Aristagoras if he could give them enough power to return to their own country.


5.30.3
5552
ὁ δὲ ἐπιλεξάμενος ὡς ἢν δι’ αὐτοῦ κατέλθωσι ἐς τὴν πόλιν , ἄρξει τῆς Νάξου , σκῆψιν δὲ ποιεύμενος τὴν ξεινίην τὴν Ἱστιαίου , τόνδε σφι λόγον προσέφερε .
Believing that he would become ruler of Naxos if they were restored to their city with his help and using as a pretext their friendship with Histiaeus, he made them this proposal:


5.30.4
5553
" αὐτὸς μὲν ὑμῖν οὐ φερέγγυός εἰμι δύναμιν παρασχεῖν τοσαύτην ὥστε κατάγειν ἀεκόντων τῶν τὴν πόλιν ἐχόντων Ναξίων ·
“I myself do not have the authority to give you such power as will restore you against the will of the Naxians who hold your city,


5.30.4
5554
πυνθάνομαι γὰρ ὀκτακισχιλίην ἀσπίδα Ναξίοισι εἶναι καὶ πλοῖα μακρὰ πολλά ·
for I know that the Naxians have eight thousand men that bear shields, and many ships of war.


5.30.4
5555
μηχανήσομαι δὲ πᾶσαν σπουδὴν ποιεύμενος .
Nevertheless, I will do everything I can to realize your request.


5.30.5
5556
ἐπινοέω δὲ τῇδε .
This is my plan.


5.30.5
5557
Ἀρταφρένης μοι τυγχάνει ἐὼν φίλος ·
Artaphrenes is my friend,


5.30.5
5558
ὁ δὲ Ἀρταφρένης ὑμῖν Ὑστάσπεος μὲν ἐστὶ παῖς , Δαρείου δὲ τοῦ βασιλέος ἀδελφεός , τῶν δ’ ἐπιθαλασσίων τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῇ ἄρχει πάντων , ἔχων στρατιήν τε πολλὴν καὶ πολλὰς νέας .
and he is not only Hystaspes' son and brother to Darius the king but also governor of all the coastal peoples of Asia. He accordingly has a great army and many ships at his disposal.


5.30.5
5559
τοῦτον ὦν δοκέω τὸν ἄνδρα ποιήσειν τῶν ἂν χρηίζωμεν " .
This man, then, will, I think, do whatever we desire.”


5.30.6
5560
ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες οἱ Νάξιοι προσέθεσαν τῷ Ἀρισταγόρῃ πρήσσειν τῇ δύναιτο ἄριστα , καὶ ὑπίσχεσθαι δῶρα ἐκέλευον καὶ δαπάνην τῇ στρατιῇ ὡς αὐτοὶ διαλύσοντες , ἐλπίδας πολλὰς ἔχοντες , ὅταν ἐπιφανέωσι ἐς τὴν Νάξον , πάντα ποιήσειν τοὺς Ναξίους τὰ ἂν αὐτοὶ κελεύωσι , ὣς δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους νησιώτας .
Hearing this, the Naxians left the matter for Aristagoras to deal with as best he could, asking him to promise gifts and the costs of the army, for which they themselves would pay since they had great hope that when they should appear off Naxos, the Naxians would obey all their commands.


5.30.6
5561
τῶν γὰρ νήσων τουτέων τῶν Κυκλάδων οὐδεμία κω ἦν ὑπὸ Δαρείῳ .
The rest of the islanders, they expected, would do likewise since none of these Cycladic islands was as yet subject to Darius.


5.31.1
5562
ἀπικόμενος δὲ ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης ἐς τὰς Σάρδις λέγει πρὸς τὸν Ἀρταφρένεα ὡς Νάξος εἴη νῆσος μεγάθεϊ μὲν οὐ μεγάλη , ἄλλως δὲ καλή τε καὶ ἀγαθὴ καὶ ἀγχοῦ Ἰωνίης , χρήματα δὲ ἔνι πολλὰ καὶ ἀνδράποδα .
Aristagoras came to Sardis and told Artaphrenes that Naxos was indeed an island of no great size, but that it was otherwise a beautiful and noble island lying near Ionia. Furthermore, it had a store of wealth and slaves.


5.31.1
5563
" σὺ ὦν ἐπὶ ταύτην τὴν χώρην στρατηλάτεε , κατάγων ἐς αὐτὴν τοὺς φυγάδας ἐξ αὐτῆς .
“Therefore send an army against that country,” he said, “ and bring back the men who have been banished from there.


5.31.2
5564
καί τοι ταῦτα ποιήσαντι τοῦτο μὲν ἐστὶ ἕτοιμα παρ’ ἐμοὶ χρήματα μεγάλα πάρεξ τῶν ἀναισιμωμάτων τῇ στρατιῇ ·
If you so do, I have a great sum of money at your disposal, over and above the costs of the force,


5.31.2
5565
ταῦτα μὲν γὰρ δίκαιον ἡμέας τοὺς ἄγοντας παρέχειν ἐστί ·
for it is only fair that we, who bring you, should furnish that.


5.31.2
5566
τοῦτο δὲ νήσους βασιλέι προσκτήσεαι αὐτήν τε Νάξον καὶ τὰς ἐκ ταύτης ἠρτημένας , Πάρον καὶ Ἄνδρον καὶ ἄλλας τὰς Κυκλάδας καλευμένας .
Furthermore, you will win new dominions for the king, Naxos itself and the islands which are its dependents, Paros, Andros, and the rest of those that are called Cyclades.


5.31.3
5567
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὁρμώμενος εὐπετέως ἐπιθήσεαι Εὐβοίῃ νήσῳ μεγάλῃ τε καὶ εὐδαίμονι , οὐκ ἐλάσσονι Κύπρου καὶ κάρτα εὐπετέι αἱρεθῆναι .
Making these your starting point, you will easily attack Euboea, which is a great and a wealthy island, no smaller than Cyprus and very easy to take.


5.31.3
5568
ἀποχρῶσι δὲ ἑκατὸν νέες ταύτας πάσας χειρώσασθαι " .
A hundred ships suffice for the conquest of all these.”


5.31.3
5569
ὁ δὲ ἀμείβετο αὐτὸν τοῖσιδε .
Artaphrenes answered him as follows:


5.31.4
5570
" σὺ ἐς οἶκον τὸν βασιλέος ἐξηγητὴς γίνεαι πρηγμάτων ἀγαθῶν , καὶ ταῦτα εὖ παραινέεις πάντα , πλὴν τῶν νεῶν τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ ·
“This plan which you set forth,” Artaphrenes answered, “is profitable for the king's house, and all your advice is good except as regards the number of the ships.


5.31.4
5571
ἀντὶ δὲ ἑκατὸν νεῶν διηκόσιαί τοι ἕτοιμοι ἔσονται ἅμα τῷ ἔαρι .
Not one hundred but two hundred ships will be ready for you when the spring comes.


5.31.4
5572
δεῖ δὲ τούτοισι καὶ αὐτὸν βασιλέα συνέπαινον γίνεσθαι " .
The king too, however, must himself consent to this.”


5.32.1
5573
ὁ μὲν δὴ Ἀρισταγόρης ὡς ταῦτα ἤκουσε , περιχαρὴς ἐὼν ἀπήιε ἐς Μίλητον .
When Aristagoras heard that, he went away to Miletus in great joy.


5.32.1
5574
ὁ δὲ Ἀρταφρένης , ὥς οἱ πέμψαντι ἐς Σοῦσα καὶ ὑπερθέντι τὰ ἐκ τοῦ Ἀρισταγόρεω λεγόμενα συνέπαινος καὶ αὐτὸς Δαρεῖος ἐγένετο , παρεσκευάσατο μὲν διηκοσίας τριήρεας , πολλὸν δὲ κάρτα ὅμιλον Περσέων τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων συμμάχων , στρατηγὸν δὲ τούτων ἀπέδεξε Μεγαβάτην ἄνδρα Πέρσην τῶν Ἀχαιμενιδέων , ἑωυτοῦ τε καὶ Δαρείου ἀνεψιόν , τοῦ Παυσανίης ὁ Κλεομβρότου Λακεδαιμόνιος , εἰ δὴ ἀληθής γε ἐστὶ ὁ λόγος , ὑστέρῳ χρόνῳ τούτων ἡρμόσατο θυγατέρα , ἔρωτα σχὼν τῆς Ἑλλάδος τύραννος γενέσθαι .
Artaphrenes sent a messenger to Susa with the news of what Aristagoras said, and when Darius himself too had consented to the plan, he equipped two hundred triremes and a very great company of Persians and their allies in addition. For their general he appointed Megabates, a Persian of the Achaemenid family, cousin to himself and to Darius. This was he whose daughter (if indeed the tale is true) Pausanias the Lacedaemonian, son of Cleombrotus, at a later day betrothed to himself, since it was his wish to possess the sovereignty of Hellas.


5.32.1
5575
ἀποδέξας δὲ Μεγαβάτην στρατηγὸν Ἀρταφρένης ἀπέστειλε τὸν στρατὸν παρὰ τὸν Ἀρισταγόρεα .
After appointing Megabates general, Artaphrenes sent his army away to Aristagoras.


5.33.1
5576
παραλαβὼν δὲ ὁ Μεγαβάτης τόν τε Ἀρισταγόρεα ἐκ τῆς Μιλήτου καὶ τὴν Ἰάδα στρατιὴν καὶ τοὺς Ναξίους ἔπλεε πρόφασιν ἐπ’ Ἑλλησπόντου , ἐπείτε δὲ ἐγένετο ἐν Χίῳ , ἔσχε τὰς νέας ἐς Καύκασα , ὡς ἐνθεῦτεν βορέῃ ἀνέμῳ ἐς τὴν Νάξον διαβάλοι .
Then Megabates, bringing Aristagoras from  Miletus, the Ionian army, and the Naxians, pretended to be sailing to the  Hellespont, but when he came to  Chios, he put in with his ships at Caucasa so that he might cross with a north wind to  Naxos.


5.33.2
5577
καὶ οὐ γὰρ ἔδεε τούτῳ τῷ στόλῳ Ναξίους ἀπολέσθαι , πρῆγμα τοιόνδε συνηνείχθη γενέσθαι .
Since it was not fated that the Naxians were to be destroyed by this force, the following things took place.


5.33.2
5578
περιιόντος Μεγαβάτεω τὰς ἐπὶ τῶν νεῶν φυλακάς , ἐπὶ νεὸς Μυνδίης ἔτυχε οὐδεὶς φυλάσσων ·
As Megabates was making his rounds among the ships' watches, it chanced that there was no watch on the ship of Myndus.


5.33.2
5579
ὁ δὲ δεινόν τι ποιησάμενος ἐκέλευσε τοὺς δορυφόρους ἐξευρόντας τὸν ἄρχοντα ταύτης τῆς νεός , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Σκύλαξ , τοῦτον δῆσαι διὰ θαλαμίης διελόντας τῆς νεὸς κατὰ τοῦτο , ἔξω μὲν κεφαλὴν ποιεῦντας ἔσω δὲ τὸ σῶμα .
Megabates, very angry at this, ordered his guards to find the captain of this ship, whose name was Scylax, and thrust him partly through an oar-hole of the ship and bound him there so that his head was outside the ship and his body inside.


5.33.3
5580
δεθέντος δὲ τοῦ Σκύλακος , ἐξαγγέλλει τις τῷ Ἀρισταγόρῃ ὅτι τὸν ξεῖνόν οἱ τὸν Μύνδιον Μεγαβάτης δήσας λυμαίνοιτο .
When Scylax had been bound, someone brought word to Aristagoras, that his Myndian friend was bound and being disgracefully treated by Megabates.


5.33.3
5581
ὃ δ’ ἐλθὼν παραιτέετο τὸν Πέρσην , τυγχάνων δὲ οὐδενὸς τῶν ἐδέετο , αὐτὸς ἐλθὼν ἔλυσε .
Aristagoras then went and pleaded with the Persian for Scylax, but since he obtained nothing that he requested, he went and released the man himself.


5.33.3
5582
πυθόμενος δὲ κάρτα δεινὸν ἐποιήσατο ὁ Μεγαβάτης καὶ ἐσπέρχετο τῷ Ἀρισταγόρῃ , ὁ δὲ εἶπε " σοὶ δὲ καὶ τούτοισι τοῖσι πρήγμασι τί ἐστι ;
When Megabates learned this, he took it very badly and was angry at Aristagoras.


5.33.4
5583
οὐ σὲ ἀπέστειλε Ἀρταφρένης ἐμέο πείθεσθαι καὶ πλέειν τῇ ἂν ἐγὼ κελεύω ;
Aristagoras, however, said, “But you, what have you to do with these matters? Did not Artaphrenes send you to obey me and to sail wherever I bid you?


5.33.4
5584
τί πολλὰ πρήσσεις " ;
Why are you so meddlesome?”


5.33.4
5585
ταῦτα εἶπε ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης .
This was Aristagoras' answer.


5.33.4
5586
ὁ δὲ θυμωθεὶς τούτοισι , ὡς νὺξ ἐγένετο , ἔπεμπε ἐς Νάξον πλοίῳ ἄνδρας φράσοντας τοῖσι Ναξίοισι πάντα τὰ παρεόντα σφι πρήγματα .
Enraged, Megabates, who, when night fell, sent men in a boat to Naxos to tell the Naxians of the trouble in store for them.


5.34.1
5587
οἱ γὰρ ὦν Νάξιοι οὐδὲν πάντως προσεδέκοντο ἐπὶ σφέας τὸν στόλον τοῦτον ὁρμήσεσθαι .
Now the Naxians had no suspicion at all that it was they who were to be attacked by that force.


5.34.1
5588
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἐπύθοντο , αὐτίκα μὲν ἐσηνείκαντο τὰ ἐκ τῶν ἀγρῶν ἐς τὸ τεῖχος , παρεσκευάσαντο δὲ ὡς πολιορκησόμενοι καὶ σῖτα καὶ ποτά , καὶ τὸ τεῖχος ἐσάξαντο .
However, when they learned the truth, they immediately brought inside their walls all that was in their fields, stored both meat and drink in case of a siege, and strengthened their walls.


5.34.2
5589
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν παρεσκευάζοντο ὡς παρεσομένου σφι πολέμου ·
The Naxians, then, made all preparations to face the onset of war.


5.34.2
5590
οἳ δ’ ἐπείτε διέβαλον ἐκ τῆς Χίου τὰς νέας ἐς τὴν Νάξον , πρὸς πεφραγμένους προσεφέροντο καὶ ἐπολιόρκεον μῆνας τέσσερας .
When their enemies had brought their ships over from Chios to Naxos, it was a fortified city that they attacked, and for four months they besieged it.


5.34.3
5591
ὡς δὲ τά τε ἔχοντες ἦλθον χρήματα οἱ Πέρσαι , ταῦτα κατεδεδαπάνητό σφι , καὶ αὐτῷ τῷ Ἀρισταγόρῃ προσαναισίμωτο πολλά , τοῦ πλεῦνός τε ἐδέετο ἡ πολιορκίη , ἐνθαῦτα τείχεα τοῖσι φυγάσι τῶν Ναξίων οἰκοδομήσαντες ἀπαλλάσσοντο ἐς τὴν ἤπειρον κακῶς πρήσσοντες .
When the Persians had exhausted all the money with which they had come, and Aristagoras himself had spent much beside, they built a stronghold for the banished Naxians, and went off to the mainland in poor spirits since still more money was needed for the siege.


5.35.1
5592
Ἀρισταγόρης δὲ οὐκ εἶχε τὴν ὑπόσχεσιν τῷ Ἀρταφρένεϊ ἐκτελέσαι ·
Aristagoras had no way of fulfilling his promise to Artaphrenes, and he was hard-pressed by demands for the costs of the force.


5.35.1
5593
ἅμα δὲ ἐπίεζέ μιν ἡ δαπάνη τῆς στρατιῆς ἀπαιτεομένη , ἀρρώδεέ τε τοῦ στρατοῦ πρήξαντος κακῶς καὶ Μεγαβάτῃ διαβεβλημένος , ἐδόκεέ τε τὴν βασιληίην τῆς Μιλήτου ἀπαιρεθήσεσθαι .
Furthermore he feared what might come of the failure of the army and Megabates' displeasure against him. It was likely, he thought, that his lordship of Miletus would be taken away from him.


5.35.2
5594
ἀρρωδέων δὲ τούτων ἕκαστα ἐβουλεύετο ἀπόστασιν ·
With all these fears in his mind, he began to plan revolt,


5.35.2
5595
συνέπιπτε γὰρ καὶ τὸν ἐστιγμένον τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀπῖχθαι ἐκ Σούσων παρὰ Ἱστιαίου , σημαίνοντα ἀπίστασθαι Ἀρισταγόρην ἀπὸ βασιλέος .
for it chanced that at that very time there came from Susa Histiaeus' messenger, the man with the marked head, signifying that Aristagoras should revolt from the king.


5.35.3
5596
ὁ γὰρ Ἱστιαῖος βουλόμενος τῷ Ἀρισταγόρῃ σημῆναι ἀποστῆναι ἄλλως μὲν οὐδαμῶς εἶχε ἀσφαλέως σημῆναι ὥστε φυλασσομενέων τῶν ὁδῶν , ὁ δὲ τῶν δούλων τὸν πιστότατον ἀποξυρήσας τὴν κεφαλὴν ἔστιξε καὶ ἀνέμεινε ἀναφῦναι τὰς τρίχας , ὡς δὲ ἀνέφυσαν τάχιστα , ἀπέπεμπε ἐς Μίλητον ἐντειλάμενος αὐτῷ ἄλλο μὲν οὐδέν , ἐπεὰν δὲ ἀπίκηται ἐς Μίλητον , κελεύειν Ἀρισταγόρην ξυρήσαντά μιν τὰς τρίχας κατιδέσθαι ἐς τὴν κεφαλήν .
Since Histiaeus desired to give word to Aristagoras that he should revolt and had no other safe way of doing so because the roads were guarded, he shaved and branded the head of his most trustworthy slave.


5.35.3
5597
τὰ δὲ στίγματα ἐσήμαινε , ὡς καὶ πρότερόν μοι εἴρηται , ἀπόστασιν .
He waited till the hair had grown again, and as soon as it was grown, he sent the man to Miletus with no other message except that when he came to Miletus he must bid Aristagoras shave his hair and examine his head. The writing branded on it signified revolt, as I have already said.


5.35.4
5598
ταῦτα δὲ ὁ Ἱστιαῖος ἐποίεε συμφορὴν ποιεύμενος μεγάλην τὴν ἑωυτοῦ κατοχὴν τὴν ἐν Σούσοισι ·
This Histiaeus did because he greatly disliked his detention at Susa and fully expected to be sent away to the coast in the case that there should be a revolt.


5.35.4
5599
ἀποστάσιος ὦν γινομένης πολλὰς εἶχε ἐλπίδας μετήσεσθαι ἐπὶ θάλασσαν , μὴ δὲ νεώτερόν τι ποιεύσης τῆς Μιλήτου οὐδαμὰ ἐς αὐτὴν ἥξειν ἔτι ἐλογίζετο .
If, however, Miletus remained at peace, he calculated that he would never return there.


5.36.1
5600
Ἱστιαῖος μέν νυν ταῦτα διανοεύμενος ἀπέπεμπε τὸν ἄγγελον , Ἀρισταγόρῃ δὲ συνέπιπτε τοῦ αὐτοῦ χρόνου πάντα ταῦτα συνελθόντα .
With this intent, then, Histiaeus sent his messenger, and it chanced that all these things came upon Aristagoras at one and the same time.


5.36.1
5601
ἐβουλεύετο ὦν μετὰ τῶν στασιωτέων , ἐκφήνας τήν τε ἑωυτοῦ γνώμην καὶ τὰ παρὰ τοῦ Ἱστιαίου ἀπιγμένα .
He accordingly took counsel with the members of his faction, stating his own opinion as well as the message which had come to him from Histiaeus.


5.36.2
5602
οἱ μὲν δὴ ἄλλοι πάντες γνώμην κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ ἐξεφέροντο , κελεύοντες ἀπίστασθαι ·
All the rest spoke their minds to the same effect, favoring revolt,


5.36.2
5603
Ἑκαταῖος δ’ ὁ λογοποιὸς πρῶτα μὲν οὐκ ἔα πόλεμον βασιλέι τῶν Περσέων ἀναιρέεσθαι , καταλέγων τά τε ἔθνεα πάντα τῶν ἦρχε Δαρεῖος καὶ τὴν δύναμιν αὐτοῦ .
with the exception of Hecataeus the historian who, listing all the nations subject to Darius and all his power, advised them that they should not make war on the king of Persia.


5.36.2
5604
ἐπείτε δὲ οὐκ ἔπειθε , δεύτερα συνεβούλευε ποιέειν ὅκως ναυκρατέες τῆς θαλάσσης ἔσονται .
When, however, he failed to persuade them, he counselled them that their next best plan was to make themselves masters of the sea.


5.36.3
5605
ἄλλως μέν νυν οὐδαμῶς ἔφη λέγων ἐνορᾶν ἐσόμενον τοῦτο ·
This, he said, could only be accomplished in one way (Miletus, he knew, was a city of no great wealth),


5.36.3
5606
ἐπίστασθαι γὰρ τὴν δύναμιν τῶν Μιλησίων ἐοῦσαν ἀσθενέα ·
namely if they took away from the temple at Branchidae the treasure which Croesus the Lydian had dedicated there.


5.36.3
5607
εἰ δὲ τὰ χρήματα καταιρεθείη τὰ ἐκ τοῦ ἱροῦ τοῦ ἐν Βραγχίδῃσι , τὰ Κροῖσος ὁ Λυδὸς ἀνέθηκε , πολλὰς εἶχε ἐλπίδας ἐπικρατήσειν τῆς θαλάσσης , καὶ οὕτω αὐτούς τε ἕξειν τοῖσι χρήμασι χρᾶσθαι καὶ τοὺς πολεμίους οὐ συλήσειν αὐτά .
With this at their disposal, he fully expected them to gain the mastery of the sea. They would then have the use of that treasure and their enemies would not be able to plunder it.


5.36.4
5608
τὰ δὲ χρήματα ἦν ταῦτα μεγάλα , ὡς δεδήλωταί μοι ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ τῶν λόγων .
The treasure was very great, as I have shown in the beginning of my account.


5.36.4
5609
αὕτη μὲν δὴ οὐκ ἐνίκα ἡ γνώμη , ἐδόκεε δὲ ὅμως ἀπίστασθαι , ἕνα τε αὐτῶν πλώσαντα ἐς Μυοῦντα ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς Νάξου ἀπελθόν , ἐὸν ἐνθαῦτα , συλλαμβάνειν πειρᾶσθαι τοὺς ἐπὶ τῶν νεῶν ἐπιπλέοντας στρατηγούς .
This plan was not approved, and they resolved that they would revolt. One out of their number was to sail to Myus, to the army which had left Naxos and was there, and attempt to seize the generals who were aboard the ships.


5.37.1
5610
ἀποπεμφθέντος δὲ Ἰητραγόρεω κατ’ αὐτὸ τοῦτο καὶ συλλαβόντος δόλῳ Ὀλίατον Ἰβανώλλιος Μυλασσέα καὶ Ἱστιαῖον Τύμνεω Τερμερέα καὶ Κώην Ἐρξάνδρου , τῷ Δαρεῖος Μυτιλήνην ἐδωρήσατο , καὶ Ἀρισταγόρην Ἡρακλείδεω Κυμαῖον καὶ ἄλλους συχνούς , οὕτω δὴ ἐκ τοῦ ἐμφανέος ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης ἀπεστήκεε , πᾶν ἐπὶ Δαρείῳ μηχανώμενος .
Iatragoras, who had been sent for this very purpose, craftily seized Oliatus of  Mylasa son of Ibanollis; Histiaeus of  Termera son of Tymnes; Coes son of Erxandrus, to whom Darius gave  Mytilene; Aristagoras of  Cyme, son of Heraclides; and many others besides. Then Aristagoras revolted openly, devising all he could to harm Darius.


5.37.2
5611
καὶ πρῶτα μὲν λόγῳ μετεὶς τὴν τυραννίδα ἰσονομίην ἐποίεε τῇ Μιλήτῳ , ὡς ἂν ἑκόντες αὐτῷ οἱ Μιλήσιοι συναπισταίατο , μετὰ δὲ καὶ ἐν τῇ ἄλλῃ Ἰωνίῃ τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἐποίεε , τοὺς μὲν ἐξελαύνων τῶν τυράννων , τοὺς δ’ ἔλαβε τυράννους ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν τῶν συμπλευσασέων ἐπὶ Νάξον , τούτους δὲ φίλα βουλόμενος ποιέεσθαι τῇσι πόλισι ἐξεδίδου , ἄλλον ἐς ἄλλην πόλιν παραδιδούς , ὅθεν εἴη ἕκαστος .
First he made pretence of giving up his tyranny and gave  Miletus equality of government so that the Milesians might readily join in his revolt. Then he proceeded to do the same things in the rest of  Ionia. Some of the tyrants he banished, and as for those tyrants whom he had taken out of the ships that sailed with him against  Naxos, he handed them each over to their respective cities, which he wished to please.


5.38.1
5612
Κώην μέν νυν Μυτιληναῖοι ἐπείτε τάχιστα παρέλαβον , ἐξαγαγόντες κατέλευσαν , Κυμαῖοι δὲ τὸν σφέτερον αὐτῶν ἀπῆκαν ·
Coes, when the Mytilenaeans received him, was taken out and stoned,


5.38.1
5613
ὣς δὲ καὶ ἄλλοι οἱ πλεῦνες ἀπίεσαν .
but the Cymaeans, as well as most of the others, let their own man go.


5.38.2
5614
τυράννων μέν νυν κατάπαυσις ἐγίνετο ἀνὰ τὰς πόλιας , Ἀρισταγόρης δὲ ὁ Μιλήσιος ὡς τοὺς τυράννους κατέπαυσε , στρατηγοὺς ἐν ἑκάστῃ τῶν πολίων κελεύσας ἑκάστους καταστῆσαι , δεύτερα αὐτὸς ἐς Λακεδαίμονα τριήρεϊ ἀπόστολος ἐγίνετο ·
In this way, then, an end was made of tyrants in the cities.


5.38.2
5615
ἔδεε γὰρ δὴ συμμαχίης τινός οἱ μεγάλης ἐξευρεθῆναι .
After doing away with the tyrants, Aristagoras of Miletus ordered all the peoples to set up governors in each city. Then he went on an embassy in a trireme to Lacedaemon, for it was necessary for him to find some strong ally.


5.39.1
5616
τῆς δὲ Σπάρτης Ἀναξανδρίδης μὲν ὁ Λέοντος οὐκέτι περιεὼν ἐβασίλευε ἀλλὰ ἐτετελευτήκεε , Κλεομένης δὲ ὁ Ἀναξανδρίδεω εἶχε τὴν βασιληίην , οὐ κατ’ ἀνδραγαθίην σχὼν ἀλλὰ κατὰ γένος .
At Sparta, Anaxandrides the son of Leon, who had been king, was now no longer alive but was dead, and Cleomenes son of Anaxandrides held the royal power.


5.39.1
5617
Ἀναξανδρίδῃ γὰρ ἔχοντι γυναῖκα ἀδελφεῆς ἑωυτοῦ θυγατέρα , καὶ ἐούσης ταύτης οἱ καταθυμίης , παῖδες οὐκ ἐγίνοντο .
This he had won not by manly merit but by right of birth. Anaxandrides had as his wife his own sister's daughter, and although he was content with her, no children were born to him.


5.39.2
5618
τούτου δὲ τοιούτου ἐόντος , οἱ ἔφοροι εἶπαν ἐπικαλεσάμενοι αὐτὸν " εἴ τοι σὺ σεωυτοῦ μὴ προορᾷς , ἀλλ’ ἡμῖν τοῦτ’ ἐστὶ οὐ περιοπτέον , γένος τὸ Εὐρυσθένεος γενέσθαι ἐξίτηλον .
Since this was the case, the Ephors called him to them and said,


5.39.2
5619
σύ νυν τὴν μὲν ἔχεις γυναῖκα , ἐπείτε τοι οὐ τίκτει , ἔξεο , ἄλλην δὲ γῆμον ·
“Even if you have no interest in caring for yourself, we cannot allow the house of Eurysthenes to perish.


5.39.2
5620
καὶ ποιέων ταῦτα Σπαρτιήτῃσι ἁδήσεις " .
Therefore send away the wife that you have, seeing that she bears you no children, and wed another.


5.39.2
5621
ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο φὰς τούτων οὐδέτερα ποιήσειν , ἐκείνους τε οὐ καλῶς συμβουλεύειν παραινέοντας , τὴν ἔχει γυναῖκα ἐοῦσαν ἀναμάρτητον ἑωυτῷ , ταύτην ἀπέντα ἄλλην ἐσαγαγέσθαι ·
If you do this, you will please the Spartans.”


5.39.2
5622
οὐδέ σφι πείσεσθαι .
Anaxandrides, however, said in response that he would do neither of these things and that they were not giving him good advice in bidding him to get rid of his present wife, who was blameless, and to marry another.


5.40.1
5623
πρὸς ταῦτα οἱ ἔφοροι καὶ οἱ γέροντες βουλευσάμενοι προσέφερον Ἀναξανδρίδῃ τάδε .
Then the Ephors and Elders took counsel, and placed this proposal before Anaxandrides:


5.40.1
5624
" ἐπεὶ τοίνυν τοι περιεχόμενόν σε ὁρῶμεν τῆς ἔχεις γυναικός , σὺ δὲ ταῦτα ποίεε , καὶ μὴ ἀντίβαινε τούτοισι , ἵνα μή τι ἀλλοῖον περὶ σεῦ Σπαρτιῆται βουλεύσωνται ·
“Since, as we see, you cling to the wife that you have, carry out our command, and do not hold out against it, bearing in mind that the Spartans will certainly find some other way of dealing with you.


5.40.2
5625
γυναικὸς μὲν τῆς ἔχεις οὐ προσδεόμεθά σευ τῆς ἐξέσιος , σὺ δὲ ταύτῃ τε πάντα ὅσα νῦν παρέχεις πάρεχε καὶ ἄλλην πρὸς ταύτῃ ἐσάγαγε γυναῖκα τεκνοποιόν " .
As for the wife that you have, we do not ask that you send her away. Keep providing her with all that you give her now and marry another woman in addition who can give you children.”


5.40.2
5626
ταῦτά κῃ λεγόντων συνεχώρησε ὁ Ἀναξανδρίδης , μετὰ δὲ γυναῖκας ἔχων δύο διξὰς ἱστίας οἴκεε , ποιέων οὐδαμῶς Σπαρτιητικά .
So they spoke, and Anaxandrides consented. Presently he had two wives and kept two households, a thing which is not at all customary at Sparta.


5.41.1
5627
χρόνου δὲ οὐ πολλοῦ διελθόντος ἡ ἐσύστερον ἐπελθοῦσα γυνὴ τίκτει τὸν δὴ Κλεομένεα τοῦτον .
After no long time the second wife gave birth to Cleomenes.


5.41.1
5628
καὶ αὕτη τε ἔφεδρον βασιλέα Σπαρτιήτῃσι ἀπέφαινε , καὶ ἡ προτέρη γυνὴ τὸν πρότερον χρόνον ἄτοκος ἐοῦσα τότε κως ἐκύησε , συντυχίῃ ταύτῃ χρησαμένη .
She, then, gave the Spartans an heir to the royal power, and as luck would have it, the first wife, who had been barren before, conceived at that very time.


5.41.2
5629
ἔχουσαν δὲ αὐτὴν ἀληθεῖ λόγῳ οἱ τῆς ἐπελθούσης γυναικὸς οἰκήιοι πυθόμενοι ὤχλεον , φάμενοι αὐτὴν κομπέειν ἄλλως βουλομένην ὑποβαλέσθαι .
When the friends of the new wife learned that the other woman was pregnant, they began to make trouble for her.


5.41.2
5630
δεινὰ δὲ ποιεύντων αὐτῶν , τοῦ χρόνου συντάμνοντος , ὑπ’ ἀπιστίης οἱ ἔφοροι τίκτουσαν τὴν γυναῖκα περιιζόμενοι ἐφύλαξαν .
They said that she was making an empty boast, so that she might substitute a child. The Ephors were angry, and when her time drew near, they sat around to watch her in childbirth because of their skepticism.


5.41.3
5631
ἣ δὲ ὡς ἔτεκε Δωριέα ἰθέως ἴσχει Λεωνίδην , καὶ μετὰ τοῦτον ἰθέως ἴσχει Κλεόμβροτον ·
She gave birth first to Dorieus, then straightway to Leonidas, and right after him to Cleombrotus.


5.41.3
5632
οἳ δὲ καὶ διδύμους λέγουσι Κλεόμβροτον καὶ Λεωνίδην γενέσθαι .
Some, however, say that Cleombrotus and Leonidas were twins.


5.41.3
5633
ἣ δὲ Κλεομένεα τεκοῦσα καὶ τὸ δεύτερον ἐπελθοῦσα γυνή , ἐοῦσα θυγάτηρ Πρινητάδεω τοῦ Δημαρμένου , οὐκέτι ἔτικτε τὸ δεύτερον .
As for the later wife, the mother of Cleomenes and the daughter of Prinetadas son of Demarmenus, she bore no more children.


5.42.1
5634
ὁ μὲν δὴ Κλεομένης , ὡς λέγεται , ἦν τε οὐ φρενήρης ἀκρομανής τε , ὁ δὲ Δωριεὺς ἦν τῶν ἡλίκων πάντων πρῶτος , εὖ τε ἐπίστατο κατ’ ἀνδραγαθίην αὐτὸς σχήσων τὴν βασιληίην .
Now Cleomenes, as the story goes, was not in his right mind and really quite mad, while Dorieus was first among all of his peers and fully believed that he would be made king for his manly worth.


5.42.2
5635
ὥστε ὦν οὕτω φρονέων , ἐπειδὴ ὅ τε Ἀναξανδρίδης ἀπέθανε καὶ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι χρεώμενοι τῷ νόμῳ ἐστήσαντο βασιλέα τὸν πρεσβύτατον Κλεομένεα , ὁ Δωριεὺς δεινόν τε ποιεύμενος καὶ οὐκ ἀξιῶν ὑπὸ Κλεομένεος βασιλεύεσθαι , αἰτήσας λεὼν Σπαρτιήτας ἦγε ἐς ἀποικίην , οὔτε τῷ ἐν Δελφοῖσι χρηστηρίῳ χρησάμενος ἐς ἥντινα γῆν κτίσων ἴῃ , οὔτε ποιήσας οὐδὲν τῶν νομιζομένων ·
Since he was of this opinion, Dorieus was very angry when at Anaxandrides' death the Lacedaemonians followed their custom and made Cleomenes king by right of age.


5.42.2
5636
οἷα δὲ βαρέως φέρων , ἀπίει ἐς τὴν Λιβύην τὰ πλοῖα ·
Since he would not tolerate being made subject to Cleomenes, he asked the Spartans for a group of people whom he took away as colonists. He neither inquired of the oracle at Delphi in what land he should establish his settlement, nor did anything else that was customary


5.42.2
5637
κατηγέοντο δέ οἱ ἄνδρες Θηραῖοι .
but set sail in great anger for Libya, with men of Thera to guide him.


5.42.3
5638
ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐς Λιβύην οἴκισε χῶρον κάλλιστον τῶν Λιβύων παρὰ Κίνυπα ποταμόν .
When he arrived there, he settled by the Cinyps river in the fairest part of Libya,


5.42.3
5639
ἐξελασθεὶς δὲ ἐνθεῦτεν τρίτῳ ἔτεϊ ὑπὸ Μακέων τε Λιβύων καὶ Καρχηδονίων ἀπίκετο ἐς Πελοπόννησον .
but in the third year he was driven out by the Macae, the Libyans and the Carchedonians and returned to the Peloponnesus.


5.43.1
5640
ἐνθαῦτα δέ οἱ Ἀντιχάρης ἀνὴρ Ἐλεώνιος συνεβούλευσε ἐκ τῶν Λαΐου χρησμῶν Ἡρακλείην τὴν ἐν Σικελίῃ κτίζειν , φὰς τὴν Ἔρυκος χώρην πᾶσαν εἶναι Ἡρακλειδέων αὐτοῦ Ἡρακλέος κτησαμένου .
There Antichares, a man of Eleon, advised him, on the basis of the oracles of Laius, to plant a colony at Heraclea in Sicily,


5.43.1
5641
ὁ δὲ ἀκούσας ταῦτα ἐς Δελφοὺς οἴχετο χρησόμενος τῷ χρηστηρίῳ , εἰ αἱρέει ἐπ’ ἣν στέλλεται χώρην ·
for Heracles himself, said Antichares, had won all the region of Eryx, which accordingly belonged to his descendants.


5.43.1
5642
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη οἱ χρᾷ αἱρήσειν .
When Dorieus heard that, he went away to Delphi to enquire of the oracle if he should seize the place to which he was preparing to go.


5.43.1
5643
παραλαβὼν δὲ Δωριεὺς τὸν στόλον τὸν καὶ ἐς Λιβύην ἦγε , ἐκομίζετο παρὰ τὴν Ἰταλίην .
The priestess responded that it should be so, and he took with him the company that he had led to Libya and went to Italy.


5.44.1
5644
τὸν χρόνον δὲ τοῦτον , ὡς λέγουσι Συβαρῖται , σφέας τε αὐτοὺς καὶ Τῆλυν τὸν ἑωυτῶν βασιλέα ἐπὶ Κρότωνα μέλλειν στρατεύεσθαι , τοὺς δὲ Κροτωνιήτας περιδεέας γενομένους δεηθῆναι Δωριέος σφίσι τιμωρῆσαι καὶ τυχεῖν δεηθέντας ·
Now at this time, as the Sybarites say, they and their king Telys were making ready to march against Croton,


5.44.1
5645
συστρατεύεσθαί τε δὴ ἐπὶ Σύβαριν Δωριέα καὶ συνελεῖν τὴν Σύβαριν .
and the men of Croton, who were very much afraid, entreated Dorieus to come to their aid. Their request was granted, and Dorieus marched with them to Sybaris helping them to take it.


5.44.2
5646
ταῦτα μέν νυν Συβαρῖται λέγουσι ποιῆσαι Δωριέα τε καὶ τοὺς μετ’ αὐτοῦ , Κροτωνιῆται δὲ οὐδένα σφίσι φασὶ ξεῖνον προσεπιλαβέσθαι τοῦ πρὸς Συβαρίτας πολέμου εἰ μὴ Καλλίην τῶν Ἰαμιδέων μάντιν Ἠλεῖον μοῦνον , καὶ τοῦτον τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
This is the story which the Sybarites tell of Dorieus and his companions,


5.44.2
5647
παρὰ Τήλυος τοῦ Συβαριτέων τυράννου ἀποδράντα ἀπικέσθαι παρὰ σφέας , ἐπείτε οἱ τὰ ἱρὰ οὐ προεχώρεε χρηστὰ θυομένῳ ἐπὶ Κρότωνα .
but the Crotoniats say that they were aided by no stranger in their war with Sybaris with the exception of Callias, an Elean diviner of the Iamid clan. About him there was a story that he had fled to Croton from Telys, the tyrant of Sybaris, because as he was sacrificing for victory over Croton, he could obtain no favorable omens.


5.45.1
5648
ταῦτα δὲ οὗτοι λέγουσι .
This is their tale.


5.45.1
5649
μαρτύρια δὲ τούτων ἑκάτεροι ἀποδεικνύουσι τάδε , Συβαρῖται μὲν τέμενός τε καὶ νηὸν ἐόντα παρὰ τὸν ξηρὸν Κρᾶθιν , τὸν ἱδρύσασθαι συνελόντα τὴν πόλιν Δωριέα λέγουσι Ἀθηναίῃ ἐπωνύμῳ Κραθίῃ ·
Both cities have proof of the truth of what they say.


5.45.1
5650
τοῦτο δὲ αὐτοῦ Δωριέος τὸν θάνατον μαρτύριον μέγιστον ποιεῦνται , ὅτι παρὰ τὰ μεμαντευμένα ποιέων διεφθάρη ·
The Sybarites point to a precinct and a temple beside the dry bed of the Crathis, which, they say, Dorieus founded in honor of Athena of Crathis after he had helped to take their city.


5.45.1
5651
εἰ γὰρ δὴ μὴ παρέπρηξε μηδέν , ἐπ’ ὁ δὲ ἐστάλη ἐποίεε , εἷλε ἂν τὴν Ἐρυκίνην χώρην καὶ ἑλὼν κατέσχε , οὐδ’ ἂν αὐτός τε καὶ ἡ στρατιὴ διεφθάρη .
They find their strongest proof in his death. He perished through doing more than the oracle bade him, for if he had accomplished no more than that which he set out to do, he would have taken and held the Erycine region without bringing about the death of himself and his army.


5.45.2
5652
οἱ δ’ αὖ Κροτωνιῆται ἀποδεικνῦσι Καλλίῃ μὲν τῷ Ἠλείῳ ἐξαίρετα ἐν γῇ τῇ Κροτωνιήτιδι πολλὰ δοθέντα , τὰ καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἔτι ἐνέμοντο οἱ Καλλίεω ἀπόγονοι , Δωριέι δὲ καὶ τοῖσι Δωριέος ἀπογόνοισι οὐδέν .
The Crotoniats, on the other hand, show many plots of land which had been set apart for and given to Callias of Elis and on which Callias' posterity dwelt even to my time


5.45.2
5653
καίτοι εἰ συνεπελάβετό γε τοῦ Συβαριτικοῦ πολέμου Δωριεύς , δοθῆναι ἄν οἱ πολλαπλήσια ἢ Καλλίῃ .
but show no gift to Dorieus and his descendants. They claim, however, that if Dorieus had aided them in their war with Sybaris, he would have received a reward many times greater than what was given to Callias.


5.45.2
5654
ταῦτα μέν νυν ἑκάτεροι αὐτῶν μαρτύρια ἀποφαίνονται , καὶ πάρεστι , ὁκοτέροισί τις πείθεται αὐτῶν , τούτοισι προσχωρέειν .
This, then is the evidence brought forward by each party, and each may side with that which seems to him to deserve more credence.


5.46.1
5655
συνέπλεον δὲ Δωριέι καὶ ἄλλοι συγκτίσται Σπαρτιητέων , Θεσσαλὸς καὶ Παραιβάτης καὶ Κελέης καὶ Εὐρυλέων ·
Other Spartans too sailed with Dorieus to found his colony, namely, Thessalus, Paraebates, Celees, and Euryleon.


5.46.1
5656
οἳ ἐπείτε ἀπίκοντο παντὶ στόλῳ ἐς τὴν Σικελίην , ἀπέθανον μάχῃ ἑσσωθέντες ὑπό τε Φοινίκων καὶ Ἐγεσταίων ·
When these men had come to Sicily with all their company, they were all overcome and slain in battle by the Phoenicians and Egestans,


5.46.1
5657
μοῦνος δὲ Εὐρυλέων τῶν συγκτιστέων περιεγένετο τούτου τοῦ πάθεος .
all, that is, except Euryleon, who was the only settler that survived this disaster.


5.46.2
5658
συλλαβὼν δὲ οὗτος τῆς στρατιῆς τοὺς περιγενομένους ἔσχε Μινώην τὴν Σελινουσίων ἀποικίην , καὶ συνελευθέρου Σελινουσίους τοῦ μουνάρχου Πειθαγόρεω ·
He mustered the remnant of his army and took Minoa, the colony from Selinus,


5.46.2
5659
μετὰ δὲ ὡς τοῦτον κατεῖλε , αὐτὸς τυραννίδι ἐπεχείρησε Σελινοῦντος καὶ ἐμουνάρχησε χρόνον ἐπ’ ὀλίγον ·
and aided in freeing the people of Selinus from their monarch Pithagoras. After deposing this man, he himself attempted to become tyrant of Selinus but was monarch there for only a little while


5.46.2
5660
οἱ γάρ μιν Σελινούσιοι ἐπαναστάντες ἀπέκτειναν καταφυγόντα ἐπὶ Διὸς ἀγοραίου βωμόν .
since the people of the place rose against him and slew him at the altar of Zeus of the marketplace, to which he had fled for refuge.


5.47.1
5661
συνέσπετο δὲ Δωριέι καὶ συναπέθανε Φίλιππος ὁ Βουτακίδεω Κροτωνιήτης ἀνήρ , ὃς ἁρμοσάμενος Τήλυος τοῦ Συβαρίτεω θυγατέρα ἔφυγε ἐκ Κρότωνος , ψευσθεὶς δὲ τοῦ γάμου οἴχετο πλέων ἐς Κυρήνην , ἐκ ταύτης δὲ ὁρμώμενος συνέσπετο οἰκηίῃ τε τριήρεϊ καὶ οἰκηίῃ ἀνδρῶν δαπάνῃ , ἐών τε Ὀλυμπιονίκης καὶ κάλλιστος Ἑλλήνων τῶν κατ’ ἑωυτόν .
Philippus of  Croton, son of Butacides, was among those who followed Dorieus and were slain with him. He had been betrothed to the daughter of Telys of  Sybaris but was banished from  Croton. Cheated out of his marriage, he sailed away to  Cyrene, from where he set forth and followed Dorieus, bringing his own trireme and covering all expenses for his men. This Philippus was a victor at  Olympia and the fairest Greek of his day.


5.47.2
5662
διὰ δὲ τὸ ἑωυτοῦ κάλλος ἠνείκατο παρὰ Ἐγεσταίων τὰ οὐδεὶς ἄλλος ·
For his physical beauty he received from the Egestans honors accorded to no one else.


5.47.2
5663
ἐπὶ γὰρ τοῦ τάφου αὐτοῦ ἡρώιον ἱδρυσάμενοι θυσίῃσι αὐτὸν ἱλάσκονται .
They built a hero's shrine by his grave and offer him sacrifices of propitiation.


5.48.1
5664
Δωριεὺς μέν νυν τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ ἐτελεύτησε ·
Such, then, was the manner of Dorieus' death.


5.48.1
5665
εἰ δὲ ἠνέσχετο βασιλευόμενος ὑπὸ Κλεομένεος καὶ κατέμενε ἐν Σπάρτῃ , ἐβασίλευσε ἂν Λακεδαίμονος ·
Had he endured Cleomenes' rule and stayed at Sparta he would have been king of Lacedaemon,


5.48.1
5666
οὐ γάρ τινα πολλὸν χρόνον ἦρξε ὁ Κλεομένης , ἀλλ’ ἀπέθανε ἄπαις , θυγατέρα μούνην λιπών , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Γοργώ .
for Cleomenes reigned no long time, and died leaving no son but one only daughter, whose name was Gorgo.


5.49.1
5667
ἀπικνέεται δὲ ὦν ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης ὁ Μιλήτου τύραννος ἐς τὴν Σπάρτην Κλεομένεος ἔχοντος τὴν ἀρχήν ·
It was in the reign of Cleomenes that Aristagoras the tyrant of Miletus came to Sparta.


5.49.1
5668
τῷ δὴ ἐς λόγους ἤιε , ὡς Λακεδαιμόνιοι λέγουσι , ἔχων χάλκεον πίνακα ἐν τῷ γῆς ἁπάσης περίοδος ἐνετέτμητο καὶ θάλασσά τε πᾶσα καὶ ποταμοὶ πάντες .
When he had an audience with the king, as the Lacedaemonians report, he brought with him a bronze tablet on which the map of all the earth was engraved, and all the sea and all the rivers.


5.49.2
5669
ἀπικνεόμενος δὲ ἐς λόγους ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης ἔλεγε πρὸς αὐτὸν τάδε .
Having been admitted to converse with Cleomenes, Aristagoras spoke thus to him:


5.49.2
5670
" Κλεόμενες , σπουδὴν μὲν τὴν ἐμὴν μὴ θωμάσῃς τῆς ἐνθαῦτα ἀπίξιος ·
“Do not wonder, Cleomenes, that I have been so eager to come here,


5.49.2
5671
τὰ γὰρ κατήκοντα ἐστὶ τοιαῦτα ·
for our present situation is such that the sons of the Ionians are slaves and not free men,


5.49.2
5672
Ἰώνων παῖδας δούλους εἶναι ἀντ’ ἐλευθέρων ὄνειδος καὶ ἄλγος μέγιστον μὲν αὐτοῖσι ἡμῖν , ἔτι δὲ τῶν λοιπῶν ὑμῖν , ὅσῳ προέστατε τῆς Ἑλλάδος .
which is shameful and grievous particularly to ourselves but also, of all others, to you, inasmuch as you are the leaders of Hellas.


5.49.3
5673
νῦν ὦν πρὸς θεῶν τῶν Ἑλληνίων ῥύσασθε Ἴωνας ἐκ δουλοσύνης ἄνδρας ὁμαίμονας .
Now, therefore, we entreat you by the gods of Hellas to save your Ionian kinsmen from slavery.


5.49.3
5674
εὐπετέως δὲ ὑμῖν ταῦτα οἷά τε χωρέειν ἐστί ·
This is a thing which you can easily achieve,


5.49.3
5675
οὔτε γὰρ οἱ βάρβαροι ἄλκιμοι εἰσί , ὑμεῖς τε τὰ ἐς τὸν πόλεμον ἐς τὰ μέγιστα ἀνήκετε ἀρετῆς πέρι , ἥ τε μάχη αὐτῶν ἐστὶ τοιήδε , τόξα καὶ αἰχμὴ βραχέα ·
for the strangers are not valiant men while your valor in war is preeminent. As for their manner of fighting, they carry bows and short spears,


5.49.3
5676
ἀναξυρίδας δὲ ἔχοντες ἔρχονται ἐς τὰς μάχας καὶ κυρβασίας ἐπὶ τῇσι κεφαλῇσι .
and they go to battle with trousers on their legs and turbans on their heads.


5.49.4
5677
οὕτω εὐπετέες χειρωθῆναι εἰσί .
Accordingly, they are easy to overcome.


5.49.4
5678
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἀγαθὰ τοῖσι τὴν ἤπειρον ἐκείνην νεμομένοισι ὅσα οὐδὲ τοῖσι συνάπασι ἄλλοισι , ἀπὸ χρυσοῦ ἀρξαμένοισι , ἄργυρος καὶ χαλκὸς καὶ ἐσθὴς ποικίλη καὶ ὑποζύγιά τε καὶ ἀνδράποδα ·
Furthermore, the inhabitants of that continent have more good things than all other men together, gold first but also silver, bronze, colored cloth, beasts of burden, and slaves.


5.49.4
5679
τὰ θυμῷ βουλόμενοι αὐτοὶ ἂν ἔχοιτε .
All this you can have to your heart's desire.


5.49.5
5680
κατοίκηνται δὲ ἀλλήλων ἐχόμενοι ὡς ἐγὼ φράσω , Ἰώνων μὲν τῶνδε οἵδε Λυδοί , οἰκέοντές τε χώρην ἀγαθὴν καὶ πολυαργυρώτατοι ἐόντες " .
The lands in which they dwell lie next to each other, as I shall show: next to the Ionians are the Lydians, who inhabit a good land and have great store of silver.”


5.49.5
5681
δεικνὺς δὲ ἔλεγε ταῦτα ἐς τῆς γῆς τὴν περίοδον , τὴν ἐφέρετο ἐν τῷ πίνακι ἐντετμημένην .
(This he said pointing to the map of the earth which he had brought engraved on the tablet.)


5.49.5
5682
" Λυδῶν δέ " ἔφη λέγων ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης " οἵδε ἔχονται Φρύγες οἱ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ , πολυπροβατώτατοί τε ἐόντες πάντων τῶν ἐγὼ οἶδα καὶ πολυκαρπότατοι .
“Next to the Lydians,” said Aristagoras, “you see the Phrygians to the east, men that of all known to me are the richest in flocks and in the fruits of the earth.


5.49.6
5683
Φρυγῶν δὲ ἔχονται Καππαδόκαι , τοὺς ἡμεῖς Συρίους καλέομεν .
Close by them are the Cappadocians, whom we call Syrians,


5.49.6
5684
τούτοισι δὲ πρόσουροι Κίλικες , κατήκοντες ἐπὶ θάλασσαν τήνδε , ἐν τῇ ἥδε Κύπρος νῆσος κέεται ·
and their neighbors are the Cilicians, whose land reaches to the sea over there, in which you see the island of Cyprus lying.


5.49.6
5685
οἳ πεντακόσια τάλαντα βασιλέι τὸν ἐπέτειον φόρον ἐπιτελεῦσι .
The yearly tribute which they pay to the king is five hundred talents.


5.49.6
5686
Κιλίκων δὲ τῶνδε ἔχονται Ἀρμένιοι οἵδε , καὶ οὗτοι ἐόντες πολυπρόβατοι , Ἀρμενίων δὲ Ματιηνοὶ χώρην τήνδε ἔχοντες .
Next to the Cilicians, are the Armenians, another people rich in flocks, and after the Armenians, the Matieni, whose country I show you.


5.49.7
5687
ἔχεται δὲ τούτων γῆ ἥδε Κισσίη , ἐν τῇ δὴ παρὰ ποταμὸν τόνδε Χοάσπην κείμενα ἐστὶ τὰ Σοῦσα ταῦτα , ἔνθα βασιλεύς τε μέγας δίαιταν ποιέεται , καὶ τῶν χρημάτων οἱ θησαυροὶ ἐνθαῦτα εἰσί ·
Adjoining these you see the Cissian land, in which, on the Choaspes, lies that Susa where the great king lives and where the storehouses of his wealth are located.


5.49.7
5688
ἑλόντες δὲ ταύτην τὴν πόλιν θαρσέοντες ἤδη τῷ Διὶ πλούτου πέρι ἐρίζετε .
Take that city, and you need not fear to challenge Zeus for riches.


5.49.8
5689
ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν χώρης ἄρα οὐ πολλῆς οὐδὲ οὕτω χρηστῆς καὶ οὔρων σμικρῶν χρεόν ἐστι ὑμέας μάχας ἀναβάλλεσθαι πρός τε Μεσσηνίους ἐόντας ἰσοπαλέας καὶ Ἀρκάδας τε καὶ Ἀργείους , τοῖσι οὔτε χρυσοῦ ἐχόμενον ἐστι οὐδὲν οὔτε ἀργύρου , τῶν πέρι καί τινα ἐνάγει προθυμίη μαχόμενον ἀποθνήσκειν ·
You should suspend your war, then, for strips of land of no great worth — for that fight with with Messenians, who are matched in strength with you, and Arcadians and Argives, men who have nothing in the way of gold or silver (for which things many are spurred by zeal to fight and die).


5.49.8
5690
παρέχον δὲ τῆς Ἀσίης πάσης ἄρχειν εὐπετέως , ἄλλο τι αἱρήσεσθε " ;
Yet when you can readily be masters of all Asia, will you refuse to attempt it?”


5.49.9
5691
Ἀρισταγόρης μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεξε , Κλεομένης δὲ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
Thus spoke Aristagoras, and Cleomenes replied:


5.49.9
5692
" ὦ ξεῖνε Μιλήσιε , ἀναβάλλομαί τοι ἐς τρίτην ἡμέρην ὑποκρινέεσθαι " .
“Milesian, my guest, wait till the third day for my answer.”


5.50.1
5693
τότε μὲν ἐς τοσοῦτον ἤλασαν ·
At that time, then, they got so far.


5.50.1
5694
ἐπείτε δὲ ἡ κυρίη ἡμέρη ἐγένετο τῆς ὑποκρίσιος καὶ ἦλθον ἐς τὸ συγκείμενον , εἴρετο ὁ Κλεομένης τὸν Ἀρισταγόρην ὁκοσέων ἡμερέων ἀπὸ θαλάσσης τῆς Ἰώνων ὁδὸς εἴη παρὰ βασιλέα .
When, on the day appointed for the answer, they came to the place upon which they had agreed, Cleomenes asked Aristagoras how many days' journey it was from the Ionian sea to the king.


5.50.2
5695
ὁ δὲ Ἀρισταγόρης τ- ἄλλα ἐὼν σοφὸς καὶ διαβάλλων ἐκεῖνον εὖ ἐν τούτῳ ἐσφάλη ·
Till now, Aristagoras had been cunning and fooled the Spartan well, but here he made a false step.


5.50.2
5696
χρὲον γάρ μιν μὴ λέγειν τὸ ἐόν , βουλόμενόν γε Σπαρτιήτας ἐξαγαγεῖν ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην , λέγει δ’ ὦν τριῶν μηνῶν φὰς εἶναι τὴν ἄνοδον .
If he desired to take the Spartans away into Asia he should never have told the truth, but he did tell it, and said that it was a three months' journey inland.


5.50.2
5697
ὁ δὲ ὑπαρπάσας τὸν ἐπίλοιπον λόγον τὸν ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης ὥρμητο λέγειν περὶ τῆς ὁδοῦ , εἶπε " ὦ ξεῖνε Μιλήσιε , ἀπαλλάσσεο ἐκ Σπάρτης πρὸ δύντος ἡλίου ·
Upon hearing this, Cleomenes cut short the rest of Aristagoras' explanation about the journey and said, “Milesian, my guest, leave Sparta before sunset.”


5.50.3
5698
οὐδένα γὰρ λόγον εὐεπέα λέγεις Λακεδαιμονίοισι , ἐθέλων σφέας ἀπὸ θαλάσσης τριῶν μηνῶν ὁδὸν ἀγαγεῖν " .
At that, Cleomenes cut short Aristagoras' account of the prospective journey. He then bade his Milesian guest depart from  Sparta before sunset, for never, he said, would the Lacedaemonians listen to the plan, if Aristagoras desired to lead them a three months' journey from the sea.


5.51.1
5699
ὁ μὲν Κλεομένης ταῦτα εἴπας ἤιε ἐς τὰ οἰκία , ὁ δὲ Ἀρισταγόρης λαβὼν ἱκετηρίην ἤιε ἐς τοῦ Κλεομένεος , ἐσελθὼν δὲ ἔσω ἅτε ἱκετεύων ἐπακοῦσαι ἐκέλευε τὸν Κλεομένεα ἀποπέμψαντα τὸ παιδίον ·
Cleomenes went to his house after this exchange, but Aristagoras took a suppliant's garb and followed him there.


5.51.1
5700
προσεστήκεε γὰρ δὴ τῷ Κλεομένεϊ ἡ θυγάτηρ , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Γοργώ ·
Upon entering, he used a suppliant's right to beg Cleomenes to listen to him. He first asked Cleomenes to send away the child, his daughter Gorgo, who was standing by him.


5.51.1
5701
τοῦτο δέ οἱ καὶ μοῦνον τέκνον ἐτύγχανε ἐὸν ἐτέων ὀκτὼ ἢ ἐννέα ἡλικίην .
She was his only child, and was about eight or nine years of age.


5.51.1
5702
Κλεομένης δὲ λέγειν μιν ἐκέλευε τὰ βούλεται μηδὲ ἐπισχεῖν τοῦ παιδίου εἵνεκα .
Cleomenes bade him say whatever he wanted and not let the child's presence hinder him.


5.51.2
5703
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης ἄρχετο ἐκ δέκα ταλάντων ὑπισχνεόμενος , ἤν οἱ ἐπιτελέσῃ τῶν ἐδέετο .
Then Aristagoras began to promise Cleomenes from ten talents upwards, if he would grant his request.


5.51.2
5704
ἀνανεύοντος δὲ τοῦ Κλεομένεος προέβαινε τοῖσι χρήμασι ὑπερβάλλων ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης , ἐς οὗ πεντήκοντά τε τάλαντα ὑπεδέδεκτο καὶ τὸ παιδίον ηὐδάξατο " πάτερ , διαφθερέει σε ὁ ξεῖνος , ἢν μὴ ἀποστὰς ἴῃς " .
When Cleomenes refused, Aristagoras offered him ever more and more. When he finally promised fifty talents the child cried out, “Father, the stranger will corrupt you, unless you leave him and go away.”


5.51.3
5705
ὅ τε δὴ Κλεομένης ἡσθεὶς τοῦ παιδίου τῇ παραινέσι ἤιε ἐς ἕτερον οἴκημα , καὶ ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης ἀπαλλάσσετο τὸ παράπαν ἐκ τῆς Σπάρτης , οὐδέ οἱ ἐξεγένετο ἐπὶ πλέον ἔτι σημῆναι περὶ τῆς ἀνόδου τῆς παρὰ βασιλέα .
Cleomenes was pleased with the child's counsel and went into another room while Aristagoras departed from  Sparta, finding no further occasion for telling of the journey inland to the king's palace.


5.52.1
5706
ἔχει γὰρ ἀμφὶ τῇ ὁδῷ ταύτῃ ὧδε ·
Now the nature of this road is as I will show.


5.52.1
5707
σταθμοί τε πανταχῇ εἰσι βασιλήιοι καὶ καταλύσιες κάλλισται , διὰ οἰκεομένης τε ἡ ὁδὸς ἅπασα καὶ ἀσφαλέος .
All along it are the king's road stations and very good resting places, and the whole of it passes through country that is inhabited and safe.


5.52.1
5708
διὰ μέν γε Λυδίης καὶ Φρυγίης σταθμοὶ τείνοντες εἴκοσι εἰσί , παρασάγγαι δὲ τέσσερες καὶ ἐνενήκοντα καὶ ἥμισυ .
Its course through Lydia and Phrygia is of the length of twenty stages, and ninety-four and a half parasangs.


5.52.2
5709
ἐκδέκεται δὲ ἐκ τῆς Φρυγίης ὁ Ἅλυς ποταμός , ἐπ’ ᾧ πύλαι τε ἔπεισι , τὰς διεξελάσαι πᾶσα ἀνάγκη καὶ οὕτω διεκπερᾶν τὸν ποταμόν , καὶ φυλακτήριον μέγα ἐπ’ αὐτῷ .
Next after Phrygia it comes to the river Halys, where there is both a defile which must be passed before the river can be crossed and a great fortress to guard it.


5.52.2
5710
διαβάντι δὲ ἐς τὴν Καππαδοκίην καὶ ταύτῃ πορευομένῳ μέχρι οὔρων τῶν Κιλικίων σταθμοὶ δυῶν δέοντες εἰσὶ τριήκοντα , παρασάγγαι δὲ τέσσερες καὶ ἑκατόν .
After the passage into Cappadocia, the road in that land as far as the borders of Cilicia is of twenty-eight stages and one hundred and four parasangs.


5.52.2
5711
ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖσι τούτων οὔροισι διξάς τε πύλας διεξελᾷς καὶ διξὰ φυλακτήρια παραμείψεαι .
On this frontier you must ride through two defiles and pass two fortresses.


5.52.3
5712
ταῦτα δὲ διεξελάσαντι καὶ διὰ τῆς Κιλικίης ὁδὸν ποιευμένῳ τρεῖς εἱσι σταθμοί , παρασάγγαι δὲ πεντεκαίδεκα καὶ ἥμισυ .
Ride past these, and you will have a journey through Cilica of three stages and fifteen and a half parasangs.


5.52.3
5713
οὖρος δὲ Κιλικίης καὶ τῆς Ἀρμενίης ἐστὶ ποταμὸς νηυσιπέρητος , τῷ οὔνομα Εὐφρήτης .
The boundary of Cilicia and Armenia is a navigable river, the name of which is the Euphrates.


5.52.3
5714
ἐν δὲ τῇ Ἀρμενίῃ σταθμοὶ μὲν εἰσὶ καταγωγέων πεντεκαίδεκα , παρασάγγαι δὲ ἓξ καὶ πεντήκοντα καὶ ἥμισυ , καὶ φυλακτήριον ἐν αὐτοῖσι .
In Armenia there are fifteen resting-stages and fifty-six and a half parasangs. Here too there is a fortress.


5.52.4
5715
ἐκ δὲ ταύτης τῆς Ἀρμενίης ἐς βάλλοντι ἐς τὴν Ματιηνὴν γῆν σταθμοί εἰσι τέσσερες καὶ τριήκοντα , παρασάγγαι δὲ ἑπτὰ καὶ τριήκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν .
From Armenia the road enters the Matienian land, in which there are thirty-four stages and one hundred and thirty-seven parasangs.


5.52.4
5716
ποταμοὶ δὲ νηυσιπέρητοι τέσσερες διὰ ταύτης ῥέουσι , τοὺς πᾶσα ἀνάγκη διαπορθμεῦσαι ἐστί , πρῶτος μὲν Τίγρης , μετὰ δὲ δεύτερός τε καὶ τρίτος ὡυτὸς ὀνομαζόμενος , οὐκ ὡυτὸς ἐὼν ποταμὸς οὐδὲ ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ ῥέων ·
Through this land flow four navigable rivers which must be passed by ferries, first the Tigris, then a second and a third of the same name, yet not the same stream nor flowing from the same source.


5.52.4
5717
ὁ μὲν γὰρ πρότερον αὐτῶν καταλεχθεὶς ἐξ Ἀρμενίων ῥέει , ὁ δ’ ὕστερον ἐκ Ματιηνῶν ·
The first-mentioned of them flows from the Armenians and the second from the Matieni.


5.52.5
5718
ὁ δὲ τέταρτος τῶν ποταμῶν οὔνομα ἔχει Γύνδης , τὸν Κῦρος διέλαβε κοτὲ ἐς διώρυχας ἑξήκοντα καὶ τριηκοσίας .
The fourth river is called Gyndes, that Gyndes which Cyrus parted once into three hundred and sixty channels.


5.52.6
5719
ἐκ δὲ ταύτης ἐς τὴν Κισσίην χώρην μεταβαίνοντι ἕνδεκα σταθμοί , παρασάγγαι δὲ δύο καὶ τεσσεράκοντα καὶ ἥμισυ ἐστὶ ἐπὶ ποταμὸν Χοάσπην , ἐόντα καὶ τοῦτον νηυσιπέρητον ·
When this country is passed, the road is in the Cissian land, where there are eleven stages and forty-two and a half parasangs, as far as yet another navigable river, the Choaspes,


5.52.6
5720
ἐπ’ ᾧ Σοῦσα πόλις πεπόλισται .
on the banks of which stands the city of Susa.


5.53.1
5721
οὗτοι οἱ πάντες σταθμοί εἰσι ἕνδεκα καὶ ἑκατόν .
Thus the sum total of stages is one hundred and eleven.


5.53.1
5722
καταγωγαὶ μέν νυν σταθμῶν τοσαῦται εἰσὶ ἐκ Σαρδίων ἐς Σοῦσα ἀναβαίνοντι .
So many resting-stages, then, are there in the journey up from Sardis to Susa.


5.53.1
5723
εἰ δὲ ὀρθῶς μεμέτρηται ἡ ὁδὸς ἡ βασιληίη τοῖσι παρασάγγῃσι καὶ ὁ παρασάγγης δύναται τριήκοντα στάδια , ὥσπερ οὗτός γε δύναται ταῦτα , ἐκ Σαρδίων στάδια ἐστὶ ἐς τὰ βασιλήια τὰ Μεμνόνια καλεόμενα πεντακόσια καὶ τρισχίλια καὶ μύρια , παρασαγγέων ἐόντων πεντήκοντα καὶ τετρακοσίων .
If I have accurately counted the parasangs of the royal road, and the parasang is of thirty furlongs' length, which assuredly it is, then between Sardis and the king's abode called Memnonian there are thirteen thousand and five hundred furlongs, the number of parasangs being four hundred and fifty.


5.53.1
5724
πεντήκοντα δὲ καὶ ἑκατὸν στάδια ἐπ’ ἡμέρῃ ἑκάστῃ διεξιοῦσι ἀναισιμοῦνται ἡμέραι ἀπαρτὶ ἐνενήκοντα .
If each day's journey is one hundred and fifty furlongs, then the sum of days spent is ninety, neither more nor less.


5.54.1
5725
οὕτω τῷ Μιλησίῳ Ἀρισταγόρῃ εἴπαντι πρὸς Κλεομένεα τὸν Λακεδαιμόνιον εἶναι τριῶν μηνῶν τὴν ἄνοδον τὴν παρὰ βασιλέα ὀρθῶς εἴρητο .
Aristagoras of Miletus accordingly spoke the truth to Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian when he said that the journey inland was three months long.


5.54.1
5726
εἰ δέ τις τὸ ἀτρεκέστερον τούτων ἔτι δίζηται , ἐγὼ καὶ τοῦτο σημανέω ·
If anyone should desire a more exact measurement, I will give him that too,


5.54.1
5727
τὴν γὰρ ἐξ Ἐφέσου ἐς Σάρδις ὁδὸν δεῖ προσλογίσασθαι ταύτῃ .
for the journey from Ephesus to Sardis must be added to the rest.


5.54.2
5728
καὶ δὴ λέγω σταδίους εἶναι τοὺς πάντας ἀπὸ θαλάσσης τῆς Ἑλληνικῆς μέχρι Σούσων ( τοῦτο γὰρ Μεμνόνειον ἄστυ καλέεται ) , τεσσεράκοντα καὶ τετρακισχιλίους καὶ μυρίους ·
So, then, from the Greek sea to Susa, which is the city called Memnonian, it is a journey of fourteen thousand and forty stages,


5.54.2
5729
οἱ γὰρ ἐξ Ἑφέσου ἐς Σάρδις εἰσὶ τεσσεράκοντα καὶ πεντακόσιοι στάδιοι , καὶ οὕτω τρισὶ ἡμέρῃσι μηκύνεται ἡ τρίμηνος ὁδός .
for there are five hundred and forty furlongs from Ephesus to Sardis. The three months' journey is accordingly made longer by three days.


5.55.1
5730
ἀπελαυνόμενος δὲ ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης ἐκ τῆς Σπάρτης ἤιε ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας γενομένας τυράννων ὧδε ἐλευθέρας .
When he was forced to leave Sparta, Aristagoras went to Athens, which had been freed from its ruling tyrants in the manner that I will show.


5.55.1
5731
ἐπεὶ Ἵππαρχον τὸν Πεισιστράτου , Ἱππίεω δὲ τοῦ τυράννου ἀδελφεόν , ἰδόντα ὄψιν ἐνυπνίου τῷ ἑωυτοῦ πάθεϊ ἐναργεστάτην κτείνουσι Ἀριστογείτων καὶ Ἁρμόδιος , γένος ἐόντες τὰ ἀνέκαθεν Γεφυραῖοι , μετὰ ταῦτα ἐτυραννεύοντο Ἀθηναῖοι ἐπ’ ἔτεα τέσσερα οὐδὲν ἧσσον ἀλλὰ καὶ μᾶλλον ἢ πρὸ τοῦ .
First Hipparchus, son of Pisistratus and brother of the tyrant Hippias, had been slain by Aristogiton and Harmodius, men of Gephyraean descent. This was in fact an evil of which he had received a premonition in a dream.


5.56.1
5732
ἡ μέν νυν ὄψις τοῦ Ἱππάρχου ἐνυπνίου ἦν ἥδε ·
Now this was the vision which Hipparchus saw in a dream:


5.56.1
5733
ἐν τῇ προτέρῃ νυκτὶ τῶν Παναθηναίων ἐδόκεε ὁ Ἵππαρχος ἄνδρα οἱ ἐπιστάντα μέγαν καὶ εὐειδέα αἰνίσσεσθαι τάδε τὰ ἔπεα .
in the night before the Panathenaea he thought that a tall and handsome man stood over him uttering these riddling verses:


5.56.1
5734
τλῆθι λέων ἄτλητα παθὼν τετληότι θυμῷ ·
"O lion, endure the unendurable with a lion's heart.


5.56.1
5735
οὐδεὶς ἀνθρώπων ἀδικῶν τίσιν οὐκ ἀποτίσει .
No man on earth does wrong without paying the penalty."


5.56.2
5736
ταῦτα δέ , ὡς ἡμέρη ἐγένετο τάχιστα , φανερὸς ἦν ὑπερτιθέμενος ὀνειροπόλοισι ·
As soon as it was day, he imparted this to the interpreters of dreams,


5.56.2
5737
μετὰ δὲ ἀπειπάμενος τὴν ὄψιν ἔπεμπε τὴν πομπήν , ἐν τῇ δὴ τελευτᾷ .
and presently putting the vision from his mind, he led the procession in which he met his death.


5.57.1
5738
οἱ δὲ Γεφυραῖοι , τῶν ἦσαν οἱ φονέες οἱ Ἱππάρχου , ὡς μὲν αὐτοὶ λέγουσι , ἐγεγόνεσαν ἐξ Ἐρετρίης τὴν ἀρχήν , ὡς δὲ ἐγὼ ἀναπυνθανόμενος εὑρίσκω , ἦσαν Φοίνικες τῶν σὺν Κάδμῳ ἀπικομένων Φοινίκων ἐς γῆν τὴν νῦν Βοιωτίην καλεομένην , οἴκεον δὲ τῆς χώρης ταύτης ἀπολαχόντες τὴν Ταναγρικὴν μοῖραν .
Now the Gephyraean clan, of which the slayers of Hipparchus were members, claim to have come at first from  Eretria, but my own enquiry shows that they were among the Phoenicians who came with Cadmus to the country now called  Boeotia. In that country the lands of  Tanagra were allotted to them, and this is where they settled.


5.57.2
5739
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ Καδμείων πρότερον ἐξαναστάντων ὑπ’ Ἀργείων , οἱ Γεφυραῖοι οὗτοι δεύτερα ὑπὸ Βοιωτῶν ἐξαναστάντες ἐτράποντο ἐπ’ Ἀθηνέων .
The Cadmeans had first been expelled from there by the Argives, and these Gephyraeans were forced to go to  Athens after being expelled in turn by the Boeotians.


5.57.2
5740
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ σφέας ἐπὶ ῥητοῖσι ἐδέξαντο σφέων αὐτῶν εἶναι πολιήτας , πολλῶν τεῶν καὶ οὐκ ἀξιαπηγήτων ἐπιτάξαντες ἔργεσθαι .
The Athenians received them as citizens of their own on set terms, debarring them from many practices not deserving of mention here.


5.58.1
5741
οἱ δὲ Φοίνικες οὗτοι οἱ σὺν Κάδμῳ ἀπικόμενοι , τῶν ἦσαν οἱ Γεφυραῖοι , ἄλλα τε πολλὰ οἰκήσαντες ταύτην τὴν χώρην ἐσήγαγον διδασκάλια ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας καὶ δὴ καὶ γράμματα , οὐκ ἐόντα πρὶν Ἕλλησι ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέειν , πρῶτα μὲν τοῖσι καὶ ἅπαντες χρέωνται Φοίνικες ·
These Phoenicians who came with Cadmus and of whom the Gephyraeans were a part brought with them to  Hellas, among many other kinds of learning, the alphabet, which had been unknown before this, I think, to the Greeks.


5.58.1
5742
μετὰ δὲ χρόνου προβαίνοντος ἅμα τῇ φωνῇ μετέβαλλον καὶ τὸν ῥυθμὸν τῶν γραμμάτων .
As time went on the sound and the form of the letters were changed.


5.58.2
5743
περιοίκεον δὲ σφέας τὰ πολλὰ τῶν χώρων τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον Ἑλλήνων Ἴωνες , οἳ παραλαβόντες διδαχῇ παρὰ τῶν Φοινίκων τὰ γράμματα , μεταρρυθμίσαντες σφέων ὀλίγα ἐχρέωντο , χρεώμενοι δὲ ἐφάτισαν , ὥσπερ καὶ τὸ δίκαιον ἔφερε , ἐσαγαγόντων Φοινίκων ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα , Φοινικήια κεκλῆσθαι .
At this time the Greeks who were settled around them were for the most part Ionians, and after being taught the letters by the Phoenicians, they used them with a few changes of form. In so doing, they gave to these characters the name of Phoenician, as was quite fair seeing that the Phoenicians had brought them into  Greece.


5.58.3
5744
καὶ τὰς βύβλους διφθέρας καλέουσι ἀπὸ τοῦ παλαιοῦ οἱ Ἴωνες , ὅτι κοτὲ ἐν σπάνι βύβλων ἐχρέωντο διφθέρῃσι αἰγέῃσί τε καὶ οἰέῃσι ·
The Ionians have also from ancient times called sheets of papyrus skins, since they formerly used the skins of sheep and goats due to the lack of papyrus.


5.58.3
5745
ἔτι δὲ καὶ τὸ κατ’ ἐμὲ πολλοὶ τῶν βαρβάρων ἐς τοιαύτας διφθέρας γράφουσι .
Even to this day there are many foreigners who write on such skins.


5.59.1
5746
εἶδον δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς Καδμήια γράμματα ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος τοῦ Ἰσμηνίου ἐν Θήβῃσι τῇσι Βοιωτῶν , ἐπὶ τρίποσι τισὶ ἐγκεκολαμμένα , τὰ πολλὰ ὅμοια ἐόντα τοῖσι Ἰωνικοῖσι .
I have myself seen Cadmean writing in the temple of Ismenian Apollo at  Thebes of  Boeotia engraved on certain tripods and for the most part looking like Ionian letters.


5.59.1
5747
ὁ μὲν δὴ εἷς τῶν τριπόδων ἐπίγραμμα ἔχει ἀμφιτρύων μ’ ἀνέθηκ’ ἐνάρων ἀπὸ Τηλεβοάων .
On one of the tripods there is this inscription:  "   Amphitryon dedicated me from the spoils of Teleboae.  "


5.59.1
5748
ταῦτα ἡλικίην εἴη ἂν κατὰ Λάιον τὸν Λαβδάκου τοῦ Πολυδώρου τοῦ Κάδμου .
This would date from about the time of Laius the son of Labdacus, grandson of Polydorus and great-grandson of Cadmus.


5.60.1
5749
ἕτερος δὲ τρίπους ἐν ἑξαμέτρῳ τόνῳ λέγει Σκαῖος πυγμαχέων με ἑκηβόλῳ Ἀπόλλωνι νικήσας ἀνέθηκε τεῒν περικαλλὲς ἄγαλμα .
A second tripod says, in hexameter verse:  "   Scaeus the boxer, victorious in the contest,   Gave me to Apollo, the archer god, a lovely offering.  "


5.60.1
5750
Σκαῖος δ’ ἂν εἴη ὁ Ἱπποκόωντος , εἰ δὴ οὗτός γε ἐστὶ ὁ ἀναθεὶς καὶ μὴ ἄλλος τ- αὐτὸ οὔνομα ἔχων τῷ Ἱπποκόωντος , ἡλικίην κατὰ Οἰδίπουν τὸν Λαΐου .
Scaeus the son of Hippocoon, if he is indeed the dedicator and not another of the same name, would have lived at the time of Oedipus son of Laius.


5.61.1
5751
τρίτος δὲ τρίπους λέγει καὶ οὗτος ἐν ἑξαμέτρῳ Λαοδάμας τρίποδ’ αὐτὸς ἐυσκόπῳ Ἀπόλλωνι μουναρχέων ἀνέθηκε τεῒν περικαλλὲς ἄγαλμα .
The third tripod says, in hexameter verse again:  "   Laodamas, while he reigned, dedicated this cauldron   To Apollo, the sure of aim, as a lovely offering.  "


5.61.2
5752
ἐπὶ τούτου δὴ τοῦ Λαοδάμαντος τοῦ Ἐτεοκλέος μουναρχέοντος ἐξανιστέαται Καδμεῖοι ὑπ’ Ἀργείων καὶ τρέπονται ἐς τοὺς Ἐγχελέας .
During the rule of this Laodamas son of Eteocles, the Cadmeans were expelled by the Argives and went away to the Encheleis.


5.61.2
5753
οἱ δὲ Γεφυραῖοι ὑπολειφθέντες ὕστερον ὑπὸ Βοιωτῶν ἀναχωρέουσι ἐς Ἀθήνας ·
The Gephyraeans were left behind but were later compelled by the Boeotians to withdraw to  Athens.


5.61.2
5754
καί σφι ἱρά ἐστι ἐν Ἀθήνῃσι ἱδρυμένα , τῶν οὐδὲν μέτα τοῖσι λοιποῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι , ἄλλα τε κεχωρισμένα τῶν ἄλλων ἱρῶν καὶ δὴ καὶ Ἀχαιίης Δήμητρος ἱρόν τε καὶ ὄργια .
They have certain set forms of worship at  Athens in which the rest of the Athenians take no part, particularly the rites and mysteries of Achaean Demeter.


5.62.1
5755
ἡ μὲν δὴ ὄψις τοῦ Ἱππάρχου ἐνυπνίου καὶ οἱ Γεφυραῖοι ὅθεν ἐγεγόνεσαν , τῶν ἦσαν οἱ Ἱππάρχου φονέες , ἀπήγηταί μοι ·
I have told both of the vision of Hipparchus' dream and of the first origin of the Gephyreans, to whom the slayers of Hipparchus belonged.


5.62.1
5756
δεῖ δὲ πρὸς τούτοισι ἔτι ἀναλαβεῖν τὸν κατ’ ἀρχὰς ἤια λέξων λόγον , ὡς τυράννων ἐλευθερώθησαν Ἀθηναῖοι .
Now I must go further and return to the story which I began to tell, namely how the Athenians were freed from their tyrants.


5.62.2
5757
Ἱππίεω τυραννεύοντος καὶ ἐμπικραινομένου Ἀθηναίοισι διὰ τὸν Ἱππάρχου θάνατον , Ἀλκμεωνίδαι γένος ἐόντες Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ φεύγοντες Πεισιστρατίδας , ἐπείτε σφι ἅμα τοῖσι ἄλλοισι Ἀθηναίων φυγάσι πειρωμένοισι κατὰ τὸ ἰσχυρὸν οὐ προεχώρεε κάτοδος , ἀλλὰ προσέπταιον μεγάλως πειρώμενοι κατιέναι τε καὶ ἐλευθεροῦν τὰς Ἀθήνας , Λειψύδριον τὸ ὑπὲρ Παιονίης τειχίσαντες , ἐνθαῦτα οἱ Ἀλκμεωνίδαι πᾶν ἐπὶ τοῖσι Πεισιστρατίδῃσι μηχανώμενοι παρ’ Ἀμφικτυόνων τὸν νηὸν μισθοῦνται τὸν ἐν Δελφοῖσι , τὸν νῦν ἐόντα τότε δὲ οὔκω , τοῦτον ἐξοικοδομῆσαι .
Hippias, their tyrant, was growing ever more bitter in enmity against the Athenians because of Hipparchus' death, and the Alcmeonidae, a family of Athenian stock banished by the sons of Pisistratus, attempted with the rest of the exiled Athenians to make their way back by force and free  Athens. They were not successful in their return and suffered instead a great reverse. After fortifying Lipsydrium north of Paeonia, they, in their desire to use all devices against the sons of Pisistratus, hired themselves to the Amphictyons for the building of the temple at  Delphi which exists now but was not there yet then.


5.62.3
5758
οἷα δὲ χρημάτων εὖ ἥκοντες καὶ ἐόντες ἄνδρες δόκιμοι ἀνέκαθεν ἔτι , τόν τε νηὸν ἐξεργάσαντο τοῦ παραδείγματος κάλλιον τά τε ἄλλα καὶ συγκειμένου σφι πωρίνου λίθου ποιέειν τὸν νηόν , Παρίου τὰ ἔμπροσθε αὐτοῦ ἐξεποίησαν .
Since they were wealthy and like their fathers men of reputation, they made the temple more beautiful than the model showed. In particular, whereas they had agreed to build the temple of tufa, they made its front of Parian marble.


5.63.1
5759
ὡς ὦν δὴ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι λέγουσι , οὗτοι οἱ ἄνδρες ἐν Δελφοῖσι κατήμενοι ἀνέπειθον τὴν Πυθίην χρήμασι , ὅκως ἔλθοιεν Σπαρτιητέων ἄνδρες εἴτε ἰδίῳ στόλῳ εἴτε δημοσίῳ χρησόμενοι , προφέρειν σφι τὰς Ἀθήνας ἐλευθεροῦν .
These men, as the Athenians say, established themselves at  Delphi and bribed the Pythian priestess to bid any Spartans who should come to inquire of her on a private or a public account to set  Athens free.


5.63.2
5760
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δέ , ὥς σφι αἰεὶ τ- αὐτὸ πρόφαντον ἐγίνετο , πέμπουσι Ἀγχιμόλιον τὸν Ἀστέρος , ἐόντα τῶν ἀστῶν ἄνδρα δόκιμον , σὺν στρατῷ ἐξελῶντα Πεισιστρατίδας ἐξ Ἀθηνέων ὅμως καὶ ξεινίους σφι ἐόντας τὰ μάλιστα ·
Then the Lacedaemonians, when the same command was ever revealed to them, sent Anchimolius the son of Aster, a citizen of repute, to drive out the sons of Pisistratus with an army despite the fact that the Pisistratidae were their close friends,


5.63.2
5761
τὰ γὰρ τοῦ θεοῦ πρεσβύτερα ἐποιεῦντο ἢ τὰ τῶν ἀνδρῶν ·
for the god's will weighed with them more than the will of man.


5.63.2
5762
πέμπουσι δὲ τούτους κατὰ θάλασσαν πλοίοισι .
They sent these men by sea on shipboard.


5.63.3
5763
ὃ μὲν δὴ προσσχὼν ἐς Φάληρον τὴν στρατιὴν ἀπέβησε , οἱ δὲ Πεισιστρατίδαι προπυνθανόμενοι ταῦτα ἐπεκαλέοντο ἐκ Θεσσαλίης ἐπικουρίην ·
Anchimolius put in at Phalerum and disembarked his army there.


5.63.3
5764
ἐπεποίητο γάρ σφι συμμαχίη πρὸς αὐτούς .
The sons of Pisistratus, however, had received word of the plan already, and sent to ask help from the Thessalians with whom they had an alliance.


5.63.3
5765
Θεσσαλοὶ δέ σφι δεομένοισι ἀπέπεμψαν κοινῇ γνώμῃ χρεώμενοι χιλίην τε ἵππον καὶ τὸν βασιλέα τὸν σφέτερον Κινέην ἄνδρα Κονιαῖον ·
The Thessalians, at their entreaty, joined together and sent their own king, Cineas of Conium, with a thousand horsemen.


5.63.3
5766
τοὺς ἐπείτε ἔσχον συμμάχους οἱ Πεισιστρατίδαι , ἐμηχανῶντο τοιάδε ·
When the Pisistratidae got these allies, they devised the following plan.


5.63.4
5767
κείραντες τῶν Φαληρέων τὸ πεδίον καὶ ἱππάσιμον ποιήσαντες τοῦτον τὸν χῶρον ἐπῆκαν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ τὴν ἵππον ·
First they laid waste the plain of Phalerum so that all that land could be ridden over and then launched their cavalry against the enemy's army.


5.63.4
5768
ἐμπεσοῦσα δὲ διέφθειρε ἄλλους τε πολλοὺς τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ δὴ καὶ τὸν Ἀγχιμόλιον ·
Then the horsemen charged and slew Anchimolius and many more of the Lacedaemonians.


5.63.4
5769
τοὺς δὲ περιγενομένους αὐτῶν ἐς τὰς νέας κατεῖρξαν .
They drove those that survived to their ships.


5.63.4
5770
ὁ μὲν δὴ πρῶτος στόλος ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος οὕτω ἀπήλλαξε , καὶ Ἀγχιμολίου εἰσὶ ταφαὶ τῆς Ἀττικῆς Ἀλωπεκῆσι , ἀγχοῦ τοῦ Ἡρακλείου τοῦ ἐν Κυνοσάργεϊ .
Accordingly, the first Lacedaemonian army drew off, and Anchimolius' tomb is at Alopecae in  Attica, near to the Heracleum in Cynosarges.


5.64.1
5771
μετὰ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι μέζω στόλον στείλαντες ἀπέπεμψαν ἐπὶ τὰς Ἀθήνας , στρατηγὸν τῆς στρατιῆς ἀποδέξαντες βασιλέα Κλεομένεα τὸν Ἀναξανδρίδεω , οὐκέτι κατὰ θάλασσαν στείλαντες ἀλλὰ κατ’ ἤπειρον ·
After this the Lacedaemonians sent out a greater army to attack  Athens, appointing as its general their king Cleomenes son of Anaxandrides. This army they sent not by sea but by land.


5.64.2
5772
τοῖσι ἐσβαλοῦσι ἐς τὴν Ἀττικὴν χώρην ἡ τῶν Θεσσαλῶν ἵππος πρώτη προσέμιξε καὶ οὐ μετὰ πολλὸν ἐτράπετο , καὶ σφεων ἔπεσον ὑπὲρ τεσσεράκοντα ἄνδρας ·
When they broke into  Attica, the Thessalian horsemen were the first to meet them. They were routed after only a short time, and more than forty men were slain.


5.64.2
5773
οἱ δὲ περιγενόμενοι ἀπαλλάσσοντο ὡς εἶχον εὐθὺς ἐπὶ Θεσσαλίης .
Those who were left alive made off for  Thessaly by the nearest way they could.


5.64.2
5774
Κλεομένης δὲ ἀπικόμενος ἐς τὸ ἄστυ ἅμα Ἀθηναίων τοῖσι βουλομένοισι εἶναι ἐλευθέροισι ἐπολιόρκεε τοὺς τυράννους ἀπεργμένους ἐν τῷ Πελασγικῷ τείχεϊ .
Then Cleomenes, when he and the Athenians who desired freedom came into the city, drove the tyrants' family within the Pelasgic wall and besieged them there.


5.65.1
5775
καὶ οὐδέν τι πάντως ἂν ἐξεῖλον Πεισιστρατίδας οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ·
The Lacedaemonians would never have taken the Pisistratid stronghold.


5.65.1
5776
οὔτε γὰρ ἐπέδρην ἐπενόεον ποιήσασθαι , οἵ τε Πεισιστρατίδαι σίτοισι καὶ ποτοῖσι εὖ παρεσκευάδατο , πολιορκήσαντές τε ἂν ἡμέρας ὀλίγας ἀπαλλάσσοντο ἐς τὴν Σπάρτην .
First of all they had no intention to blockade it, and secondly the Pisistratidae were well furnished with food and drink.


5.65.1
5777
νῦν δὲ συντυχίη τοῖσι μὲν κακὴ ἐπεγένετο , τοῖσι δὲ ἡ αὐτὴ αὕτη σύμμαχος ·
The Lacedaemonians would only have besieged the place for a few days and then returned to  Sparta.


5.65.1
5778
ὑπεκτιθέμενοι γὰρ ἔξω τῆς χώρης οἱ παῖδες τῶν Πεισιστρατιδέων ἥλωσαν .
As it was, however, there was a turn of fortune which harmed the one party and helped the other, for the sons of the Pisistratid family were taken as they were being secretly carried out of the country.


5.65.2
5779
τοῦτο δὲ ὡς ἐγένετο , πάντα αὐτῶν τὰ πρήγματα συνετετάρακτο , παρέστησαν δὲ ἐπὶ μισθῷ τοῖσι τέκνοισι , ἐπ’ οἷσι ἐβούλοντο οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , ὥστε ἐν πέντε ἡμέρῃσι ἐκχωρῆσαι ἐκ τῆς Ἀττικῆς .
When this happened, all their plans were confounded, and they agreed to depart from  Attica within five days on the terms prescribed to them by the Athenians in return for the recovery of their children.


5.65.3
5780
μετὰ δὲ ἐξεχώρησαν ἐς Σίγειον τὸ ἐπὶ τῷ Σκαμάνδρῳ , ἄρξαντες μὲν Ἀθηναίων ἐπ’ ἔτεα ἕξ τε καὶ τριήκοντα , ἐόντες δὲ καὶ οὗτοι ἀνέκαθεν Πύλιοί τε καὶ Νηλεῖδαι , ἐκ τῶν αὐτῶν γεγονότες καὶ οἱ ἀμφὶ Κόδρον τε καὶ Μέλανθον , οἳ πρότερον ἐπήλυδες ἐόντες ἐγένοντο Ἀθηναίων βασιλέες .
Afterwards they departed to Sigeum on the Scamander. They had ruled the Athenians for thirty-six years and were in lineage of the house of  Pylos and Neleus, born of the same ancestors as the families of Codrus and Melanthus, who had formerly come from foreign parts to be kings of  Athens.


5.65.4
5781
ἐπὶ τούτου δὲ καὶ τ- αὐτὸ οὔνομα ἀπεμνημόνευσε Ἱπποκράτης τῷ παιδὶ θέσθαι τὸν Πεισίστρατον , ἐπὶ τοῦ Νέστορος Πεισιστράτου ποιεύμενος τὴν ἐπωνυμίην .
It was for this reason that Hippocrates gave his son the name Pisistratus as a remembrance, calling him after Pisistratus the son of Nestor.


5.65.5
5782
οὕτω μὲν Ἀθηναῖοι τυράννων ἀπαλλάχθησαν ·
This is the way, then, that the Athenians got rid of their tyrants.


5.65.5
5783
ὅσα δὲ ἐλευθερωθέντες ἔρξαν ἢ ἔπαθον ἀξιόχρεα ἀπηγήσιος , πρὶν ἢ Ἰωνίην τε ἀποστῆναι ἀπὸ Δαρείου καὶ Ἀρισταγόρεα τὸν Μιλήσιον ἀπικόμενον ἐς Ἀθήνας χρηίσαι σφέων βοηθέειν , ταῦτα πρῶτα φράσω .
As regards all the noteworthy things which they did or endured after they were freed and before  Ionia revolted from Darius and Aristagoras of  Miletus came to  Athens to ask help of its people, of these I will first give an account.


5.66.1
5784
Ἀθῆναι , ἐοῦσαι καὶ πρὶν μεγάλαι , τότε ἀπαλλαχθεῖσαι τυράννων ἐγίνοντο μέζονες ·
Athens, which had been great before, now grew even greater when her tyrants had been removed.


5.66.1
5785
ἐν δὲ αὐτῇσι δύο ἄνδρες ἐδυνάστευον , Κλεισθένης τε ἀνὴρ Ἀλκμεωνίδης , ὅς περ δὴ λόγον ἔχει τὴν Πυθίην ἀναπεῖσαι , καὶ Ἰσαγόρης Τισάνδρου οἰκίης μὲν ἐὼν δοκίμου , ἀτὰρ τὰ ἀνέκαθεν οὐκ ἔχω φράσαι ·
The two principal holders of power were Cleisthenes an Alcmaeonid, who was reputed to have bribed the Pythian priestess, and Isagoras son of Tisandrus, a man of a notable house but his lineage I cannot say.


5.66.1
5786
θύουσι δὲ οἱ συγγενέες αὐτοῦ Διὶ Καρίῳ .
His kinsfolk, at any rate, sacrifice to Zeus of  Caria.


5.66.2
5787
οὗτοι οἱ ἄνδρες ἐστασίασαν περὶ δυνάμιος , ἑσσούμενος δὲ ὁ Κλεισθένης τὸν δῆμον προσεταιρίζεται .
These men with their factions fell to contending for power, Cleisthenes was getting the worst of it in this dispute and took the commons into his party.


5.66.2
5788
μετὰ δὲ τετραφύλους ἐόντας Ἀθηναίους δεκαφύλους ἐποίησε , τῶν Ἴωνος παίδων Γελέοντος καὶ Αἰγικόρεος καὶ Ἀργάδεω καὶ Ὅπλητος ἀπαλλάξας τὰς ἐπωνυμίας , ἐξευρὼν δὲ ἑτέρων ἡρώων ἐπωνυμίας ἐπιχωρίων , πάρεξ Αἴαντος ·
Presently he divided the Athenians into ten tribes instead of four as formerly.


5.66.2
5789
τοῦτον δὲ ἅτε ἀστυγείτονα καὶ σύμμαχον , ξεῖνον ἐόντα προσέθετο .
He called none after the names of the sons of Ion — Geleon, Aegicores, Argades, and Hoples — but invented for them names taken from other heroes, all native to the country except Aias. Him he added despite the fact that he was a stranger because he was a neighbor and an ally.


5.67.1
5790
ταῦτα δέ , δοκέειν ἐμοί , ἐμιμέετο ὁ Κλεισθένης οὗτος τὸν ἑωυτοῦ μητροπάτορα Κλεισθένεα τὸν Σικυῶνος τύραννον .
In doing this, to my thinking, this Cleisthenes was imitating his own mother's father, Cleisthenes the tyrant of  Sicyon.


5.67.1
5791
Κλεισθένης γὰρ Ἀργείοισι πολεμήσας τοῦτο μὲν ῥαψῳδοὺς ἔπαυσε ἐν Σικυῶνι ἀγωνίζεσθαι τῶν Ὁμηρείων ἐπέων εἵνεκα , ὅτι Ἀργεῖοί τε καὶ Ἄργος τὰ πολλὰ πάντα ὑμνέαται ·
For Cleisthenes, after going to war with the Argives, made an end of minstrels' contests at  Sicyon by reason of the Homeric poems, in which it is the Argives and  Argos which are primarily the theme of the songs.


5.67.1
5792
τοῦτο δέ , ἡρώιον γὰρ ἦν καὶ ἔστι ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ ἀγορῇ τῶν Σικυωνίων Ἀδρήστου τοῦ Ταλαοῦ , τοῦτον ἐπεθύμησε ὁ Κλεισθένης ἐόντα Ἀργεῖον ἐκβαλεῖν ἐκ τῆς χώρης .
Furthermore, he conceived the desire to cast out from the land Adrastus son of Talaus, the hero whose shrine stood then as now in the very marketplace of  Sicyon because he was an Argive.


5.67.2
5793
ἐλθὼν δὲ ἐς Δελφοὺς ἐχρηστηριάζετο εἰ ἐκβάλοι τὸν Ἄδρηστον ·
He went then to  Delphi, and asked the oracle if he should cast Adrastus out.


5.67.2
5794
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη οἱ χρᾷ φᾶσα Ἄδρηστον μὲν εἶναι Σικυωνίων βασιλέα , κεῖνον δὲ λευστῆρα .
The priestess said in response: “Adrastus is king of  Sicyon, and you but a stone thrower.”


5.67.2
5795
ἐπεὶ δὲ ὁ θεὸς τοῦτό γε οὐ παρεδίδου , ἀπελθὼν ὀπίσω ἐφρόντιζε μηχανὴν τῇ αὐτὸς ὁ Ἄδρηστος ἀπαλλάξεται .
When the god would not permit him to do as he wished in this matter, he returned home and attempted to devise some plan which might rid him of Adrastus.


5.67.2
5796
ὡς δέ οἱ ἐξευρῆσθαι ἐδόκεε , πέμψας ἐς Θήβας τὰς Βοιωτίας ἔφη θέλειν ἐπαγαγέσθαι Μελάνιππον τὸν Ἀστακοῦ ·
When he thought he had found one, he sent to Boeotian Thebes saying that he would gladly bring Melanippus son of Astacus into his country.


5.67.2
5797
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ἔδοσαν .
The Thebans handed him over.


5.67.3
5798
ἐπαγαγόμενος δὲ ὁ Κλεισθένης τὸν Μελάνιππον τέμενός οἱ ἀπέδεξε ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ πρυτανηίῳ καί μιν ἵδρυσε ἐνθαῦτα ἐν τῷ ἰσχυροτάτῳ .
When Cleisthenes had brought him in, he consecrated a sanctuary for him in the government house itself, where he was established in the greatest possible security.


5.67.3
5799
ἐπηγάγετο δὲ τὸν Μελάνιππον ὁ Κλεισθένης ( καὶ γὰρ τοῦτο δεῖ ἀπηγήσασθαι ) ὡς ἔχθιστον ἐόντα Ἀδρήστῳ , ὃς τόν τε ἀδελφεόν οἱ Μηκιστέα ἀπεκτόνεε καὶ τὸν γαμβρὸν Τυδέα .
Now the reason why Cleisthenes brought in Melanippus, a thing which I must relate, was that Melanippus was Adrastus' deadliest enemy, for Adrastus had slain his brother Mecisteus and his son-in-law Tydeus.


5.67.4
5800
ἐπείτε δέ οἱ τὸ τέμενος ἀπέδεξε , θυσίας τε καὶ ὁρτὰς Ἀδρήστου ἀπελόμενος ἔδωκε τῷ Μελανίππῳ .
Having then designated the precinct for him, Cleisthenes took away all Adrastus' sacrifices and festivals and gave them to Melanippus.


5.67.4
5801
οἱ δὲ Σικυώνιοι ἐώθεσαν μεγαλωστὶ κάρτα τιμᾶν τὸν Ἄδρηστον ·
The Sicyonians had been accustomed to pay very great honor to Adrastus


5.67.4
5802
ἡ γὰρ χώρη ἦν αὕτη Πολύβου , ὁ δὲ Ἄδρηστος ἦν Πολύβου θυγατριδέος , ἄπαις δὲ Πόλυβος τελευτῶν διδοῖ Ἀδρήστῳ τὴν ἀρχήν .
because the country had once belonged to Polybus, his maternal grandfather, who died without an heir and bequeathed the kingship to him.


5.67.5
5803
τά τε δὴ ἄλλα οἱ Σικυώνιοι ἐτίμων τὸν Ἄδρηστον καὶ δὴ πρὸς τὰ πάθεα αὐτοῦ τραγικοῖσι χοροῖσι ἐγέραιρον , τὸν μὲν Διόνυσον οὐ τιμῶντες , τὸν δὲ Ἄδρηστον .
Besides other honors paid to Adrastus by the Sicyonians, they celebrated his lamentable fate with tragic choruses in honor not of Dionysus but of Adrastus.


5.67.5
5804
Κλεισθένης δὲ χοροὺς μὲν τῷ Διονύσῳ ἀπέδωκε , τὴν δὲ ἄλλην θυσίην Μελανίππῳ .
Cleisthenes, however, gave the choruses back to Dionysus and the rest of the worship to Melanippus.


5.68.1
5805
ταῦτα μὲν ἐς Ἄδρηστόν οἱ ἐπεποίητο , φυλὰς δὲ τὰς Δωριέων , ἵνα δὴ μὴ αἱ αὐταὶ ἔωσι τοῖσι Σικυωνίοισι καὶ τοῖσι Ἀργείοισι , μετέβαλε ἐς ἄλλα οὐνόματα .
This, then, is what he did regarding Adrastus, but as for the tribes of the Dorians, he changed their names so that these tribes should not be shared by Sicyonians and Argives.


5.68.1
5806
ἔνθα καὶ πλεῖστον κατεγέλασε τῶν Σικυωνίων ·
In this especially he made a laughing-stock of the Sicyonians,


5.68.1
5807
ἐπὶ γὰρ ὑός τε καὶ ὄνου τὰς ἐπωνυμίας μετατιθεὶς αὐτὰ τὰ τελευταῖα ἐπέθηκε , πλὴν τῆς ἑωυτοῦ φυλῆς ·
for he gave the tribes names derived from the words ‘donkey’ and ‘pig’ changing only the endings.


5.68.1
5808
ταύτῃ δὲ τὸ οὔνομα ἀπὸ τῆς ἑωυτοῦ ἀρχῆς ἔθετο .
The name of his own tribe, however, he did not change in this way, but rather gave it a name indicating his own rule, calling it Archelaoi, rulers of the people.


5.68.1
5809
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ Ἀρχέλαοι ἐκαλέοντο , ἕτεροι δὲ Ὑᾶται , ἄλλοι δὲ Ὀνεᾶται , ἕτεροι δὲ Χοιρεᾶται .
The rest were Swinites, Assites and Porkites.


5.68.2
5810
τούτοισι τοῖσι οὐνόμασι τῶν φυλέων ἐχρέωντο οἱ Σικυώνιοι καὶ ἐπὶ Κλεισθένεος ἄρχοντος καὶ ἐκείνου τεθνεῶτος ἔτι ἐπ’ ἔτεα ἑξήκοντα ·
These were the names of the tribes which the Sicyonians used under Cleisthenes' rule and for sixty years more after his death.


5.68.2
5811
μετέπειτα μέντοι λόγον σφίσι δόντες μετέβαλον ἐς τοὺς Ὑλλέας καὶ Παμφύλους καὶ Δυμανάτας , τετάρτους δὲ αὐτοῖσι προσέθεντο ἐπὶ τοῦ Ἀδρήστου παιδὸς Αἰγιαλέος τὴν ἐπωνυμίην ποιεύμενοι κεκλῆσθαι Αἰγιαλέας .
Afterwards, however, they took counsel together and both changed the names of three to Hylleis, Pamphyli, and Dymanatae, and added a fourth which they called Aegialeis after Aegialeus son of Adrastus.


5.69.1
5812
ταῦτα μέν νυν ὁ Σικυώνιος Κλεισθένης ἐπεποιήκεε ·
This is what the Sicyonian Cleisthenes had done,


5.69.1
5813
ὁ δὲ δὴ Ἀθηναῖος Κλεισθένης ἐὼν τοῦ Σικυωνίου τούτου θυγατριδέος καὶ τὸ οὔνομα ἐπὶ τούτου ἔχων , δοκέειν ἐμοὶ καὶ οὗτος ὑπεριδὼν Ἴωνας , ἵνα μὴ σφίσι αἱ αὐταὶ ἔωσι φυλαὶ καὶ Ἴωσι , τὸν ὁμώνυμον Κλεισθένεα ἐμιμήσατο .
and the Athenian Cleisthenes, following the lead of his grandfather and namesake, decided out of contempt, I imagine, for the Ionians, that his tribes should not be the same as theirs.


5.69.2
5814
ὡς γὰρ δὴ τὸν Ἀθηναίων δῆμον πρότερον ἀπωσμένον τότε πάντων πρὸς τὴν ἑωυτοῦ μοῖραν προσεθήκατο , τὰς φυλὰς μετωνόμασε καὶ ἐποίησε πλεῦνας ἐξ ἐλασσόνων ·
When he had drawn into his own party the Athenian people, which was then debarred from all rights, he gave the tribes new names and increased their number,


5.69.2
5815
δέκα τε δὴ φυλάρχους ἀντὶ τεσσέρων ἐποίησε , δέκαχαδὲ καὶ τοὺς δήμους κατένειμε ἐς τὰς φυλάς ·
He made ten tribe-wardens in place of four, and assigning ten districts to each tribe.


5.69.2
5816
ἦν τε τὸν δῆμον προσθέμενος πολλῷ κατύπερθε τῶν ἀντιστασιωτέων .
When he had won over the people, he was stronger by far than the rival faction.


5.70.1
5817
ἐν τῷ μέρεϊ δὲ ἑσσούμενος ὁ Ἰσαγόρης ἀντιτεχνᾶται τάδε ·
Isagoras, who was on the losing side, devised a counter-plot,


5.70.1
5818
ἐπικαλέεται Κλεομένεα τὸν Λακεδαιμόνιον γενόμενον ἑωυτῷ ξεῖνον ἀπὸ τῆς Πεισιστρατιδέων πολιορκίης ·
and invited the aid of Cleomenes, who had been his friend since the besieging of the Pisistratidae.


5.70.1
5819
τὸν δὲ Κλεομένεα εἶχε αἰτίη φοιτᾶν παρὰ τοῦ Ἰσαγόρεω τὴν γυναῖκα .
It was even said of Cleomenes that he regularly went to see Isagoras' wife.


5.70.2
5820
τὰ μὲν δὴ πρῶτα πέμπων ὁ Κλεομένης ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας κήρυκα ἐξέβαλλε Κλεισθένεα καὶ μετ’ αὐτοῦ ἄλλους πολλοὺς Ἀθηναίων , τοὺς ἐναγέας ἐπιλέγων ·
Then Cleomenes first sent a herald to  Athens demanding the banishment of Cleisthenes and many other Athenians with him, the Accursed, as he called them.


5.70.2
5821
ταῦτα δὲ πέμπων ἔλεγε ἐκ διδαχῆς τοῦ Ἰσαγόρεω .
This he said in his message by Isagoras' instruction,


5.70.2
5822
οἱ μὲν γὰρ Ἀλκμεωνίδαι καὶ οἱ συστασιῶται αὐτῶν εἶχον αἰτίην τοῦ φόνου τούτου , αὐτὸς δὲ οὐ μετεῖχε οὐδ’ οἱ φίλοι αὐτοῦ .
for the Alcmeonidae and their faction were held to be guilty of that bloody deed while Isagoras and his friends had no part in it.


5.71.1
5823
οἱ δ’ ἐναγέες Ἀθηναίων ὧδε ὠνομάσθησαν .
How the Accursed at  Athens had received their name, I will now relate.


5.71.1
5824
ἦν Κύλων τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἀνὴρ Ὀλυμπιονίκης ·
There was an Athenian named Cylon, who had been a winner at  Olympia.


5.71.1
5825
οὗτος ἐπὶ τυραννίδι ἐκόμησε , προσποιησάμενος δὲ ἑταιρηίην τῶν ἡλικιωτέων καταλαβεῖν τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἐπειρήθη , οὐ δυνάμενος δὲ ἐπικρατῆσαι ἱκέτης ἵζετο πρὸς τὸ ἄγαλμα .
This man put on the air of one who aimed at tyranny, and gathering a company of men of like age, he attempted to seize the citadel. When he could not win it, he took sanctuary by the goddess' statue.


5.71.2
5826
τούτους ἀνιστᾶσι μὲν οἱ πρυτάνιες τῶν ναυκράρων , οἵ περ ἔνεμον τότε τὰς Ἀθήνας , ὑπεγγύους πλὴν θανάτου ·
He and his men were then removed from their position by the presidents of the naval boards, the rulers of  Athens at that time.


5.71.2
5827
φονεῦσαι δὲ αὐτοὺς αἰτίη ἔχει Ἀλκμεωνίδας .
Although they were subject to any penalty save death, they were slain, and their death was attributed to the Alcmaeonidae.


5.71.2
5828
ταῦτα πρὸ τῆς Πεισιστράτου ἡλικίης ἐγένετο .
All this took place before the time of Pisistratus.


5.72.1
5829
Κλεομένης δὲ ὡς πέμπων ἐξέβαλλε Κλεισθένεα καὶ τοὺς ἐναγέας , Κλεισθένης μὲν αὐτὸς ὑπεξέσχε , μετὰ δὲ οὐδὲν ἧσσον παρῆν ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας ὁ Κλεομένης οὐ σὺν μεγάλῃ χειρί , ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἀγηλατέει ἑπτακόσια ἐπίστια Ἀθηναίων , τά οἱ ὑπέθετο ὁ Ἰσαγόρης .
When Cleomenes had sent for and demanded the banishment of Cleisthenes and the Accursed, Cleisthenes himself secretly departed. Afterwards, however, Cleomenes appeared in  Athens with no great force. Upon his arrival, he, in order to take away the curse, banished seven hundred Athenian families named for him by Isagoras.


5.72.1
5830
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας δεύτερα τὴν βουλὴν καταλύειν ἐπειρᾶτο , τριηκοσίοισι δὲ τοῖσι Ἰσαγόρεω στασιώτῃσι τὰς ἀρχὰς ἐνεχείριζε .
Having so done he next attempted to dissolve the Council, entrusting the offices of government to Isagoras' faction.


5.72.2
5831
ἀντισταθείσης δὲ τῆς βουλῆς καὶ οὐ βουλομένης πείθεσθαι , ὅ τε Κλεομένης καὶ ὁ Ἰσαγόρης καὶ οἱ στασιῶται αὐτοῦ καταλαμβάνουσι τὴν ἀκρόπολιν .
The Council, however, resisted him, whereupon Cleomenes and Isagoras and his partisans seized the acropolis.


5.72.2
5832
Ἀθηναίων δὲ οἱ λοιποὶ τὰ αὐτὰ φρονήσαντες ἐπολιόρκεον αὐτοὺς ἡμέρας δύο ·
The rest of the Athenians united and besieged them for two days.


5.72.2
5833
τῇ δὲ τρίτῃ ὑπόσπονδοι ἐξέρχονται ἐκ τῆς χώρης ὅσοι ἦσαν αὐτῶν Λακεδαιμόνιοι .
On the third day as many of them as were Lacedaemonians left the country under truce.


5.72.2
5834
ἐπετελέετο δὲ τῷ Κλεομένεϊ ἡ φήμη .
The prophetic voice that Cleomenes heard accordingly had its fulfillment,


5.72.3
5835
ὡς γὰρ ἀνέβη ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν μέλλων δὴ αὐτὴν κατασχήσειν , ἤιε ἐς τὸ ἄδυτον τῆς θεοῦ ὡς προσερέων ·
for when he went up to the acropolis with the intention of taking possession of it, he approached the shrine of the goddess to address himself to her.


5.72.3
5836
ἡ δὲ ἱρείη ἐξαναστᾶσα ἐκ τοῦ θρόνου , πρὶν ἢ τὰς θύρας αὐτὸν ἀμεῖψαι , εἶπε " ὦ ξεῖνε Λακεδαιμόνιε , πάλιν χώρεε μηδὲ ἔσιθι ἐς τὸ ἱρόν ·
The priestess rose up from her seat, and before he had passed through the door-way, she said, “Go back, Lacedaemonian stranger, and do not enter the holy place


5.72.3
5837
οὐ γὰρ θεμιτὸν Δωριεῦσι παριέναι ἐνθαῦτα " .
since it is not lawful that Dorians should pass in here.


5.72.3
5838
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ὦ γύναι , ἀλλ’ οὐ Δωριεύς εἰμι ἀλλ’ Ἀχαιός " .
“My lady,” he answered, “I am not a Dorian, but an Achaean.”


5.72.4
5839
ὃ μὲν δὴ τῇ κλεηδόνι οὐδὲν χρεώμενος ἐπεχείρησέ τε καὶ τότε πάλιν ἐξέπιπτε μετὰ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ·
So without taking heed of the omen, he tried to do as he pleased and was, as I have said, then again cast out together with his Lacedaemonians.


5.72.4
5840
τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους Ἀθηναῖοι κατέδησαν τὴν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ , ἐν δὲ αὐτοῖσι καὶ Τιμησίθεον τὸν Δελφόν , τοῦ ἔργα χειρῶν τε καὶ λήματος ἔχοιμ’ ἂν μέγιστα καταλέξαι .
As for the rest, the Athenians imprisoned them under sentence of death. Among the prisoners was Timesitheus the Delphian, whose achievements of strength and courage were quite formidable.


5.73.1
5841
οὗτοι μέν νυν δεδεμένοι ἐτελεύτησαν .
These men, then, were bound and put to death.


5.73.1
5842
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα Κλεισθένεα καὶ τὰ ἑπτακόσια ἐπίστια τὰ διωχθέντα ὑπὸ Κλεομένεος μεταπεμψάμενοι πέμπουσι ἀγγέλους ἐς Σάρδις , συμμαχίην βουλόμενοι ποιήσασθαι πρὸς Πέρσας ·
After that, the Athenians sent to bring back Cleisthenes and the seven hundred households banished by Cleomenes.


5.73.1
5843
ἠπιστέατο γὰρ σφίσι Λακεδαιμονίουστε καὶ Κλεομένεα ἐκπεπολεμῶσθαι .
Then, desiring to make an alliance with the Persians, they despatched envoys to Sardis, for they knew that they had provoked the Lacedaemonians and Cleomenes to war.


5.73.2
5844
ἀπικομένων δὲ τῶν ἀγγέλων ἐς τὰς Σάρδις καὶ λεγόντων τὰ ἐντεταλμένα , Ἀρταφρένης ὁ Ὑστάσπεος Σαρδίων ὕπαρχος ἐπειρώτα τίνες ἐόντες ἄνθρωποι καὶ κοῦ γῆς οἰκημένοι δεοίατο Περσέων σύμμαχοι γενέσθαι , πυθόμενος δὲ πρὸς τῶν ἀγγέλων ἀπεκορύφου σφι τάδε ·
When the envoys came to Sardis and spoke as they had been bidden, Artaphrenes son of Hystaspes, viceroy of Sardis, asked them, “What men are you and where do you live, who desire alliance with the Persians?”


5.73.2
5845
εἰ μὲν διδοῦσι βασιλέι Δαρείῳ Ἀθηναῖοι γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ , ὁ δὲ συμμαχίην σφι συνετίθετο , εἰ δὲ μὴ διδοῦσι , ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι αὐτοὺς ἐκέλευε .
When he had received the information he wanted from the envoys, he gave them an answer the substance of which was that if the Athenians gave king Darius earth and water, then he would make an alliance with them, but if not, his command was that they should depart.


5.73.3
5846
οἱ δὲ ἄγγελοι ἐπὶ σφέων αὐτῶν βαλόμενοι διδόναι ἔφασαν , βουλόμενοι τὴν συμμαχίην ποιήσασθαι .
The envoys consulted together, and in their desire to make the alliance, they consented to give what was asked.


5.73.3
5847
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ ἀπελθόντες ἐς τὴν ἑωυτῶν αἰτίας μεγάλας εἶχον .
They then returned to their own country and were there greatly blamed for what they had done.


5.74.1
5848
Κλεομένης δὲ ἐπιστάμενος περιυβρίσθαι ἔπεσι καὶ ἔργοισι ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίων συνέλεγε ἐκ πάσης Πελοποννήσου στρατόν , οὐ φράζων ἐς τὸ συλλέγει , τίσασθαι τε ἐθέλων τὸν δῆμον τὸν Ἀθηναίων καὶ Ἰσαγόρην βουλόμενος τύραννον καταστῆσαι ·
Cleomenes, however, fully aware that the Athenians had done him wrong in word and deed, mustered an army from the whole of the Peloponnesus.


5.74.1
5849
συνεξῆλθε γάρ οἱ οὗτος ἐκ τῆς ἀκροπόλιος .
He did not declare the purpose for which he mustered it, namely to avenge himself on the Athenian people and set up Isagoras, who had come with him out of the acropolis, as tyrant.


5.74.2
5850
Κλεομένης τε δὴ στόλῳ μεγάλῳ ἐσέβαλε ἐς Ἐλευσῖνα , καὶ οἱ Βοιωτοὶ ἀπὸ συνθήματος Οἰνόην αἱρέουσι καὶ Ὑσιὰς δήμους τοὺς ἐσχάτους τῆς Ἀττικῆς , Χαλκιδέες τε ἐπὶ τὰ ἕτερα ἐσίνοντο ἐπιόντες χώρους τῆς Ἀττικῆς .
Cleomenes broke in as far as Eleusis with a great host, and the Boeotians, by a concerted plan, took Oenoe and Hysiae, districts on the borders of Attica, while the Chalcidians attacked on another side and raided lands in Attica.


5.74.2
5851
Ἀθηναῖοι δέ , καίπερ ἀμφιβολίῃ ἐχόμενοι , Βοιωτῶν μὲν καὶ Χαλκιδέων ἐς ὕστερον ἔμελλον μνήμην ποιήσεσθαι , Πελοποννησίοισι δὲ ἐοῦσι ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι ἀντία ἔθεντο τὰ ὅπλα .
The Athenians, who were now caught in a ring of foes, decided to oppose the Spartans at Eleusis and to deal with the Boeotians and Chalcidians later.


5.75.1
5852
μελλόντων δὲ συνάψειν τὰ στρατόπεδα ἐς μάχην , Κορίνθιοι μὲν πρῶτοι σφίσι αὐτοῖσι δόντες λόγον ὡς οὐ ποιέοιεν δίκαια μετεβάλλοντό τε καὶ ἀπαλλάσσοντο , μετὰ δὲ Δημάρητος ὁ Ἀρίστωνος , ἐὼν καὶ οὗτος βασιλεὺς Σπαρτιητέων καὶ συνεξαγαγών τε τὴν στρατιὴν ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος καὶ οὐκ ἐὼν διάφορος ἐν τῷ πρόσθε χρόνῳ Κλεομένεϊ .
When the armies were about to join battle, the Corinthians, coming to the conclusion that they were acting wrongly, changed their minds and departed. Later Demaratus son of Ariston, the other king of  Sparta, did likewise, despite the fact that he had come with Cleomenes from  Lacedaemon in joint command of the army and had not till now been at variance with him.


5.75.2
5853
ἀπὸ δὲ ταύτης τῆς διχοστασίης ἐτέθη νόμος ἐν Σπάρτῃ μὴ ἐξεῖναι ἕπεσθαι ἀμφοτέρους τοὺς βασιλέας ἐξιούσης στρατιῆς ·
As a result of this dissension, a law was made at Sparta that when an army was despatched, both kings would not be permitted to go with it.


5.75.2
5854
τέως γὰρ ἀμφότεροι εἵποντο ·
Until that time they had both gone together,


5.75.2
5855
παραλυομένου δὲ τούτων τοῦ ἑτέρου καταλείπεσθαι καὶ τῶν Τυνδαριδέων τὸν ἕτερον ·
but now one of the kings was released from service and one of the sons of Tyndarus too could be left at home.


5.75.2
5856
πρὸ τοῦ γὰρ δὴ καὶ οὗτοι ἀμφότεροι ἐπίκλητοί σφι ἐόντες εἵποντο .
Before that time, both of these also were asked to give aid and went with the army.


5.75.3
5857
τότε δὴ ἐν τῇ Ἐλευσῖνι ὁρῶντες οἱ λοιποὶ τῶν συμμάχων τούς τε βασιλέας τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων οὐκ ὁμολογέοντας καὶ Κορινθίους ἐκλιπόντας τὴν τάξιν , οἴχοντο καὶ αὐτοὶ ἀπαλλασσόμενοι ,
So now at  Eleusis, when the rest of the allies saw that the Lacedaemonian kings were not of one mind and that the Corinthians had left their host, they too went off.


5.76.1
5858
τέταρτον δὴ τοῦτο ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀττικὴν ἀπικόμενοι Δωριέες , δίς τε ἐπὶ πολέμῳ ἐσβαλόντες καὶ δὶς ἐπ’ ἀγαθῷ τοῦ πλήθεος τοῦ Ἀθηναίων , πρῶτον μὲν ὅτε καὶ Μέγαρα κατοίκισαν ·
This was the fourth time that Dorians had come into Attica.


5.76.1
5859
οὗτος ὁ στόλος ἐπὶ Κόδρου βασιλεύοντος Ἀθηναίων ὀρθῶς ἂν καλέοιτο ·
They had come twice as invaders in war and twice as helpers of the Athenian people.


5.76.1
5860
δεύτερον δὲ καὶ τρίτον ὅτε ἐπὶ Πεισιστρατιδέων ἐξέλασιν ὁρμηθέντες ἐκ Σπάρτης ἀπίκοντο , τέταρτον δὲ τότε ὅτε ἐς Ἐλευσῖνα Κλεομένης ἄγων Πελοποννησίους ἐσέβαλε .
The first time was when they planted a settlement at Megara (this expedition may rightly be said to have been in the reign of Codrus), the second and third when they set out from Sparta to drive out the sons of Pisistratus, and the fourth was now, when Cleomenes broke in as far as Eleusis with his following of Peloponnesians.


5.76.1
5861
οὕτω τέταρτον τότε Δωριέες ἐσέβαλον ἐς Ἀθήνας .
This was accordingly the fourth Dorian invasion of Athens.


5.77.1
5862
διαλυθέντος ὦν τοῦ στόλου τούτου ἀκλεῶς , ἐνθαῦτα Ἀθηναῖοι τίνυσθαι βουλόμενοι πρῶτα στρατηίην ποιεῦνται ἐπὶ Χαλκιδέας .
When this force then had been ingloriously scattered, the Athenians first marched against the Chalcidians to punish them.


5.77.1
5863
Βοιωτοὶ δὲ τοῖσι Χαλκιδεῦσι βοηθέουσι ἐπὶ τὸν Εὔριπον .
The Boeotians came to the Euripus to help the Chalcidians


5.77.1
5864
Ἀθηναίοισι δὲ ἰδοῦσι τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς ἔδοξε πρότερον τοῖσι Βοιωτοῖσι ἢ τοῖσι Χαλκιδεῦσι ἐπιχειρέειν .
and as soon as the Athenians saw these allies, they resolved to attack the Boeotians before the Chalcidians.


5.77.2
5865
συμβάλλουσί τε δὴ τοῖσι Βοιωτοῖσι οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ πολλῷ ἐκράτησαν , κάρτα δὲ πολλοὺς φονεύσαντες ἑπτακοσίους αὐτῶν ἐζώγρησαν .
When they met the Boeotians in battle, they won a great victory, slaying very many and taking seven hundred of them prisoner.


5.77.2
5866
τῆς δὲ αὐτῆς ταύτης ἡμέρης οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι διαβάντες ἐς τὴν Εὔβοιαν συμβάλλουσι καὶ τοῖσι Χαλκιδεῦσι , νικήσαντες δὲ καὶ τούτους τετρακισχιλίους κληρούχους ἐπὶ τῶν ἱπποβοτέων τῇ χώρῃ λείπουσι .
On that same day the Athenians crossed to Euboea where they met the Chalcidians too in battle, and after overcoming them as well, they left four thousand tenant farmers on the lands of the horse-breeders.


5.77.2
5867
οἱ δὲ ἱπποβόται ἐκαλέοντο οἱ παχέες τῶν Χαλκιδέων .
Horse-breeders was the name given to the men of substance among the Chalcidians.


5.77.3
5868
ὅσους δὲ καὶ τούτων ἐζώγρησαν , ἅμα τοῖσι Βοιωτῶν ἐζωγρημένοισι εἶχον ἐν φυλακῇ ἐς πέδας δήσαντες ·
They fettered as many of these as they took alive and kept them imprisoned with the captive Boeotians.


5.77.3
5869
χρόνῳ δὲ ἔλυσαν σφέας δίμνεως ἀποτιμησάμενοι .
In time, however, they set them free, each for an assessed ransom of two minae.


5.77.3
5870
τὰς δὲ πέδας αὐτῶν , ἐν τῇσι ἐδεδέατο , ἀνεκρέμασαν ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ·
The fetters in which the prisoners had been bound they hung up in the acropolis,


5.77.3
5871
αἵ περ ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἦσαν περιεοῦσαι , κρεμάμεναι ἐκ τειχέων περιπεφλευσμένων πυρὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ Μήδου , ἀντίον δὲ τοῦ μεγάρου τοῦ πρὸς ἑσπέρην τετραμμένου .
where they could still be seen in my time hanging from walls which the Persians' fire had charred, opposite the temple which faces west.


5.77.4
5872
καὶ τῶν λύτρων τὴν δεκάτην ἀνέθηκαν ποιησάμενοι τέθριππον χάλκεον ·
Moreover, they made a dedication of a tenth part of the ransom, and this money was used for the making of a four-horse chariot


5.77.4
5873
τὸ δὲ ἀριστερῆς χειρὸς ἕστηκε πρῶτον ἐσιόντι ἐς τὰ προπύλαια τὰ ἐν τῇ ἀκροπόλι ·
which stands on the left hand of the entrance into the outer porch of the acropolis


5.77.4
5874
ἐπιγέγραπται δέ οἱ τάδε .
and bears this inscription:


5.77.4
5875
ἔθνεα Βοιωτῶν καὶ Χαλκιδέων δαμάσαντες παῖδες Ἀθηναίων ἔργμασιν ἐν πολέμου , δεσμῷ ἐν ἀχλυόεντι σιδηρέῳ ἔσβεσαν ὕβριν ·
"Athens with Chalcis and Boeotia fought, Bound them in chains and brought their pride to naught. Prison was grief, and ransom cost them dear-


5.77.4
5876
τῶν ἵππους δεκάτην Παλλάδι τάσδ’ ἔθεσαν .
One tenth to Pallas raised this chariot here."


5.78.1
5877
Ἀθηναῖοι μέν νυν ηὔξηντο .
So the Athenians grew in power.


5.78.1
5878
δηλοῖ δὲ οὐ κατ’ ἓν μοῦνον ἀλλὰ πανταχῇ ἡ ἰσηγορίη ὡς ἔστι χρῆμα σπουδαῖον , εἰ καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι τυραννευόμενοι μὲν οὐδαμῶν τῶν σφέας περιοικεόντων ἦσαν τὰ πολέμια ἀμείνους , ἀπαλλαχθέντες δὲ τυράννων μακρῷ πρῶτοι ἐγένοντο .
They proved, not in one respect only but in all, that equality is a good thing.


5.78.1
5879
δηλοῖ ὦν ταῦτα ὅτι κατεχόμενοι μὲν ἐθελοκάκεον ὡς δεσπότῃ ἐργαζόμενοι , ἐλευθερωθέντων δὲ αὐτὸς ἕκαστος ἑωυτῷ προεθυμέετο κατεργάζεσθαι .
Evidence for this is the fact that while they were under tyrannical rulers, the Athenians were no better in war than any of their neighbors, yet once they got rid of their tyrants, they were by far the best of all. This, then, shows that while they were oppressed, they were, as men working for a master, cowardly, but when they were freed, each one was eager to achieve for himself.


5.79.1
5880
οὗτοι μέν νυν ταῦτα ἔπρησσον .
This, then, is the course of action which the Athenians took,


5.79.1
5881
Θῃβαῖοι δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα ἐς θεὸν ἔπεμπον , βουλόμενοι τίσασθαι Ἀθηναίους .
and the Thebans, desiring vengeance on Athens, afterwards appealed to Delphi for advice.


5.79.1
5882
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη ἀπὸ σφέων μὲν αὐτῶν οὐκ ἔφη αὐτοῖσι εἶναι τίσιν , ἐς πολύφημον δὲ ἐξενείκαντας ἐκέλευε τῶν ἄγχιστα δέεσθαι .
The Pythian priestess said that the Thebans themselves would not be able to obtain the vengeance they wanted and that they should lay the matter before the “many-voiced” and entreat their “nearest.”


5.79.2
5883
ἀπελθόντων ὦν τῶν θεοπρόπων , ἐξέφερον τὸ χρηστήριον ἁλίην ποιησάμενοι ·
Upon the return of the envoys, an assembly was called and the oracle put before it.


5.79.2
5884
ὡς ἐπυνθάνοντο δὲ λεγόντων αὐτῶν τῶν ἄγχιστα δέεσθαι , εἶπαν οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἀκούσαντες τούτων " οὐκ ὦν ἄγχιστα ἡμέων οἰκέουσι Ταναγραῖοί τε καὶ Κορωναῖοι καὶ Θεσπιέες ;
When the Thebans heard that they must entreat their “nearest,” they said, “If this is so, our nearest neighbors are the men of Tanagra and Coronea and Thespiae.


5.79.2
5885
καὶ οὗτοί γε ἅμα ἡμῖν αἰεὶ μαχόμενοι προθύμως συνδιαφέρουσι τὸν πόλεμον ·
These are always our comrades in battle and zealously wage our wars.


5.79.2
5886
τί δεῖ τούτων γε δέεσθαι ;
What need, then, is there to entreat them?


5.79.2
5887
ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον μὴ οὐ τοῦτο ᾖ τὸ χρηστήριον " .
Perhaps this is the meaning of the oracle.”


5.80.1
5888
τοιαῦτα ἐπιλεγομένων εἶπε δή κοτε μαθών τις " ἐγώ μοι δοκέω συνιέναι τὸ θέλει λέγειν ἡμῖν τὸ μαντήιον .
They reasoned in this way, till at last one understood, and said:


5.80.1
5889
Ἀσωποῦ λέγονται γενέσθαι θυγατέρες Θήβη τε καὶ Αἴγινα ·
“I think that I perceive what the oracle is trying to tell us.


5.80.1
5890
τουτέων ἀδελφεῶν ἐουσέων , δοκέω ἡμῖν Αἰγινητέων δέεσθαι τὸν θεὸν χρῇσαι τιμωρητήρων γενέσθαι " .
Thebe and Aegina, it is said, were daughters of Asopus and sisters. The god's answer is, I think, that we should ask the Aeginetans to be our avengers.”


5.80.2
5891
καὶ οὐ γάρ τις ταύτης ἀμείνων γνώμη ἐδόκεε φαίνεσθαι , αὐτίκα πέμψαντες ἐδέοντο Αἰγινητέων ἐπικαλεόμενοι κατὰ τὸ χρηστήριόν σφι βοηθέειν , ὡς ἐόντων ἀγχίστων ·
Seeing that there seemed to be no better opinion before them than this, they sent straightaway to entreat the Aeginetans and invite their aid, since this was the oracle's bidding, and the Aeginetans were their nearest.


5.80.2
5892
οἳ δέ σφι αἰτέουσι ἐπικουρίην τοὺς Αἰακίδας συμπέμπειν ἔφασαν .
These replied to their demand that they were sending the Sons of Aeacus in aid.


5.81.1
5893
πειρησαμένων δὲ τῶν Θηβαίων κατὰ τὴν συμμαχίην τῶν Αἰακιδέων καὶ τρηχέως περιεφθέντων ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀθηναίων , αὖτις οἱ Θηβαῖοι πέμψαντες τοὺς μὲν Αἰακίδας σφι ἀπεδίδοσαν , τῶν δὲ ἀνδρῶν ἐδέοντο .
The Thebans took the field on the strength of their alliance with that family but were soundly beaten by the Athenians. Thereupon they sent a second message to  Aegina, giving back the sons of Aeacus and asking for some men instead.


5.81.2
5894
Αἰγινῆται δὲ εὐδαιμονίῃ τε μεγάλῃ ἐπαερθέντες καὶ ἔχθρης παλαιῆς ἀναμνησθέντες ἐχούσης ἐς Ἀθηναίους , τότε Θηβαίων δεηθέντων πόλεμον ἀκήρυκτον Ἀθηναίοισι ἐπέφερον ·
The Aeginetans, who were enjoying great prosperity and remembered their old feud with  Athens, accordingly made war on the Athenians at the entreaty of the Thebans without sending a herald.


5.81.3
5895
ἐπικειμένων γὰρ αὐτῶν Βοιωτοῖσι , ἐπιπλώσαντες μακρῇσι νηυσὶ ἐς τὴν Ἀττικὴν κατὰ μὲν ἔσυραν Φάληρον κατὰ δὲ τῆς ἄλλης παραλίης πολλοὺς δήμους , ποιεῦντες δὲ ταῦτα μεγάλως Ἀθηναίους ἐσικνέοντο .
While the Athenians were busy with the Boeotians, they descended on  Attica in ships of war, and ravaged  Phaleron and many other seaboard townships. By so doing they dealt the Athenians a very shrewd blow.


5.82.1
5896
ἡ δὲ ἔχθρη ἡ προοφειλομένη ἐς Ἀθηναίους ἐκ τῶν Αἰγινητέων ἐγένετο ἐξ ἀρχῆς τοιῆσδε .
This was the beginning of the Aeginetans' long-standing debt of enmity against the Athenians.


5.82.1
5897
Ἐπιδαυρίοισι ἡ γῆ καρπὸν οὐδένα ἀνεδίδου .
The Epidaurians' land bore no produce.


5.82.1
5898
περὶ ταύτης ὦν τῆς συμφορῆς οἱ Ἐπιδαύριοι ἐχρέωντο ἐν Δελφοῖσι ·
Because of this event the Epidaurians inquired at Delphi concerning this calamity.


5.82.1
5899
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη σφέας ἐκέλευε Δαμίης τε καὶ Αὐξησίης ἀγάλματα ἱδρύσασθαι καί σφι ἱδρυσαμένοισι ἄμεινον συνοίσεσθαι .
The priestess bade them set up images of Damia and Auxesia, saying that if they so did their luck would be better.


5.82.2
5900
ἐπειρώτεον ὦν οἱ Ἐπιδαύριοι κότερα χαλκοῦ ποιέωνται τὰ ἀγάλματα ἢ λίθου ·
So the men of Epidaurus asked whether they should make the images out of bronze or stone.


5.82.2
5901
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη οὐδέτερα τούτων ἔα , ἀλλὰ ξύλου ἡμέρης ἐλαίης .
The priestess forbade either, but commanded that they be made of the wood of the cultivated olive.


5.82.2
5902
ἐδέοντο ὦν οἱ Ἐπιδαύριοι Ἀθηναίων ἐλαίην σφι δοῦναι ταμέσθαι , ἱρωτάτας δὴ κείνας νομίζοντες εἶναι .
So the men of Epidaurus asked the Athenians to permit them to cut down some olive trees, supposing the olives there to be the holiest.


5.82.2
5903
λέγεται δὲ καὶ ὡς ἐλαῖαι ἦσαν ἄλλοθι γῆς οὐδαμοῦ κατὰ χρόνον ἐκεῖνον ἢ ἐν Ἀθήνῃσι .
Indeed it is said that at that time there were no olives anywhere save at Athens.


5.82.3
5904
οἳ δὲ ἐπὶ τοῖσιδε δώσειν ἔφασαν ἐπ’ ᾧ ἀπάξουσι ἔτεος ἑκάστου τῇ Ἀθηναίῃ τε τῇ Πολιάδι ἱρὰ καὶ τῷ Ἐρεχθέι .
The Athenians consented to give the trees, if the Epidaurians would pay yearly sacred dues to Athena, the city's goddess, and to Erechtheus.


5.82.3
5905
καταινέσαντες δὲ ἐπὶ τούτοισι οἱ Ἐπιδαύριοι τῶν τε ἐδέοντο ἔτυχον καὶ ἀγάλματα ἐκ τῶν ἐλαιέων τουτέων ποιησάμενοι ἱδρύσαντο ·
The Epidaurians agreed to this condition, and their request was granted.


5.82.3
5906
καὶ ἥ τε γῆ σφι ἔφερε καρπὸν καὶ Ἀθηναίοισι ἐπετέλεον τὰ συνέθεντο .
When they set up images made of these olive trees, their land brought forth fruit, and they fulfilled their agreement with the Athenians.


5.83.1
5907
τοῦτον δ’ ἔτι τὸν χρόνον καὶ πρὸ τοῦ Αἰγινῆται Ἐπιδαυρίων ἤκουον τά τε ἄλλα καὶ δίκας διαβαίνοντες ἐς Ἐπίδαυρον ἐδίδοσάν τε καὶ ἐλάμβανον παρ’ ἀλλήλων οἱ Αἰγινῆται ·
Now at this time, as before it, the Aeginetans were in all matters still subject to the Epidaurians and even crossed to Epidaurus for the hearing of their own private lawsuits.


5.83.1
5908
τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦδε νέας τε πηξάμενοι καὶ ἀγνωμοσύνῃ χρησάμενοι ἀπέστησαν ἀπὸ τῶν Ἐπιδαυρίων .
From this time, however, they began to build ships, and stubbornly revolted from the Epidaurians.


5.83.2
5909
ἅτε δὲ ἐόντες διάφοροι ἐδηλέοντο αὐτούς , ὥστε θαλασσοκράτορες ἐόντες , καὶ δὴ καὶ τὰ ἀγάλματα ταῦτα τῆς τε Δαμίης καὶ τῆς Αὐξησίης ὑπαιρέονται αὐτῶν , καί σφεα ἐκόμισάν τε καὶ ἱδρύσαντο τῆς σφετέρης χώρης ἐς τὴν μεσόγαιαν , τῇ Οἴη μὲν ἐστὶ οὔνομα , στάδια δὲ μάλιστά κῃ ἀπὸ τῆς πόλιος ὡς εἴκοσι ἀπέχει .
In the course of this struggle, they did the Epidaurians much damage and stole their images of Damia and Auxesia. These they took away and set them up in the middle of their own country at a place called Oea, about twenty furlongs distant from their city.


5.83.3
5910
ἱδρυσάμενοι δὲ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χώρῳ θυσίῃσί τε σφέα καὶ χοροῖσι γυναικηίοισι κερτομίοισι ἱλάσκοντο , χορηγῶν ἀποδεικνυμένων ἑκατέρῃ τῶν δαιμόνων δέκα ἀνδρῶν ·
Having set them up in this place they sought their favor with sacrifices and female choruses in the satirical and abusive mode.


5.83.3
5911
κακῶς δὲ ἠγόρευον οἱ χοροὶ ἄνδρα μὲν οὐδένα , τὰς δὲ ἐπιχωρίας γυναῖκας .
Ten men were appointed providers of a chorus for each of the deities, and the choruses aimed their raillery not at any men but at the women of the country.


5.83.3
5912
ἦσαν δὲ καὶ τοῖσι Ἐπιδαυρίοισι αἱ αὐταὶ ἱροεργίαι ·
The Epidaurians too had the same rites,


5.83.3
5913
εἰσὶ δέ σφι καὶ ἄρρητοι ἱρουργίαι .
and they have certain secret rites as well.


5.84.1
5914
κλεφθέντων δὲ τῶνδε τῶν ἀγαλμάτων οἱ Ἐπιδαύριοι τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι τὰ συνέθεντο οὐκ ἐπετέλεον .
When these images were stolen, the Epidaurians ceased from fulfilling their agreement with the Athenians.


5.84.1
5915
πέμψαντες δὲ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐμήνιον τοῖσι Ἐπιδαυρίοισι ·
Then the Athenians sent an angry message to the Epidaurians


5.84.1
5916
οἳ δὲ ἀπέφαινον λόγῳ ὡς οὐκ ἀδικέοιεν ·
who pleaded in turn that they were doing no wrong.


5.84.1
5917
ὅσον μὲν γὰρ χρόνον εἶχον τὰ ἀγάλματα ἐν τῇ χώρῃ , ἐπιτελέειν τὰ συνέθεντο , ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐστερῆσθαι αὐτῶν , οὐ δίκαιον εἶναι ἀποφέρειν ἔτι , ἀλλὰ τοὺς ἔχοντας αὐτὰ Αἰγινήτας πρήσσεσθαι ἐκέλευον .
“For as long,” they said, “as we had the images in our country, we fulfilled our agreement. Now that we are deprived of them, it is not just that we should still be paying. Ask your dues of the men of Aegina, who have the images.”


5.84.2
5918
πρὸς ταῦτα οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐς Αἴγιναν πέμψαντες ἀπαίτεον τὰ ἀγάλματα ·
The Athenians therefore sent to Aegina and demanded that the images be restored,


5.84.2
5919
οἱ δὲ Αἰγινῆται ἔφασαν σφίσι τε καὶ Ἀθηναίοισι εἶναι οὐδὲν πρῆγμα .
but the Aeginetans answered that they had nothing to do with the Athenians.


5.85.1
5920
Ἀθηναῖοι μέν νυν λέγουσι μετὰ τὴν ἀπαίτησιν ἀποσταλῆναι τριήρεϊ μιῇ τῶν ἀστῶν τούτους οἳ ἀποπεμφθέντες ἀπὸ τοῦ κοινοῦ καὶ ἀπικόμενοι ἐς Αἴγιναν τὰ ἀγάλματα ταῦτα ὡς σφετέρων ξύλων ἐόντα ἐπειρῶντο ἐκ τῶν βάθρων ἐξανασπᾶν , ἵνα σφέα ἀνακομίσωνται .
The Athenians report that after making this demand, they despatched one trireme with certain of their citizens who, coming in the name of the whole people to  Aegina, attempted to tear the images, as being made of Attic wood, from their bases so that they might carry them away.


5.85.2
5921
οὐ δυναμένους δὲ τούτῳ τῷ τρόπῳ αὐτῶν κρατῆσαι , περιβαλόντας σχοινία ἕλκειν τὰ ἀγάλματα , καί σφι ἕλκουσι βροντήν τε καὶ ἅμα τῇ βροντῇ σεισμὸν ἐπιγενέσθαι ·
When they could not obtain possession of them in this manner, they tied cords around the images with which they could be dragged. While they were attempting to drag them off, they were overtaken both by a thunderstorm and an earthquake.


5.85.2
5922
τοὺς δὲ τριηρίτας τοὺς ἕλκοντας ὑπὸ τούτων ἀλλοφρονῆσαι , παθόντας δὲ τοῦτο κτείνειν ἀλλήλους ἅτε πολεμίους , ἐς ὃ ἐκ πάντων ἕνα λειφθέντα ἀνακομισθῆναι αὐτὸν ἐς Φάληρον .
This drove the trireme's crew to such utter madness that they began to slay each other as if they were enemies. At last only one of all was left, who returned by himself to Phalerum.


5.86.1
5923
Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν οὕτω γενέσθαι λέγουσι , Αἰγινῆται δὲ οὐ μιῇ νηὶ ἀπικέσθαι Ἀθηναίους ·
This is the Athenian version of the matter, but the Aeginetans say that the Athenians came not in one ship only,


5.86.1
5924
μίαν μὲν γὰρ καὶ ὀλίγῳ πλεῦνας μιῆς , καὶ εἰ σφίσι μὴ ἔτυχον ἐοῦσαι νέες , ἀπαμύνεσθαι ἂν εὐπετέως ·
for they could easily have kept off a single ship, or several, for that matter, even if they had no navy themselves.


5.86.1
5925
ἀλλὰ πολλῇσι νηυσὶ ἐπιπλέειν σφίσι ἐπὶ τὴν χώρην , αὐτοὶ δέ σφι εἶξαι καὶ οὐ ναυμαχῆσαι .
The truth was, they said, that the Athenians descended upon their coasts with many ships and that they yielded to them without making a fight of it at sea.


5.86.2
5926
οὐκ ἔχουσι δὲ τοῦτο διασημῆναι ἀτρεκέως , οὔτε εἰ ἥσσονες συγγινωσκόμενοι εἶναι τῇ ναυμαχίῃ κατὰ τοῦτο εἶξαν , οὔτε εἰ βουλόμενοι ποιῆσαι οἷόν τι καὶ ἐποίησαν .
They are not able to determine clearly whether it was because they admitted to being weaker at sea-fighting that they yielded, or because they were planning what they then actually did.


5.86.3
5927
Ἀθηναίους μέν νυν , ἐπείτε σφι οὐδεὶς ἐς μάχην κατίστατο , ἀποβάντας ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν τραπέσθαι πρὸς τὰ ἀγάλματα , οὐ δυναμένους δὲ ἀνασπάσαι ἐκ τῶν βάθρων αὐτὰ οὕτω δὴ περιβαλομένους σχοινία ἕλκειν , ἐς οὗ ἑλκόμενα τὰ ἀγάλματα ἀμφότερα τ- αὐτὸ ποιῆσαι , ἐμοὶ μὲν οὐ πιστὰ λέγοντες , ἄλλῳ δὲ τεῷ ·
When, as the Aeginetans say, no man came out to fight with them, the Athenians disembarked from their ships and turned their attention to the images.


5.86.3
5928
ἐς γούνατα γάρ σφι αὐτὰ πεσεῖν , καὶ τὸν ἀπὸ τούτου χρόνον διατελέειν οὕτω ἔχοντα .
Unable to drag them from the bases, they fastened cords on them and dragged them until they both — this I cannot believe, but another might — fell on their knees. Both have remained in this position ever since.


5.86.4
5929
Ἀθηναίους μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ποιέειν ·
This is what the Athenians did,


5.86.4
5930
σφέας δὲ Αἰγινῆται λέγουσι πυθομένους τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ὡς μέλλοιεν ἐπὶ σφέας στρατεύεσθαι , ἑτοίμους Ἀργείους ποιέεσθαι .
 but the Aeginetans say that they discovered that the Athenians were about to make war upon them and therefore assured themselves of help from the Argives.


5.86.4
5931
τούς τε δὴ Ἀθηναίους ἀποβεβάναι ἐς τὴν Αἰγιναίην , καὶ ἥκειν βοηθέοντας σφίσι τοὺς Ἀργείους καὶ λαθεῖν τε ἐξ Ἐπιδαύρου διαβάντας ἐς τὴν νῆσον καὶ οὐ προακηκοόσι τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι ἐπιπεσεῖν ὑποταμομένους τὸ ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν , ἅμα τε ἐν τούτῳ τὴν βροντήν τε γενέσθαι καὶ τὸν σεισμὸν αὐτοῖσι .
So when the Athenians disembarked on the land of Aegina, the Argives came to aid the Aeginetans, crossing over from Epidaurus to the island secretly. They then fell upon the Athenians unaware and cut them off from their ships. It was at this moment that the thunderstorm and earthquake came upon them.


5.87.1
5932
λέγεται μέν νυν ὑπ’ Ἀργείων τε καὶ Αἰγινητέων τάδε , ὁμολογέεται δὲ καὶ ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίων ἕνα μοῦνον τὸν ἀποσωθέντα αὐτῶν ἐς τὴν Ἀττικὴν γενέσθαι ·
This, then, is the story told by the Argives and Aeginetans, and the Athenians too acknowledge that only one man of their number returned safely to  Attica.


5.87.2
5933
πλὴν Ἀργεῖοι μὲν λέγουσι αὐτῶν τὸ Ἀττικὸν στρατόπεδον διαφθειράντων τὸν ἕνα τοῦτον περιγενέσθαι , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ τοῦ δαιμονίου ·
The Argives, however, say that he escaped after they had destroyed the rest of the Athenian force, while the Athenians claim that the whole thing was to be attributed to divine power.


5.87.2
5934
περιγενέσθαι μέντοι οὐδὲ τοῦτον τὸν ἕνα , ἀλλ’ ἀπολέσθαι τρόπῳ τοιῷδε .
This one man did not survive but perished in the following manner.


5.87.2
5935
κομισθεὶς ἄρα ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας ἀπήγγελλε τὸ πάθος ·
It would seem that he made his way to Athens and told of the mishap.


5.87.2
5936
πυθομένας δὲ τὰς γυναῖκας τῶν ἐπ’ Αἴγιναν στρατευσαμένων ἀνδρῶν , δεινόν τι ποιησαμένας κεῖνον μοῦνον ἐξ ἁπάντων σωθῆναι , πέριξ τὸν ἄνθρωπον τοῦτον λαβούσας καὶ κεντεύσας τῇσι περόνῃσι τῶν ἱματίων εἰρωτᾶν ἑκάστην αὐτέων ὅκου εἴη ὁ ἑωυτῆς ἀνήρ .
When the wives of the men who had gone to attack Aegina heard this, they were very angry that he alone should be safe. They gathered round him and stabbed him with the brooch-pins of their garments, each asking him where her husband was.


5.87.3
5937
καὶ τοῦτον μὲν οὕτω διαφθαρῆναι , Ἀθηναίοισι δὲ ἔτι τοῦ πάθεος δεινότερόν τι δόξαι εἶναι τὸ τῶν γυναικῶν ἔργον .
This is how this man met his end, and the Athenians found the action of their women to be more dreadful than their own misfortune.


5.87.3
5938
ἄλλῳ μὲν δὴ οὐκ ἔχειν ὅτεῳ ζημιώσωσι τὰς γυναῖκας , τὴν δὲ ἐσθῆτα μετέβαλον αὐτέων ἐς τὴν Ἰάδα ·
They could find, it is said, no other way to punish the women than changing their dress to the Ionian fashion.


5.87.3
5939
ἐφόρεον γὰρ δὴ πρὸ τοῦ αἱ τῶν Ἀθηναίων γυναῖκες ἐσθῆτα Δωρίδα , τῇ Κορινθίῃ παραπλησιωτάτην ·
Until then the Athenian women had worn Dorian dress, which is very like the Corinthian.


5.87.3
5940
μετέβαλον ὦν ἐς τὸν λίνεον κιθῶνα , ἵνα δὴ περόνῃσι μὴ χρέωνται .
It was changed, therefore, to the linen tunic, so that they might have no brooch-pins to use.


5.88.1
5941
ἔστι δὲ ἀληθέι λόγῳ χρεωμένοισι οὐκ Ἰὰς αὕτη ἡ ἐσθὴς τὸ παλαιὸν ἀλλὰ Κάειρα , ἐπεὶ ἥ γε Ἑλληνικὴ ἐσθὴς πᾶσα ἡ ἀρχαίη τῶν γυναικῶν ἡ αὐτὴ ἦν τὴν νῦν Δωρίδα καλέομεν .
The truth of the matter, however, is that this form of dress is not in its origin Ionian, but Carian, for in ancient times all women in  Greece wore the costume now known as Dorian.


5.88.2
5942
τοῖσι δὲ Ἀργείοισι καὶ τοῖσι Αἰγινήτῃσι καὶ πρὸς ταῦτα ἔτι τόδε ποιῆσαι νόμον εἶναι παρὰ σφίσι ἑκατέροισι τὰς περόνας ἡμιολίας ποιέεσθαι τοῦ τότε κατεστεῶτος μέτρου , καὶ ἐς τὸ ἱρὸν τῶν θεῶν τουτέων περόνας μάλιστα ἀνατιθέναι τὰς γυναῖκας , Ἀττικὸν δὲ μήτε τι ἄλλο προσφέρειν πρὸς τὸ ἱρὸν μήτε κέραμον , ἀλλ’ ἐκ χυτρίδων ἐπιχωριέων νόμον τὸ λοιπὸν αὐτόθι εἶναι πίνειν .
As for the Argives and Aeginetans, this was the reason of their passing a law in both their countries that brooch-pins should be made half as long as they used to be and that brooches should be the principal things offered by women in the shrines of these two goddesses. Furthermore, nothing else Attic should be brought to the temple, not even pottery, and from that time on only drinking vessels made in the country should be used.


5.89.1
5943
Ἀργείων μέν νυν καὶ Αἰγινητέων αἱ γυναῖκες ἐκ τόσου κατ’ ἔριν τὴν Ἀθηναίων περόνας ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἐφόρεον μέζονας ἢ πρὸ τοῦ , τῆς δὲ ἔχθρης τῆς πρὸς Αἰγινήτας ἐξ Ἀθηναίων γενομένης ἀρχὴ κατὰ τὰ εἴρηται ἐγένετο .
Ever since that day even to my time the women of Argos and Aegina wore brooch-pins longer than before, by reason of the feud with the Athenians.


5.89.1
5944
τότε δὲ Θηβαίων ἐπικαλεομένων , προθύμως τῶν περὶ τὰ ἀγάλματα γενομένων ἀναμιμνησκόμενοι οἱ Αἰγινῆται ἐβοήθεον τοῖσι Βοιωτοῖσι .
The enmity of the Athenians against the Aeginetans began as I have told, and now at the Thebans' call the Aeginetans came readily to the aid of the Boeotians, remembering the matter of the images.


5.89.2
5945
Αἰγινῆταί τε δὴ ἐδηίουν τῆς Ἀττικῆς τὰ παραθαλάσσια , καὶ Ἀθηναίοισι ὁρμημένοισι ἐπ’ Αἰγινήτας στρατεύεσθαι ἦλθε μαντήιον ἐκ Δελφῶν , ἐπισχόντας ἀπὸ τοῦ Αἰγινητέων ἀδικίου τριήκοντα ἔτεα , τῷ ἑνὶ καὶ τριηκοστῷ Αἰακῷ τέμενος ἀποδέξαντας ἄρχεσθαι τοῦ πρὸς Αἰγινήτας πολέμου , καί σφι χωρήσειν τὰ βούλονται ·
While the Aeginetans were laying waste to the seaboard of Attica, the Athenians were setting out to march against them, but an oracle from Delphi came to them bidding them to restrain themselves for thirty years after the wrongdoing of the Aeginetans, and in the thirty-first to mark out a precinct for Aeacus and begin the war with Aegina.


5.89.2
5946
ἢν δὲ αὐτίκα ἐπιστρατεύωνται , πολλὰ μὲν σφέας ἐν τῷ μεταξὺ τοῦ χρόνου πείσεσθαι πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ποιήσειν , τέλος μέντοι καταστρέψεσθαι .
In this way their purpose would prosper. If, however, they sent an army against their enemies straightaway, they would indeed subdue them in the end but would in the meantime both suffer and do many things.


5.89.3
5947
ταῦτα ὡς ἀπενειχθέντα ἤκουσαν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , τῷ μὲν Αἰακῷ τέμενος ἀπέδεξαν τοῦτο τὸ νῦν ἐπὶ τῆς ἀγορῆς ἵδρυται , τριήκοντα δὲ ἔτεα οὐκ ἀνέσχοντο ἀκούσαντες ὅκως χρεὸν εἴη ἐπισχεῖν πεπονθότας ὑπ’ Αἰγινητέων ἀνάρσια .
When the Athenians heard this reported to them, they marked out for Aeacus that precinct which is now set in their marketplace, but they could not stomach the order that they must hold their hand for thirty years, seeing that the Aeginetans had dealt them a foul blow.


5.90.1
5948
ἐς τιμωρίην δὲ παρασκευαζομένοισι αὐτοῖσι ἐκ Λακεδαιμονίων πρῆγμα ἐγειρόμενον ἐμπόδιον ἐγένετο .
As they were making ready for vengeance, a matter which took its rise in Lacedaemon hindered them,


5.90.1
5949
πυθόμενοι γὰρ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τὰ ἐκ τῶν Ἀλκμεωνιδέων ἐς τὴν Πυθίην μεμηχανημένα καὶ τὰ ἐκ τῆς Πυθίης ἐπὶ σφέας τε καὶ τοὺς Πεισιστρατίδας συμφορὴν ἐποιεῦντο διπλῆν , ὅτι τε ἄνδρας ξείνους σφίσι ἐόντας ἐξεληλάκεσαν ἐκ τῆς ἐκείνων , καὶ ὅτι ταῦτα ποιήσασι χάρις οὐδεμία ἐφαίνετο πρὸς Ἀθηναίων .
for when the Lacedaemonians learned of the plot of the Alcmaeonids with the Pythian priestess and of her plot against themselves and the Pisistratidae, they were very angry for two reasons, namely that they had driven their own guests and friends from the country they dwelt in, and that the Athenians showed them no gratitude for their doing so.


5.90.2
5950
ἔτι τε πρὸς τούτοισι ἐνῆγον σφέας οἱ χρησμοὶ λέγοντες πολλά τε καὶ ἀνάρσια ἔσεσθαι αὐτοῖσι ἐξ Ἀθηναίων , τῶν πρότερον μὲν ἦσαν ἀδαέες , τότε δὲ Κλεομένεος κομίσαντος ἐς Σπάρτην ἐξέμαθον .
Furthermore, they were spurred on by the oracles which foretold that many deeds of enmity would be perpetrated against them by the Athenians.


5.90.2
5951
ἐκτήσατο δὲ ὁ Κλεομένης ἐκ τῆς Ἀθηναίων ἀκροπόλιος τοὺς χρησμούς , τοὺς ἔκτηντο μὲν πρότερον οἱ Πεισιστρατίδαι , ἐξελαυνόμενοι δὲ ἔλιπον ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ , καταλειφθέντας δὲ ὁ Κλεομένης ἀνέλαβε .
Previously they had had no knowledge of these oracles but now Cleomenes brought them to Sparta, and the Lacedaemonians learned their contents. It was from the Athenian acropolis that Cleomenes took the oracles, which had been in the possession of the Pisistratidae earlier. When they were exiled, they left them in the temple from where they were retrieved by Cleomenes.


5.91.1
5952
τότε δὲ ὡς ἀνέλαβον οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τοὺς χρησμοὺς καὶ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ὥρων αὐξομένους καὶ οὐδαμῶς ἑτοίμους ἐόντας πείθεσθαι σφίσι , νόῳ λαβόντες ὡς ἐλεύθερον μὲν ἐὸν τὸ γένος τὸ Ἀττικὸν ἰσόρροπον ἂν τῷ ἑωυτῶν γίνοιτο , κατεχόμενον δὲ ὑπὸ τυραννίδος ἀσθενὲς καὶ πειθαρχέεσθαι ἕτοιμον ·
Now the Lacedaemonians, when they regained the oracles and saw the Athenians increasing in power and in no way inclined to obey them, realized that if the Athenians remained free, they would be equal in power with themselves, but that if they were held down under tyranny, they would be weak and ready to serve a master.


5.91.1
5953
μαθόντες δὲ τούτων ἕκαστα μετεπέμποντο Ἱππίην τὸν Πεισιστράτου ἀπὸ Σιγείου τοῦ ἐν Ἑλλησπόντῳ ἐς ὃ καταφεύγουσι οἱ Πεισιστρατίδαι .
Perceiving all this, they sent to bring Pisistratus' son Hippias from Sigeum on the Hellespont, the Pisistratidae's place of refuge.


5.91.2
5954
ἐπείτε δέ σφι Ἱππίης καλεόμενος ἧκε , μεταπεμψάμενοι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων συμμάχων ἀγγέλους ἔλεγόν σφι Σπαρτιῆται τάδε .
When Hippias arrived, the Spartans sent for envoys from the rest of their allies and spoke to them as follows:


5.91.2
5955
" ἄνδρες σύμμαχοι , συγγινώσκομεν αὐτοῖσι ἡμῖν οὐ ποιήσασι ὀρθῶς ·
“Sirs, our allies, we do acknowledge that we have acted wrongly, for, led astray by lying divinations, we drove from their native land men who were our close friends and promised to make Athens subject to us.


5.91.2
5956
ἐπαερθέντες γὰρ κιβδήλοισι μαντηίοισι ἄνδρας ξείνους ἐόντας ἡμῖν τὰ μάλιστα καὶ ἀναδεκομένους ὑποχειρίας παρέξειν τὰς Ἀθήνας , τούτους ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος ἐξηλάσαμεν , καὶ ἔπειτα ποιήσαντες ταῦτα δήμῳ ἀχαρίστῳ παρεδώκαμεν τὴν πόλιν ·
Then we handed that city over to a thankless people which had no sooner lifted up its head in the freedom which we gave it, than it insolently cast out us and our king.


5.91.2
5957
ὃς ἐπείτε δι’ ἡμέας ἐλευθερωθεὶς ἀνέκυψε , ἡμέας μὲν καὶ τὸν βασιλέα ἡμέων περιυβρίσας ἐξέβαλε , δόξαν δὲ φύσας αὐξάνεται , ὥστε ἐκμεμαθήκασι μάλιστα μὲν οἱ περίοικοι αὐτῶν Βοιωτοὶ καὶ Χαλκιδέες , τάχα δέ τις καὶ ἄλλος ἐκμαθήσεται ἁμαρτών .
Now it has bred such a spirit of pride and is growing so much in power, that its neighbors in Boeotia and Chalcis have really noticed it, and others too will soon recognize their error.


5.91.3
5958
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐκεῖνα ποιήσαντες ἡμάρτομεν , νῦν πειρησόμεθα σφέας ἅμα ὑμῖν ἀπικόμενοι τίσασθαι ·
Since we erred in doing what we did, we will now attempt with your aid to avenge ourselves on them.


5.91.3
5959
αὐτοῦ γὰρ τούτου εἵνεκεν τόνδε τε Ἱππίην μετεπεμψάμεθα καὶ ὑμέας ἀπὸ τῶν πολίων , ἵνα κοινῷ τε λόγῳ καὶ κοινῷ στόλῳ ἐσαγαγόντες αὐτὸν ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας ἀποδῶμεν τὰ καὶ ἀπειλόμεθα " .
It is on this account and no other that we have sent for Hippias, whom you see, and have brought you from your cities, namely that uniting our counsels and our power, we may bring him to Athens and restore that which we took away.”


5.92.1
5960
οἳ μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεγον , τῶν δὲ συμμάχων τὸ πλῆθος οὐκ ἐνεδέκετο τοὺς λόγους .
These were the words of the Lacedaemonians, but their words were ill-received by the greater part of their allies.


5.92.1
5961
οἱ μέν νυν ἄλλοι ἡσυχίην ἦγον , Κορίνθιος δὲ Σωκλέης ἔλεξε τάδε .
The rest then keeping silence, Socles, a Corinthian, said,


5.92A.1
5962
" ἦ δὴ ὅ τε οὐρανὸς ἔνερθε ἔσται τῆς γῆς καὶ ἡ γῆ μετέωρος ὑπὲρ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ , καὶ ἄνθρωποι νομὸν ἐν θαλάσσῃ ἕξουσι καὶ ἰχθύες τὸν πρότερον ἄνθρωποι , ὅτε γε ὑμεῖς ὦ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἰσοκρατίας καταλύοντες τυραννίδας ἐς τὰς πόλις κατάγειν παρασκευάζεσθε , τοῦ οὔτε ἀδικώτερον ἐστὶ οὐδὲν κατ’ ἀνθρώπους οὔτε μιαιφονώτερον .
“In truth heaven will be beneath the earth and the earth aloft above the heaven, and men will dwell in the sea and fishes where men dwelt before, now that you, Lacedaemonians, are destroying the rule of equals and making ready to bring back tyranny into the cities, tyranny, a thing more unrighteous and bloodthirsty than anything else on this earth.


5.92A.2
5963
εἰ γὰρ δὴ τοῦτό γε δοκέει ὑμῖν εἶναι χρηστὸν ὥστε τυραννεύεσθαι τὰς πόλις , αὐτοὶ πρῶτοι τύραννον καταστησάμενοι παρὰ σφίσι αὐτοῖσι οὕτω καὶ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι δίζησθε κατιστάναι ·
If indeed it seems to you to be a good thing that the cities be ruled by tyrants, set up a tyrant among yourselves first and then seek to set up such for the rest.


5.92A.2
5964
νῦν δὲ αὐτοὶ τυράννων ἄπειροι ἐόντες , καὶ φυλάσσοντες τοῦτο δεινότατα ἐν τῇ Σπάρτῃ μὴ γενέσθαι , παραχρᾶσθε ἐς τοὺς συμμάχους .
As it is, however, you, who have never made trial of tyrants and take the greatest precautions that none will arise at Sparta, deal wrongfully with your allies.


5.92A.2
5965
εἰ δὲ αὐτοῦ ἔμπειροι ἔατε κατά περ ἡμεῖς , εἴχετε ἂν περὶ αὐτοῦ γνώμας ἀμείνονας συμβαλέσθαι ἤ περ νῦν .
If you had such experience of that thing as we have, you would be more prudent advisers concerning it than you are now.”


5.92B.1
5966
Κορινθίοισι γὰρ ἦν πόλιος κατάστασις τοιήδε ·
The Corinthian state was ordered in such manner as I will show.


5.92B.1
5967
ἦν ὀλιγαρχίη , καὶ οὗτοι Βακχιάδαι καλεόμενοι ἔνεμον τὴν πόλιν , ἐδίδοσαν δὲ καὶ ἤγοντο ἐξ ἀλλήλων .
There was an oligarchy, and this group of men, called the Bacchiadae, held sway in the city, marrying and giving in marriage among themselves.


5.92B.1
5968
Ἀμφίονι δὲ ἐόντι τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν γίνεται θυγάτηρ χωλή ·
Now Amphion, one of these men, had a crippled daughter,


5.92B.1
5969
οὔνομα δέ οἱ ἦν Λάβδα .
whose name was Labda.


5.92B.1
5970
ταύτην Βακχιαδέων γὰρ οὐδεὶς ἤθελε γῆμαι , ἴσχει Ἠετίων ὁ Ἐχεκράτεος , δήμου μὲν ἐὼν ἐκ Πέτρης , ἀτὰρ τὰ ἀνέκαθεν Λαπίθης τε καὶ Καινείδης .
Since none of the Bacchiadae would marry her, she was wedded to Eetion son of Echecrates, of the township of Petra, a Lapith by lineage and of the posterity of Caeneus.


5.92B.2
5971
ἐκ δέ οἱ ταύτης τῆς γυναικὸς οὐδ’ ἐξ ἄλλης παῖδες ἐγίνοντο .
When no sons were born to him by this wife or any other,


5.92B.2
5972
ἐστάλη ὦν ἐς Δελφοὺς περὶ γόνου .
he set out to Delphi to enquire concerning the matter of acquiring offspring.


5.92B.2
5973
ἐσιόντα δὲ αὐτὸν ἰθέως ἡ Πυθίη προσαγορεύει τοῖσιδε τοῖσι ἔπεσι .
As soon as he entered, the Pythian priestess spoke these verses to him:


5.92B.2
5974
Ἠετίων , οὔτις σε τίει πολύτιτον ἐόντα .
"Eetion,worthy of honor, no man honors you.


5.92B.2
5975
Λάβδα κύει , τέξει δ’ ὀλοοίτροχον ·
Labda is with child, and her child will be a millstone


5.92B.2
5976
ἐν δὲ πεσεῖται ἀνδράσι μουνάρχοισι , δικαιώσει δὲ Κόρινθον .
Which will fall upon the rulers and will bring justice to Corinth."


5.92B.3
5977
ταῦτα χρησθέντα τῷ Ἠετίωνι ἐξαγγέλλεταί κως τοῖσι Βακχιάδῃσι , τοῖσι τὸ μὲν πρότερον γενόμενον χρηστήριον ἐς Κόρινθον ἦν ἄσημον , φέρον τε ἐς τ- αὐτὸ καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἠετίωνος καὶ λέγον ὧδε .
This oracle which was given to Eetion was in some way made known to the Bacchiadae.


5.92B.3
5978
αἰετὸς ἐν πέτρῃσι κύει , τέξει δὲ λέοντα καρτερὸν ὠμηστήν ·
The earlier oracle sent to Corinth had not been understood by them, despite the fact that its meaning was the same as the meaning of the oracle of Eetion, and it read as follows:


5.92B.3
5979
πολλῶν δ’ ὑπὸ γούνατα λύσει .
"An eagle in the rocks has conceived, and will bring forth a lion,


5.92B.3
5980
ταῦτά νυν εὖ φράζεσθε , Κορίνθιοι , οἳ περὶ καλήν Πειρήνην οἰκεῖτε καὶ ὀφρυόεντα Κόρινθον .
Strong and fierce. The knees of many will it loose. This consider well, Corinthians, You who dwell by lovely Pirene and the overhanging heights of Corinth."


5.92C.1
5981
τοῦτο μὲν δὴ τοῖσι Βακχιάδῃσι πρότερον γενόμενον ἦν ἀτέκμαρτον ·
This earlier prophecy had been unintelligible to the Bacchiadae,


5.92C.1
5982
τότε δὲ τὸ Ἠετίωνι γενόμενον ὡς ἐπύθοντο , αὐτίκα καὶ τὸ πρότερον συνῆκαν ἐὸν συνῳδὸν τῷ Ἠετίωνος .
but as soon as they heard the one which was given to Eetion, they understood it at once, recognizing its similarity with the oracle of Eetion.


5.92C.1
5983
συνέντες δὲ καὶ τοῦτο εἶχον ἐν ἡσυχίῃ , ἐθέλοντες τὸν μέλλοντα Ἠετίωνι γίνεσθαι γόνον διαφθεῖραι .
Now understanding both oracles, they kept quiet but resolved to do away with the offspring of Eetion.


5.92C.1
5984
ὡς δ’ ἔτεκε ἡ γυνὴ τάχιστα , πέμπουσι σφέων αὐτῶν δέκα ἐς τὸν δῆμον ἐν τῷ κατοίκητο ὁ Ἠετίων ἀποκτενέοντας τὸ παιδίον .
Then, as soon as his wife had given birth, they sent ten men of their clan to the township where Eetion dwelt to kill the child.


5.92C.2
5985
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ οὗτοι ἐς τὴν Πέτρην καὶ παρελθόντες ἐς τὴν αὐλὴν τὴν Ἠετίωνος αἴτεον τὸ παιδίον ·
These men came to Petra and passing into Eetion's courtyard, asked for the child.


5.92C.2
5986
ἡ δὲ Λάβδα εἰδυῖά τε οὐδὲν τῶν εἵνεκα ἐκεῖνοι ἀπικοίατο , καὶ δοκέουσα σφέας φιλοφροσύνης τοῦ πατρὸς εἵνεκα αἰτέειν , φέρουσα ἐνεχείρισε αὐτῶν ἑνί .
Labda, knowing nothing of the purpose of their coming and thinking that they wished to see the baby out of affection for its father, brought it and placed it into the hands of one of them.


5.92C.2
5987
τοῖσι δὲ ἄρα ἐβεβούλευτο κατ’ ὁδὸν τὸν πρῶτον αὐτῶν λαβόντα τὸ παιδίον προσουδίσαι .
Now they had planned on their way that the first of them who received the child should dash it to the ground.


5.92C.3
5988
ἐπεὶ ὦν ἔδωκε φέρουσα ἡ Λάβδα , τὸν λαβόντα τῶν ἀνδρῶν θείῃ τύχῃ προσεγέλασε τὸ παιδίον , καὶ τὸν φρασθέντα τοῦτο οἶκτός τις ἴσχει ἀποκτεῖναι , κατοικτείρας δὲ παραδιδοῖ τῷ δευτέρῳ , ὁ δὲ τῷ τρίτῳ .
When, however, Labda brought and handed over the child, by divine chance it smiled at the man who took it.


5.92C.3
5989
οὕτω δὴ διεξῆλθε διὰ πάντων τῶν δέκα παραδιδόμενον , οὐδενὸς βουλομένου διεργάσασθαι .
This he saw, and compassion prevented him from killing it. Filled with pity, he handed it to a second, and this man again to a third.In fact it passed from hand to hand to each of the ten, for none would make an end of it.


5.92C.4
5990
ἀποδόντες ὦν ὀπίσω τῇ τεκούσῃ τὸ παιδίον καὶ ἐξελθόντες ἔξω , ἑστεῶτες ἐπὶ τῶν θυρέων ἀλλήλων ἅπτοντο καταιτιώμενοι , καὶ μάλιστα τοῦ πρώτου λαβόντος , ὅτι οὐκ ἐποίησε κατὰ τὰ δεδογμένα , ἐς ὃ δή σφι χρόνου ἐγγινομένου ἔδοξε αὖτις παρελθόντας πάντας τοῦ φόνου μετίσχειν .
They then gave the child back to its mother, and after going out, they stood before the door reproaching and upbraiding one another, but chiefly him who had first received it since he had not acted in accordance with their agreement. Finally they resolved to go in again and all have a hand in the killing.


5.92D.1
5991
ἔδει δὲ ἐκ τοῦ Ἠετίωνος γόνου Κορίνθῳ κακὰ ἀναβλαστεῖν .
Fate, however, had decreed that Eetion's offspring should be the source of ills for Corinth,


5.92D.1
5992
ἡ Λάβδα γὰρ πάντα ταῦτα ἤκουε ἑστεῶσα πρὸς αὐτῇσι τῇσι θύρῃσι ·
for Labda, standing close to this door, heard all this.


5.92D.1
5993
δείσασα δὲ μή σφι μεταδόξῃ καὶ τὸ δεύτερον λαβόντες τὸ παιδίον ἀποκτείνωσι , φέρουσα κατακρύπτει ἐς τὸ ἀφραστότατόν οἱ ἐφαίνετο εἶναι , ἐς κυψέλην , ἐπισταμένη ὡς εἰ ὑποστρέψαντες ἐς ζήτησιν ἀπικνεοίατο πάντα ἐρευνήσειν μέλλοιεν ·
Fearing that they would change their minds and that they would take and actually kill the child, she took it away and hid it where she thought it would be hardest to find, in a chest, for she knew that if they returned and set about searching they would seek in every place


5.92D.1
5994
τὰ δὴ καὶ ἐγίνετο .
— which in fact they did.


5.92D.2
5995
ἐλθοῦσι δὲ καὶ διζημένοισι αὐτοῖσι ὡς οὐκ ἐφαίνετο , ἐδόκεε ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι καὶ λέγειν πρὸς τοὺς ἀποπέμψαντας ὡς πάντα ποιήσειαν τὰ ἐκεῖνοι ἐνετείλαντο .
They came and searched, but when they did not find it, they resolved to go off and say to those who had sent them that they had carried out their orders.


5.92D.2
5996
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἀπελθόντες ἔλεγον ταῦτα .
They then went away and said this.


5.92E.1
5997
Ἠετίωνι δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα ὁ παῖς ηὐξάνετο , καί οἱ διαφυγόντι τοῦτον τὸν κίνδυνον ἀπὸ τῆς κυψέλης ἐπωνυμίην Κύψελος οὔνομα ἐτέθη .
Eetion's son, however, grew up, and because of his escape from that danger, he was called Cypselus, after the chest.


5.92E.1
5998
ἀνδρωθέντι δὲ καὶ μαντευομένῳ Κυψέλῳ ἐγένετο ἀμφιδέξιον χρηστήριον ἐν Δελφοῖσι , τῷ πίσυνος γενόμενος ἐπεχείρησέ τε καὶ ἔσχε Κόρινθον .
When he had reached manhood and was seeking a divination, an oracle of double meaning was given him at Delphi. Putting faith in this, he made an attempt on Corinth and won it.


5.92E.1
5999
ὁ δὲ χρησμὸς ὅδε ἦν .
The oracle was as follows:


5.92E.2
6000
ὄλβιος οὗτος ἀνὴρ ὃς ἐμὸν δόμον ἐσκαταβαίνει , Κύψελος Ἠετίδης , βασιλεὺς κλειτοῖο Κορίνθου αὐτὸς καὶ παῖδες , παίδων γε μὲν οὐκέτι παῖδες .
"That man is fortunate who steps into my house, Cypselus, son of Eetion, the king of noble Corinth, He himself and his children, but not the sons of his sons."


5.92E.2
6001
τὸ μὲν δὴ χρηστήριον τοῦτο ἦν , τυραννεύσας δὲ ὁ Κύψελος τοιοῦτος δή τις ἀνὴρ ἐγένετο ·
Such was the oracle. Cypselus, however, when he had gained the tyranny, conducted himself in this way:


5.92E.2
6002
πολλοὺς μὲν Κορινθίων ἐδίωξε , πολλοὺς δὲ χρημάτων ἀπεστέρησε , πολλῷ δέ τι πλείστους τῆς ψυχῆς .
many of the Corinthians he drove into exile, many he deprived of their wealth, and by far the most he had killed.


5.92F.1
6003
ἄρξαντος δὲ τούτου ἐπὶ τριήκοντα ἔτεα καὶ διαπλέξαντος τὸν βίον εὖ , διάδοχός οἱ τῆς τυραννίδος ὁ παῖς Περίανδρος γίνεται .
After a reign of thirty years, he died in the height of prosperity, and was succeeded by his son Periander.


5.92F.1
6004
ὁ τοίνυν Περίανδρος κατ’ ἀρχὰς μὲν ἦν ἠπιώτερος τοῦ πατρός , ἐπείτε δὲ ὡμίλησε δι’ ἀγγέλων Θρασυβούλῳ τῷ Μιλήτου τυράννῳ , πολλῷ ἔτι ἐγένετο Κυψέλου μιαιφονώτερος .
Now Periander was to begin with milder than his father, but after he had held converse by messenger with Thrasybulus the tyrant of Miletus, he became much more bloodthirsty than Cypselus.


5.92F.2
6005
πέμψας γὰρ παρὰ Θρασύβουλον κήρυκα ἐπυνθάνετο ὅντινα ἂν τρόπον ἀσφαλέστατον καταστησάμενος τῶν πρηγμάτων κάλλιστα τὴν πόλιν ἐπιτροπεύοι .
He had sent a herald to Thrasybulus and inquired in what way he would best and most safely govern his city.


5.92F.2
6006
Θρασύβουλος δὲ τὸν ἐλθόντα παρὰ τοῦ Περιάνδρου ἐξῆγε ἔξω τοῦ ἄστεος , ἐσβὰς δὲ ἐς ἄρουραν ἐσπαρμένην ἅμα τε διεξήιε τὸ λήιον ἐπειρωτῶν τε καὶ ἀναποδίζων τὸν κήρυκα κατὰ τὴν ἀπὸ Κορίνθου ἄπιξιν , καὶ ἐκόλουε αἰεὶ ὅκως τινὰ ἴδοι τῶν ἀσταχύων ὑπερέχοντα , κολούων δὲ ἔρριπτε , ἐς ὃ τοῦ ληίου τὸ κάλλιστόν τε καὶ βαθύτατον διέφθειρε τρόπῳ τοιούτω ·
Thrasybulus led the man who had come from Periander outside the town, and entered into a sown field. As he walked through the corn, continually asking why the messenger had come to him from Corinth, he kept cutting off all the tallest ears of wheat which he could see, and throwing them away, until he had destroyed the best and richest part of the crop.


5.92F.3
6007
διεξελθὼν δὲ τὸ χωρίον καὶ ὑποθέμενος ἔπος οὐδὲν ἀποπέμπει τὸν κήρυκα .
Then, after passing through the place and speaking no word of counsel, he sent the herald away.


5.92F.3
6008
νοστήσαντος δὲ τοῦ κήρυκος ἐς τὴν Κόρινθον ἦν πρόθυμος πυνθάνεσθαι τὴν ὑποθήκην ὁ Περίανδρος ·
When the herald returned to Corinth, Periander desired to hear what counsel he brought, but the man said that Thrasybulus had given him none.


5.92F.3
6009
ὁ δὲ οὐδέν οἱ ἔφη Θρασύβουλον ὑποθέσθαι , θωμάζειν τε αὐτοῦ παρ’ οἷόν μιν ἄνδρα ἀποπέμψειε , ὡς παραπλῆγά τε καὶ τῶν ἑωυτοῦ σινάμωρον , ἀπηγεόμενος τά περ πρὸς Θρασυβούλου ὀπώπεε .
The herald added that it was a strange man to whom he had been sent, a madman and a destroyer of his own possessions, telling Periander what he had seen Thrasybulus do.


5.92G.1
6010
Περίανδρος δὲ συνιεὶς τὸ ποιηθὲν καὶ νόῳ ἴσχων ὥς οἱ ὑπετίθετο Θρασύβουλος τοὺς ὑπειρόχους τῶν ἀστῶν φονεύειν , ἐνθαῦτα δὴ πᾶσαν κακότητα ἐξέφαινε ἐς τοὺς πολιήτας .
Periander, however, understood what had been done, and perceived that Thrasybulus had counselled him to slay those of his townsmen who were outstanding in influence or ability; with that he began to deal with his citizens in an evil manner.


5.92G.1
6011
ὅσα γὰρ Κύψελος ἀπέλιπε κτείνων τε καὶ διώκων , Περίανδρος σφέα ἀπετέλεσε , μιῇ δὲ ἡμέρῃ ἀπέδυσε πάσας τὰς Κορινθίων γυναῖκας διὰ τὴν ἑωυτοῦ γυναῖκα Μέλισσαν .
Whatever act of slaughter or banishment Cypselus had left undone, that Periander brought to accomplishment. In a single day he stripped all the women of Corinth naked, because of his own wife Melissa.


5.92G.2
6012
πέμψαντι γάρ οἱ ἐς Θεσπρωτοὺς ἐπ’ Ἀχέροντα ποταμὸν ἀγγέλους ἐπὶ τὸ νεκυομαντήιον παρακαταθήκης πέρι ξεινικῆς οὔτε σημανέειν ἔφη ἡ Μέλισσα ἐπιφανεῖσα οὔτε κατερέειν ἐν τῷ κέεται χώρῳ ἡ παρακαταθήκη ·
Periander had sent messengers to the Oracle of the Dead on the river Acheron in Thesprotia to enquire concerning a deposit that a friend had left, but Melissa, in an apparition, said that she would tell him nothing, nor reveal where the deposit lay,


5.92G.2
6013
ῥιγοῦν τε γὰρ καὶ εἶναι γυμνή ·
for she was cold and naked.


5.92G.2
6014
τῶν γάρ οἱ συγκατέθαψε ἱματίων ὄφελος εἶναι οὐδὲν οὐ κατακαυθέντων ·
The garments, she said, with which Periander had buried with her had never been burnt, and were of no use to her.


5.92G.2
6015
μαρτύριον δέ οἱ εἶναι ὡς ἀληθέα ταῦτα λέγει , ὅτι ἐπὶ ψυχρὸν τὸν ἰπνὸν Περίανδρος τοὺς ἄρτους ἐπέβαλε .
Then, as evidence for her husband that she spoke the truth, she added that Periander had put his loaves into a cold oven.


5.92G.3
6016
ταῦτα δὲ ὡς ὀπίσω ἀπηγγέλθη τῷ Περιάνδρῳ , πιστὸν γάρ οἱ ἦν τὸ συμβόλαιον ὃς νεκρῷ ἐούσῃ Μελίσσῃ ἐμίγη , ἰθέως δὴ μετὰ τὴν ἀγγελίην κήρυγμα ἐποιήσατο ἐς τὸ Ἥραιον ἐξιέναι πάσας τὰς Κορινθίων γυναῖκας .
When this message was brought back to Periander (for he had had intercourse with the dead body of Melissa and knew her token for true), immediately after the message he made a proclamation that all the Corinthian women should come out into the temple of Hera.


5.92G.3
6017
αἳ μὲν δὴ ὡς ἐς ὁρτὴν ἤισαν κόσμῳ τῷ καλλίστῳ χρεώμεναι , ὃ δ’ ὑποστήσας τοὺς δορυφόρους ἀπέδυσε σφέας πάσας ὁμοίως , τάς τε ἐλευθέρας καὶ τὰς ἀμφιπόλους , συμφορήσας δὲ ἐς ὄρυγμα Μελίσσῃ ἐπευχόμενος κατέκαιε .
They then came out as to a festival, wearing their most beautiful garments, and Periander set his guards there and stripped them all alike, ladies and serving-women, and heaped all the clothes in a pit, where, as he prayed to Melissa, he burnt them.


5.92G.4
6018
ταῦτα δέ οἱ ποιήσαντι καὶ τὸ δεύτερον πέμψαντι ἔφρασε τὸ εἴδωλον τὸ Μελίσσης ἐς τὸν κατέθηκε χῶρον τοῦ ξείνου τὴν παρακαταθήκην .
When he had done this and sent a second message, the ghost of Melissa told him where the deposit of the friend had been laid.


5.92G.4
6019
τοιοῦτο μὲν ὑμῖν ἐστὶ ἡ τυραννίς , ὦ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , καὶ τοιούτων ἔργων .
“This, then, Lacedaimonians, is the nature of tyranny, and such are its deeds.


5.92G.5
6020
ἡμέας δὲ τοὺς Κορινθίους τότε αὐτίκα θῶμα μέγα εἶχε ὅτε ὑμέας εἴδομεν μεταπεμπομένους Ἱππίην , νῦν τε δὴ καὶ μεζόνως θωμάζομεν λέγοντας ταῦτα , ἐπιμαρτυρόμεθά τε ἐπικαλεόμενοι ὑμῖν θεοὺς τοὺς Ἑλληνίους μὴ κατιστάναι τυραννίδας ἐς τὰς πόλις .
We Corinthians marvelled greatly when we saw that you were sending for Hippias, and now we marvel yet more at your words to us. We entreat you earnestly in the name of the gods of Hellas not to establish tyranny in the cities,


5.92G.5
6021
οὔκων παύσεσθε ἀλλὰ πειρήσεσθε παρὰ τὸ δίκαιον κατάγοντες Ἱππίην ·
but if you do not cease from so doing and unrighteously attempt to bring Hippias back,


5.92G.5
6022
ἴστε ὑμῖν Κορινθίους γε οὐ συναινέοντας " .
be assured that you are proceeding without the Corinthians' consent.”


5.93.1
6023
Σωκλέης μὲν ἀπὸ Κορίνθου πρεσβεύων ἔλεξε τάδε , Ἱππίης δὲ αὐτὸν ἀμείβετο τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἐπικαλέσας θεοὺς ἐκείνῳ , ἦ μὲν Κορινθίους μάλιστα πάντων ἐπιποθήσειν Πεισιστρατίδας , ὅταν σφι ἥκωσι ἡμέραι αἱ κύριαι ἀνιᾶσθαι ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίων .
These were the words of Socles, the envoy from  Corinth, and Hippias answered, calling the same gods as Socles had invoked to witness, that the Corinthians would be the first to wish the Pisistratidae back, when the time appointed should come for them to be vexed by the Athenians.


5.93.2
6024
Ἱππίης μὲν τούτοισι ἀμείψατο οἷα τοὺς χρησμοὺς ἀτρεκέστατα ἀνδρῶν ἐξεπιστάμενος ·
Hippias made this answer, inasmuch as he had more exact knowledge of the oracles than any man,


5.93.2
6025
οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ τῶν συμμάχων τέως μὲν εἶχον ἐν ἡσυχίῃ σφέας αὐτούς , ἐπείτε δὲ Σωκλέος ἤκουσαν εἴπαντος ἐλευθέρως , ἅπας τις αὐτῶν φωνὴν ῥήξας αἱρέετο τοῦ Κορινθίου τὴν γνώμην , Λακεδαιμονίοισί τε ἐπεμαρτυρέοντο μὴ ποιέειν μηδὲν νεώτερον περὶ πόλιν Ἑλλάδα .
but the rest of the allies, who had till now kept silence, spoke out when they heard the free speech of Socles and sided with the opinion of the Corinthians, entreating the Lacedaemonians not to harm a Greek city.


5.94.1
6026
οὕτω μὲν τοῦτο ἐπαύσθη .
His plan, then, came to nothing, and Hippias was forced to depart.


5.94.1
6027
Ἱππίῃ δὲ ἐνθεῦτεν ἀπελαυνομένῳ ἐδίδου μὲν Ἀμύντης ὁ Μακεδόνων βασιλεὺς Ἀνθεμοῦντα , ἐδίδοσαν δὲ Θεσσαλοὶ Ἰωλκόν .
Amyntas king of the Macedonians offered him Anthemus, and the Thessalians Iolcus,


5.94.1
6028
ὁ δὲ τούτων μὲν οὐδέτερα αἱρέετο , ἀνεχώρεε δὲ ὀπίσω ἐς Σίγειον , τὸ εἷλε Πεισίστρατος αἰχμῇ παρὰ Μυτιληναίων , κρατήσας δὲ αὐτοῦ κατέστησε τύραννον εἶναι παῖδα τὸν ἑωυτοῦ νόθον Ἡγησίστρατον , γεγονότα ἐξ Ἀργείης γυναικός , ὃς οὐκ ἀμαχητὶ εἶχε τὰ παρέλαβε παρὰ Πεισιστράτου .
but he would have neither. He withdrew to Sigeum, which Pisistratus had taken at the spear's point from the Mytilenaeans and where he then established as tyrant Hegesistratus, his own bastard son by an Argive woman. Hegesistratus, however, could not keep what Pisistratus had given him without fighting,


5.94.2
6029
ἐπολέμεον γὰρ ἔκ τε Ἀχιλληίου πόλιος ὁρμώμενοι καὶ Σιγείου ἐπὶ χρόνον συχνὸν Μυτιληναῖοί τε καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι , οἳ μὲν ἀπαιτέοντες τὴν χώρην , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ οὔτε συγγινωσκόμενοι ἀποδεικνύντες τε λόγῳ οὐδὲν μᾶλλον Αἰολεῦσι μετεὸν τῆς Ἰλιάδος χώρης ἢ οὐ καὶ σφίσι καὶ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι , ὅσοι Ἑλλήνων συνεπρήξαντο Μενέλεῳ τὰς Ἑλένης ἁρπαγάς .
for there was constant war over a long period of time between the Athenians at Sigeum and the Mytilenaeans at Achilleum. The Mytilenaeans were demanding the place back, and the Athenians, bringing proof to show that the Aeolians had no more part or lot in the land of  Ilium than they themselves and all the other Greeks who had aided Menelaus to avenge the rape of Helen, would not consent.


5.95.1
6030
πολεμεόντων δὲ σφέων παντοῖα καὶ ἄλλα ἐγένετο ἐν τῇσι μάχῃσι , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ Ἀλκαῖος ὁ ποιητὴς συμβολῆς γενομένης καὶ νικώντων Ἀθηναίων αὐτὸς μὲν φεύγων ἐκφεύγει , τὰ δέ οἱ ὅπλα ἴσχουσι Ἀθηναῖοι , καί σφεα ἀνεκρέμασαν πρὸς τὸ Ἀθήναιον τὸ ἐν Σιγείῳ .
Among the various incidents of this war, one in particular is worth mention; In the course of a battle in which the Athenians had the upper hand, Alcaeus the poet took to flight and escaped, but his armor was taken by the Athenians and hung up in the temple of Athena at Sigeum.


5.95.2
6031
ταῦτα δὲ Ἀλκαῖος ἐν μέλεϊ ποιήσας ἐπιτιθεῖ ἐς Μυτιλήνην , ἐξαγγελλόμενος τὸ ἑωυτοῦ πάθος Μελανίππῳ ἀνδρὶ ἑταίρῳ .
Alcaeus wrote a poem about this and sent it to Mytilene. In it he relates his own misfortune to his friend Melanippus.


5.95.2
6032
Μυτιληναίους δὲ καὶ Ἀθηναίους κατήλλαξε Περίανδρος ὁ Κυψέλου ·
As for the Mytilenaeans and Athenians, however, peace was made between them by Periander son of Cypselus,


5.95.2
6033
τούτῳ γὰρ διαιτητῇ ἐπετράποντο ·
to whose arbitration they committed the matter,


5.95.2
6034
κατήλλαξε δὲ ὧδε , νέμεσθαι ἑκατέρους τὴν ἔχουσι .
and the terms of peace were that each party should keep what it had.


5.96.1
6035
Σίγειον μέν νυν οὕτω ἐγένετο ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίοισι .
It was in this way, then, that Sigeum came to be under Athenian rule,


5.96.1
6036
Ἱππίης δὲ ἐπείτε ἀπίκετο ἐκ τῆς Λακεδαίμονος ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην , πᾶν χρῆμα ἐκίνεε , διαβάλλων τε τοὺς Ἀθηναίους πρὸς τὸν Ἀρταφρένεα καὶ ποιέων ἅπαντα ὅκως αἱ Ἀθῆναι γενοίατο ὑπ’ ἑωυτῷ τε καὶ Δαρείῳ .
but Hippias, having come from Lacedaemon into Asia, left no stone unturned, maligning the Athenians to Artaphrenes, and doing all he could to bring Athens into subjection to himself and Darius.


5.96.2
6037
Ἱππίης τε δὴ ταῦτα ἔπρησσε , καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι πυθόμενοι ταῦτα πέμπουσι ἐς Σάρδις ἀγγέλους , οὐκ ἐῶντες τοὺς Πέρσας πείθεσθαι Ἀθηναίων τοῖσι φυγάσι .
While Hippias was engaged in these activities, the Athenians heard of it and sent messengers to Sardis, warning the Persians not to believe banished Athenians.


5.96.2
6038
ὁ δὲ Ἀρταφρένης ἐκέλευε σφέας , εἰ βουλοίατο σόοι εἶναι , καταδέκεσθαι ὀπίσω Ἱππίην .
Artaphrenes, however, bade them receive Hippias back, if they wanted to be safe.


5.96.2
6039
οὔκων δὴ ἐνεδέκοντο τοὺς λόγους ἀποφερομένους οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ·
When his words were brought back to the Athenians, they would not consent to them,


5.96.2
6040
οὐκ ἐνδεκομένοισι δέ σφι ἐδέδοκτο ἐκ τοῦ φανεροῦ τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι πολεμίους εἶναι .
and since they would not consent, it was resolved that they should be openly at war with Persia.


5.97.1
6041
νομίζουσι δὲ ταῦτα καὶ διαβεβλημένοισι ἐς τοὺς Πέρσας , ἐν τούτῳ δὴ τῷ καιρῷ ὁ Μιλήσιος Ἀρισταγόρης , ὑπὸ Κλεομένεος τοῦ Λακεδαιμονίου ἐξελασθεὶς ἐκ τῆς Σπάρτης , ἀπίκετο ἐς Ἀθήνας ·
It was when the Athenians had made their decision and were already on bad terms with Persia, that Aristagoras the Milesian, driven from Sparta by Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian, came to Athens,


5.97.1
6042
αὕτη γὰρ ἡ πόλις τῶν λοιπέων ἐδυνάστευε μέγιστον .
since that city was more powerful than any of the rest.


5.97.1
6043
ἐπελθὼν δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν δῆμον ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης τ- αὐτὰ ἔλεγε τὰ καὶ ἐν τῇ Σπάρτῃ περὶ τῶν ἀγαθῶν τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ καὶ τοῦ πολέμου τοῦ Περσικοῦ , ὡς οὔτε ἀσπίδα οὔτε δόρυ νομίζουσι εὐπετέες τε χειρωθῆναι εἴησαν .
Coming before the people, Aristagoras spoke to the same effect as at Sparta, of the good things of Asia, and how the Persians carried neither shield nor spear in war and could easily be overcome.


5.97.2
6044
ταῦτά τε δὴ ἔλεγε καὶ πρὸς τοῖσι τάδε , ὡς οἱ Μιλήσιοι τῶν Ἀθηναίων εἰσὶ ἄποικοι , καὶ οἰκός σφεας εἴη ῥύεσθαι δυναμένους μέγα ·
This he said adding that the Milesians were settlers from Athens, whom it was only right to save seeing that they themselves were a very powerful people.


5.97.2
6045
καὶ οὐδὲν ὅ τι οὐκ ὑπίσχετο οἷα κάρτα δεόμενος , ἐς ὃ ἀνέπεισε σφέας .
There was nothing which he did not promise in the earnestness of his entreaty, till at last he prevailed upon them.


5.97.2
6046
πολλοὺς γὰρ οἶκε εἶναι εὐπετέστερον διαβάλλειν ἢ ἕνα , εἰ Κλεομένεα μὲν τὸν Λακεδαιμόνιον μοῦνον οὐκ οἷός τε ἐγένετο διαβάλλειν , τρεῖς δὲ μυριάδας Ἀθηναίων ἐποίησε τοῦτο .
It seems, then, that it is easier to deceive many than one, for he could not deceive Cleomenes of Lacedaemon, one single man, but thirty thousand Athenians he could.


5.97.3
6047
Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν δὴ ἀναπεισθέντες ἐψηφίσαντο εἴκοσι νέας ἀποστεῖλαι βοηθοὺς Ἴωσι , στρατηγὸν ἀποδέξαντες αὐτῶν εἶναι Μελάνθιον ἄνδρα τῶν ἀστῶν ἐόντα τὰ πάντα δόκιμον ·
The Athenians, now persuaded, voted to send twenty ships to aid the Ionians, appointing for their admiral Melanthius, a citizen of Athens who had an unblemished reputation.


5.97.3
6048
αὗται δὲ αἱ νέες ἀρχὴ κακῶν ἐγένοντο Ἕλλησί τε καὶ βαρβάροισι .
These ships were the beginning of troubles for both Greeks and foreigners.


5.98.1
6049
Ἀρισταγόρης δὲ προπλώσας καὶ ἀπικόμενος ἐς τὴν Μίλητον , ἐξευρὼν βούλευμα ἀπ’ οὗ Ἴωσι μὲν οὐδεμία ἔμελλε ὠφελίη ἔσεσθαι , οὐδ’ ὦν οὐδὲ τούτου εἵνεκα ἐποίεε ἀλλ’ ὅκως βασιλέα Δαρεῖον λυπήσειε , ἔπεμψε ἐς τὴν Φρυγίην ἄνδρα ἐπὶ τοὺς Παίονας τοὺς ἀπὸ Στρυμόνος ποταμοῦ αἰχμαλώτους γενομένους ὑπὸ Μεγαβάζου , οἰκέοντας δὲ τῆς Φρυγίης χῶρόν τε καὶ κώμην ἐπ’ ἑωυτῶν ·
Aristagoras sailed before the rest, and when he came to Miletus, he devised a plan from which no advantage was to accrue to the Ionians (nor indeed was that the purpose of his plan, but rather to vex king Darius).


5.98.1
6050
ὃς ἐπειδὴ ἀπίκετο ἐς τοὺς Παίονας , ἔλεγε τάδε .
He sent a man into Phrygia, to the Paeonians who had been led captive from the Strymon by Megabazus, and now dwelt in a Phrygian territory and village by themselves. When the man came to the Paeonians, he spoke as follows:


5.98.2
6051
" ἄνδρες Παίονες , ἔπεμψέ με Ἀρισταγόρης ὁ Μιλήτου τύραννος σωτηρίην ὑποθησόμενον ὑμῖν , ἤν περ βούλησθε πείθεσθαι .
“Men of Paeonia, I have been sent by Aristagoras, tyrant of Miletus, to show you the way to deliverance, if you are disposed to obey.


5.98.2
6052
νῦν γὰρ Ἰωνίη πᾶσα ἀπέστηκε ἀπὸ βασιλέος , καὶ ὑμῖν παρέχει σώζεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν ὑμετέρην αὐτῶν ·
All Ionia is now in revolt against the king, and it is possible for you to win your own way back safely to your own land.


5.98.2
6053
μέχρι μὲν θαλάσσης αὐτοῖσι ὑμῖν , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτου ἡμῖν ἤδη μελήσει " .
Up to the sea it will be your problem, but afterwards we will take care of you.”


5.98.3
6054
ταῦτα δὲ ἀκούσαντες οἱ Παίονες κάρτα τε ἀσπαστὸν ἐποιήσαντο καὶ ἀναλαβόντες παῖδας καὶ γυναῖκας ἀπεδίδρησκον ἐπὶ θάλασσαν , οἳ δὲ τινὲς αὐτῶν καὶ κατέμειναν ἀρρωδήσαντες αὐτοῦ .
The Paeonians were very glad when they heard that, and although some of them remained where they were for fear of danger, the rest took their children and women and fled to the sea.


5.98.3
6055
ἐπείτε δὲ οἱ Παίονες ἀπίκοντο ἐπὶ θάλασσαν , ἐνθεῦτεν ἐς Χίον διέβησαν .
After arriving there, the Paeonians crossed over to Chios.


5.98.4
6056
ἐόντων δὲ ἤδη ἐν Χίῳ , κατὰ πόδας ἐληλύθεε Περσέων ἵππος πολλὴ διώκουσα τοὺς Παίονας .
They were already in Chios, when a great host of Persian horsemen came after them in pursuit.


5.98.4
6057
ὡς δὲ οὐ κατέλαβον , ἐπηγγέλλοντο ἐς τὴν Χίον τοῖσι Παίοσι ὅκως ἂν ὀπίσω ἀπέλθοιεν .
Unable to overtake them, the Persians sent to Chios, commanding the Paeonians to go back.


5.98.4
6058
οἱ δὲ Παίονες τοὺς λόγους οὐκ ἐνεδέκοντο , ἀλλ’ ἐκ Χίου μὲν Χῖοι σφέας ἐς Λέσβον ἤγαγον , Λέσβιοι δὲ ἐς Δορίσκον ἐκόμισαν , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ πεζῇ κομιζόμενοι ἀπίκοντο ἐς Παιονίην .
The Paeonians would not consent to this, but were brought from Chios by the Chians to Lesbos and carried by the Lesbians to Doriscus, from where they made their way by land to Paeonia.


5.99.1
6059
Ἀρισταγόρης δέ , ἐπειδὴ οἵ τε Ἀθηναῖοι ἀπίκοντο εἴκοσι νηυσί , ἅμα ἀγόμενοι Ἐρετριέων πέντε τριήρεας , οἳ οὐ τὴν Ἀθηναίων χάριν ἐστρατεύοντο ἀλλὰ τὴν αὐτῶν Μιλησίων , ὀφειλόμενά σφι ἀποδιδόντες ·
The Athenians came with their twenty ships as well as five triremes of the Eretrians who came to the war to please not the Athenians but the Milesians themselves, thereby repaying their debt


5.99.1
6060
οἱ γὰρ δὴ Μιλήσιοι πρότερον τοῖσι Ἐρετριεῦσι τὸν πρὸς Χαλκιδέας πόλεμον συνδιήνεικαν , ὅτε περ καὶ Χαλκιδεῦσι ἀντία Ἐρετριέων καὶ Μιλησίων Σάμιοι ἐβοήθεον ·
(for the Milesians had once been the allies of the Eretrians in the war against Chalcis, when the Samians came to aid the Chalcidians against the Eretrians and Milesians).


5.99.1
6061
οὗτοι ὦν ἐπείτε σφι ἀπίκοντο καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι σύμμαχοι παρῆσαν , ἐποιέετο στρατηίην ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης ἐς Σάρδις .
When these, then, and the rest of the allies had arrived, Aristagoras planned a march against Sardis.


5.99.2
6062
αὐτὸς μὲν δὴ οὐκ ἐστρατεύετο ἀλλ’ ἔμενε ἐν Μιλήτῳ , στρατηγοὺς δὲ ἄλλους ἀπέδεξε Μιλησίων εἶναι , τὸν ἑωυτοῦ τε ἀδελφεὸν Χαροπῖνον καὶ τῶν ἀστῶν ἄλλον Ἑρμόφαντον .
He himself did not go with the army but remained at  Miletus, and appointed others to be generals of the Milesians, namely his own brother Charopinus and another citizen named Hermophantus.


5.100.1
6063
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ τῷ στόλῳ τούτῳ Ἴωνες ἐς Ἔφεσον πλοῖα μὲν κατέλιπον ἐν Κορησῷ τῆς Ἐφεσίης , αὐτοὶ δὲ ἀνέβαινον χειρὶ πολλῇ , ποιεύμενοι Ἐφεσίους ἡγεμόνας τῆς ὁδοῦ .
When the Ionians had come to Ephesus with this force, they left their ships at Coresus in the Ephesian territory and marched inland with a great host, taking Ephesians to guide them on their way.


5.100.1
6064
πορευόμενοι δὲ παρὰ ποταμὸν Καΰστριον , ἐνθεῦτεν ἐπείτε ὑπερβάντες τὸν Τμῶλον ἀπίκοντο , αἱρέουσι Σάρδις οὐδενός σφι ἀντιωθέντος , αἱρέουσι δὲ χωρὶς τῆς ἀκροπόλιος τ- ἄλλα πάντα ·
They made their way along the river Caicus, and after crossing the Tmolus, they came to Sardis and captured it without any resistance.


5.100.1
6065
τὴν δὲ ἀκρόπολιν ἐρρύετο αὐτὸς Ἀρταφρένης ἔχων ἀνδρῶν δύναμιν οὐκ ὀλίγην .
They took all of it except the citadel, which was held by Artaphrenes himself with a great force of men.


5.101.1
6066
τὸ δὲ μὴ λεηλατῆσαι ἑλόντας σφέας τὴν πόλιν ἔσχε τόδε .
They were prevented from plundering the city by the following.


5.101.1
6067
ἦσαν ἐν τῇσι Σάρδισι οἰκίαι αἱ μὲν πλεῦνες καλάμιναι , ὅσαι δ’ αὐτέων καὶ πλίνθιναι ἦσαν , καλάμου εἶχον τὰς ὀροφάς ·
that most of the houses in Sardis were made of reeds, and those made of brick had roofs of reeds.


5.101.1
6068
τουτέων δὴ μίαν τῶν τις στρατιωτέων ὡς ἐνέπρησε , αὐτίκα ἀπ’ οἰκίης ἐπ’ οἰκίην ἰὸν τὸ πῦρ ἐπενέμετο τὸ ἄστυ πᾶν .
Accordingly, when one of these was set on fire by a soldier, the flames spread from house to house all over the whole city.


5.101.2
6069
καιομένου δὲ τοῦ ἄστεος οἱ Λυδοί τε καὶ ὅσοι Περσέων ἐνῆσαν ἐν τῇ πόλι , ἀπολαμφθέντες πάντοθεν ὥστε τὰ περιέσχατα νεμομένου τοῦ πυρός , καὶ οὐκ ἔχοντες ἐξήλυσιν ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεος , συνέρρεον ἔς τε τὴν ἀγορὴν καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν Πακτωλὸν ποταμόν , ὅς σφι ψῆγμα χρυσοῦ καταφορέων ἐκ τοῦ Τμώλου διὰ μέσης τῆς ἀγορῆς ῥέει καὶ ἔπειτα ἐς τὸν Ἕρμον ποταμὸν ἐκδιδοῖ , ὁ δὲ ἐς θάλασσαν ·
While the city was burning, the Lydians and all the Persians who were in the citadel, being hemmed in on every side since the fire was consuming the outer parts and having no exit from the city, came thronging into the marketplace and to the river Pactolus,


5.101.2
6070
ἐπὶ τοῦτον δὴ τὸν Πακτωλὸν καὶ ἐς τὴν ἀγορὴν ἀθροιζόμενοι οἵ τε Λυδοὶ καὶ οἱ Πέρσαι ἠναγκάζοντο ἀμύνεσθαι .
which flows through the marketplace carrying down gold dust from Tmolus and issues into the river Hermus, which in turn issues into the sea. They assembled in the marketplace by this Pactolus and were forced to defend themselves there.


5.101.3
6071
οἱ δὲ Ἴωνες ὁρέοντες τοὺς μὲν ἀμυνομένους τῶν πολεμίων τοὺς δὲ σὺν πλήθεϊ πολλῷ προσφερομένους , ἐξανεχώρησαν δείσαντες πρὸς τὸ ὄρος τὸν Τμῶλον καλεόμενον , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὑπὸ νύκτα ἀπαλλάσσοντο ἐπὶ τὰς νέας .
When the Ionians saw some of their enemies defending themselves and a great multitude of others approaching, they were afraid and withdrew to the mountain called Tmolus, from where they departed to their ships at nightfall.


5.102.1
6072
καὶ Σάρδιες μὲν ἐνεπρήσθησαν , ἐν δὲ αὐτῇσι καὶ ἱρὸν ἐπιχωρίης θεοῦ Κυβήβης ·
In the fire at Sardis, a temple of Cybebe, the goddess of that country, was burnt,


5.102.1
6073
τὸ σκηπτόμενοι οἱ Πέρσαι ὕστερον ἀντενεπίμπρασαν τὰ ἐν Ἕλλησι ἱρά .
and the Persians afterwards made this their pretext for burning the temples of Hellas.


5.102.1
6074
τότε δὲ οἱ Πέρσαι οἱ ἐντὸς Ἅλυος ποταμοῦ νομοὺς ἔχοντες , προπυνθανόμενοι ταῦτα , συνηλίζοντο καὶ ἐβοήθεον τοῖσι Λυδοῖσι .
At this time, the Persians of the provinces this side of the Halys, on hearing of these matters, gathered together and came to aid the Lydians.


5.102.2
6075
καὶ κως ἐν μὲν Σάρδισι οὐκέτι ἐόντας τοὺς Ἴωνας εὑρίσκουσι , ἑπόμενοι δὲ κατὰ στίβον αἱρέουσι αὐτοὺς ἐν Ἐφέσῳ .
It chanced that they found the Ionians no longer at Sardis, but following on their tracks, they caught them at Ephesus.


5.102.2
6076
καὶ ἀντετάχθησαν μὲν οἱ Ἴωνες , συμβαλόντες δὲ πολλὸν ἑσσώθησαν .
There the Ionians stood arrayed to meet them, but were utterly routed in the battle.


5.102.3
6077
καὶ πολλοὺς αὐτῶν οἱ Πέρσαι φονεύουσι ἄλλους τε ὀνομαστούς , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ Εὐαλκίδην στρατηγέοντα Ἐρετριέων , στεφανηφόρους τε ἀγῶνας ἀναραιρηκότα καὶ ὑπὸ Σιμωνίδεω τοῦ Κηίου πολλὰ αἰνεθέντα ·
The Persians put to the sword many men of renown including Eualcides the general of the Eretrians who had won crowns as victor in the games and been greatly praised by Simonides of Ceos.


5.102.3
6078
οἳ δὲ αὐτῶν ἀπέφυγον τὴν μάχην , ἐσκεδάσθησαν ἀνὰ τὰς πόλιας .
Those of the Ionians who escaped from the battle fled, each to his city.


5.103.1
6079
τότε μὲν δὴ οὕτω ἠγωνίσαντο .
This, then is how they fared in their fighting.


5.103.1
6080
μετὰ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν τὸ παράπαν ἀπολιπόντες τοὺς Ἴωνας , ἐπικαλεομένου σφέας πολλὰ δι’ ἀγγέλων Ἀρισταγόρεω , οὐκ ἔφασαν τιμωρήσειν σφι ·
Presently, however, the Athenians wholly separated themselves from the Ionians and refused to aid them, although Aristagoras sent messages of earnest entreaty.


5.103.1
6081
Ἴωνες δὲ τῆς Ἀθηναίων συμμαχίης στερηθέντες , οὕτω γάρ σφι ὑπῆρχε πεποιημένα ἐς Δαρεῖον , οὐδὲν δὴ ἧσσον τὸν πρὸς βασιλέα πόλεμον ἐσκευάζοντο .
Despite the fact that they had been deprived of their Athenian allies, the Ionians fervently continued their war against the king (for they remained committed by what they had done to Darius).


5.103.2
6082
πλώσαντες δὲ ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον Βυζάντιόν τε καὶ τὰς ἄλλας πόλιας πάσας τὰς ταύτῃ ὑπ’ ἑωυτοῖσι ἐποιήσαντο , ἐκπλώσαντές τε ἔξω τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον Καρίης τὴν πολλὴν προσεκτήσαντο σφίσι σύμμαχον εἶναι ·
They sailed to the Hellespont and made Byzantium and all the other cities of that region subject to themselves.


5.103.2
6083
καὶ γὰρ τὴν Καῦνον πρότερον οὐ βουλομένην συμμαχέειν , ὡς ἐνέπρησαν τὰς Σάρδις , τότε σφι καὶ αὕτη προσεγένετο .
Then sailing out from the Hellespont they gained to their cause the greater part of Caria, for even Caunus, which till then had not wanted to be their ally, now joined itself to them after the burning of Sardis.


5.104.1
6084
Κύπριοι δὲ ἐθελονταί σφι πάντες προσεγένοντο πλὴν Ἀμαθουσίων ·
The Cyprians did likewise of their own free will, all save the people of Amathus,


5.104.1
6085
ἀπέστησαν γὰρ καὶ οὗτοι ὧδε ἀπὸ Μήδων .
for these too revolted from the Medes in such manner as I will show.


5.104.1
6086
ἦ Ὀνήσιλος Γόργου μὲν τοῦ Σαλαμινίων βασιλέος ἀδελφεὸς νεώτερος , Χέρσιος δὲ τοῦ Σιρώμου τοῦ Εὐέλθοντος παῖς .
There was a certain Onesilus, a younger brother of Gorgus king of the Salaminians, son of Chersis, whose father was Siromus, and grandson of Euelthon.


5.104.2
6087
οὗτος ὡνὴρ πολλάκις μὲν καὶ πρότερον τὸν Γόργον παρηγορέετο ἀπίστασθαι ἀπὸ βασιλέος , τότε δέ , ὡς καὶ τοὺς Ἴωνας ἐπύθετο ἀπεστάναι , πάγχυ ἐπικείμενος ἐνῆγε ·
This man had often before advised Gorgus to revolt from Darius, and now when he heard that the Ionians too had revolted, he was insistent in striving to move him.


5.104.2
6088
ὡς δὲ οὐκ ἔπειθε τὸν Γόργον , ἐνθαῦτά μιν φυλάξας ἐξελθόντα τὸ ἄστυ τὸ Σαλαμινίων ὁ Ὀνήσιλος ἅμα τοῖσι ἑωυτοῦ στασιώτῃσι ἀπεκλήισε τῶν πυλέων .
When, however, he could not persuade Gorgus, he and his faction waited till his brother had gone out of the city of Salamis, and shut him out of the gates.


5.104.3
6089
Γόργος μὲν δὴ στερηθεὶς τῆς πόλιος ἔφευγε ἐς Μήδους , Ὀνήσιλος δὲ ἦρχε Σαλαμῖνος καὶ ἀνέπειθε πάντας Κυπρίους συναπίστασθαι .
Gorgus, after having lost his city, took refuge with the Medes, and Onesilus, now king of Salamis, persuaded all Cyprus to revolt with him,


5.104.3
6090
τοὺς μὲν δὴ ἄλλους ἀνέπεισε , Ἀμαθουσίους δὲ οὐ βουλομένους οἱ πείθεσθαι ἐπολιόρκεε προσκατήμενος .
all save the Amathusians, who would not consent. He accordingly stationed his forces in front of their city and besieged it.


5.105.1
6091
Ὀνήσιλος μέν νυν ἐπολιόρκεε Ἀμαθοῦντα .
Onesilus, then, besieged Amathus.


5.105.1
6092
βασιλέι δὲ Δαρείῳ ὡς ἐξαγγέλθη Σάρδις ἁλούσας ἐμπεπρῆσθαι ὑπό τε Ἀθηναίων καὶ Ἰώνων , τὸν δὲ ἡγεμόνα γενέσθαι τῆς συλλογῆς ὥστε ταῦτα συνυφανθῆναι τὸν Μιλήσιον Ἀρισταγόρην , πρῶτα μὲν λέγεται αὐτόν , ὡς ἐπύθετο ταῦτα , Ἰώνων οὐδένα λόγον ποιησάμενον , εὖ εἰδότα ὡς οὗτοί γε οὐ καταπροΐξονται ἀποστάντες , εἰρέσθαι οἵτινες εἶεν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , μετὰ δὲ πυθόμενον αἰτῆσαι τὸ τόξον , λαβόντα δὲ καὶ ἐπιθέντα δὲ ὀιστὸν ἄνω πρὸς τὸν οὐρανὸν ἀπεῖναι , καί μιν ἐς τὸν ἠέρα βάλλοντα εἰπεῖν " ὦ Ζεῦ , ἐκγενέσθαι μοι Ἀθηναίους τίσασθαι , " εἴπαντα δὲ ταῦτα προστάξαι ἑνὶ τῶν θεραπόντων δείπνου προκειμένου αὐτῷ ἐς τρὶς ἑκάστοτε εἰπεῖν " δέσποτα , μέμνεο τῶν Ἀθηναίων " .
When it was reported to Darius that Sardis had been taken and burnt by the Athenians and Ionians and that Aristagoras the Milesian had been leader of the conspiracy for the making of this plan, he at first, it is said, took no account of the Ionians since he was sure that they would not go unpunished for their rebellion. Darius did, however, ask who the Athenians were, and after receiving the answer, he called for his bow. This he took and, placing an arrow on it, and shot it into the sky, praying as he sent it aloft, “Zeus, grant me to punish the Athenians.” Having said this, he commanded one of his servants to repeat to him thrice at every meal, “Master, remember the Athenians.”


5.106.1
6093
προστάξας δὲ ταῦτα εἶπε , καλέσας ἐς ὄψιν Ἱστιαῖον τὸν Μιλήσιον , τὸν ὁ Δαρεῖος κατεῖχε χρόνον ἤδη πολλόν , " πυνθάνομαι Ἱστιαῖε ἐπίτροπον τὸν σόν , τῷ σὺ Μίλητον ἐπέτρεψας , νεώτερα ἐς ἐμὲ πεποιηκέναι πρήγματα ·
After giving this order, he called before him Histiaeus the Milesian, whom Darius had kept with him for a long time now, and said,


5.106.1
6094
ἄνδρας γάρ μοι ἐκ τῆς ἑτέρης ἠπείρου ἐπαγαγών , καὶ Ἴωνας σὺν αὐτοῖσι τοὺς δώσοντας ἐμοὶ δίκην τῶν ἐποίησαν , τούτους ἀναγνώσας ἅμα ἐκείνοισι ἕπεσθαι , Σαρδίων με ἀπεστέρησε .
“I hear, Histiaeus, that the viceregent whom you put in charge of Miletus has done me wrong.


5.106.1
6095
νῦν ὦν κῶς τοι ταῦτα φαίνεται ἔχειν καλῶς ;
He has brought men from the mainland overseas, and persuaded certain Ionians — who shall yet pay me the penalty for their deeds — to follow them and has robbed me of Sardis.


5.106.2
6096
κῶς δὲ ἄνευ τῶν σῶν βουλευμάτων τούτων τι ἐπρήχθη ;
Now then, I ask you, do you think that this state of affairs is good?


5.106.2
6097
ὅρα μὴ ἐξ ὑστέρης σεωυτὸν ἐν αἰτίῃ σχῇς " .
How did such things come to pass without any advice from your side? See to it that you do not have cause to blame yourself hereafter.”


5.106.3
6098
εἶπε πρὸς ταῦτα Ἱστιαῖος " βασιλεῦ , κοῖον ἐφθέγξαο ἔπος , ἐμὲ βουλεῦσαι πρῆγμα ἐκ τοῦ σοί τι ἢ μέγα ἢ σμικρὸν ἔμελλε λυπηρὸν ἀνασχήσειν ;
To this Histiaeus answered: “My lord, what is this you say — that I and none other should devise a plan as a result of which any harm, great or small, was likely to come to you?


5.106.3
6099
τί δ’ ἂν ἐπιδιζήμενος ποιέοιμι ταῦτα , τεῦ δὲ ἐνδεὴς ἐών ;
What desire or feeling of deprivation would prompt me to do such a thing?


5.106.3
6100
τῷ πάρα μὲν πάντα ὅσα περ σοί , πάντων δὲ πρὸς σέο βουλευμάτων ἐπακούειν ἀξιοῦμαι .
All that you have is mine, and I am regarded worthy of hearing all your deliberations.


5.106.4
6101
ἀλλ’ εἴ περ τι τοιοῦτον οἷον σὺ εἴρηκας πρήσσει ὁ ἐμὸς ἐπίτροπος , ἴσθι αὐτὸν ἐπ’ ἑωυτοῦ βαλόμενον πεποιηκέναι .
If my vicegerent is indeed doing what you say, be assured that he has acted of his own accord.


5.106.4
6102
ἀρχὴν δὲ ἔγωγε οὐδὲ ἐνδέκομαι τὸν λόγον , ὅκως τι Μιλήσιοι καὶ ὁ ἐμὸς ἐπίτροπος νεώτερον πρήσσουσι περὶ πρήγματα τὰ σά .
For myself, I cannot even go so far as to believe the report that the Milesians and my vicegerent are doing you some dreadful wrong.


5.106.4
6103
εἰ δ’ ἄρα τι τοιοῦτο ποιεῦσι καὶ σὺ τὸ ἐὸν ἀκήκοας ὦ βασιλεῦ , μάθε οἷον πρῆγμα ἐργάσαο ἐμὲ ἀπὸ θαλάσσης ἀνάσπαστον ποιήσας .
If, however, it is true that they are engaged in such activities and what you, O king, have heard has a basis in fact, then you can see how unwisely you acted when you forced me to leave the coast.


5.106.5
6104
Ἴωνες γὰρ οἴκασι ἐμεῦ ἐξ ὀφθαλμῶν σφι γενομένου ποιῆσαι τῶν πάλαι ἵμερον εἶχον ·
It would seem, then, that as soon as I was out of sight, the Ionians did exactly what their hearts had long been set on.


5.106.5
6105
ἐμέο δ’ ἂν ἐόντος ἐν Ἰωνίῃ οὐδεμία πόλις ὑπεκίνησε .
If I had been in Ionia no city would have stirred.


5.106.5
6106
νῦν ὦν ὡς τάχος ἄπες με πορευθῆναι ἐς Ἰωνίην , ἵνα τοι κεῖνά τε πάντα καταρτίσω ἐς τ- αὐτὸ καὶ τὸν Μιλήτου ἐπίτροπον τοῦτον τὸν ταῦτα μηχανησάμενον ἐγχειρίθετον παραδῶ .
Now send me off to Ionia right away, so that I may restore that country to peace and deliver into your hands that vicegerent of Miletus who has devised all this.


5.106.6
6107
ταῦτα δὲ κατὰ νόον τὸν σὸν ποιήσας , θεοὺς ἐπόμνυμι τοὺς βασιληίους μὴ μὲν πρότερον ἐκδύσασθαι τὸν ἔχων κιθῶνα καταβήσομαι ἐς Ἰωνίην , πρὶν ἄν τοι Σαρδὼ νῆσον τὴν μεγίστην δασμοφόρον ποιήσω " .
Then, when I have done this to your satisfaction, I swear by the gods of your royal house that I will not take off the tunic I am wearing on my arrival in  Ionia until I have made Sardo, the largest of the islands, tributary to you.”


5.107.1
6108
Ἱστιαῖος μὲν λέγων ταῦτα διέβαλλε , Δαρεῖος δὲ ἐπείθετο καί μιν ἀπίει , ἐντειλάμενος , ἐπεὰν τὰ ὑπέσχετό οἱ ἐπιτελέα ποιήσῃ , παραγίνεσθαί οἱ ὀπίσω ἐς τὰ Σοῦσα .
With these words Histiaeus successfully deceived Darius who gave his consent and let him go, charging Histiaeus to appear before him at  Susa when he had achieved what he promised.


5.108.1
6109
ἐν ᾧ δὲ ἡ ἀγγελίη τε περὶ τῶν Σαρδίων παρὰ βασιλέα ἀνήιε καὶ Δαρεῖος τὰ περὶ τὸ τόξον ποιήσας Ἱστιαίῳ ἐς λόγους ἦλθε καὶ Ἱστιαῖος μεμετιμένος ὑπὸ Δαρείου ἐκομίζετο ἐπὶ θάλασσαν , ἐν τούτῳ παντὶ τῷ χρόνῳ ἐγίνετο τάδε .
Now while the message concerning Sardis was making its way to the king, and Darius, having done as I said with his bow, held converse with Histiaeus and permitted him to go to the sea, the following events took place.


5.108.1
6110
πολιορκέοντι τῷ Σαλαμινίῳ Ὀνησίλῳ Ἀμαθουσίους ἐξαγγέλλεται νηυσὶ στρατιὴν πολλὴν ἄγοντα Περσικὴν Ἀρτύβιον ἄνδρα Πέρσην προσδόκιμον ἐς τὴν Κύπρον εἶναι ·
When Onesilus of Salamis was besieging the Amathusians, news was brought him that Artybius, a Persian, was thought to be coming to Cyprus with a great Persian host.


5.108.2
6111
πυθόμενος δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Ὀνήσιλος κήρυκας διέπεμπε ἐς τὴν Ἰωνίην ἐπικαλεύμενος σφέας , Ἴωνες δὲ οὐκ ἐς μακρὴν βουλευσάμενοι ἧκον πολλῷ στόλῳ .
Upon hearing this, Onesilus sent heralds all through Ionia to summon the people, and the Ionians, after no long deliberation, came with a great force.


5.108.2
6112
Ἴωνές τε δὴ παρῆσαν ἐς τὴν Κύπρον καὶ οἱ Πέρσαι νηυσὶ διαβάντες ἐκ τῆς Κιλικίης ἤισαν ἐπὶ τὴν Σαλαμῖνα πεζῇ .
So the Ionians were in Cyprus when the Persians, crossing from Cilicia, marched to Salamis by land,


5.108.2
6113
τῇσι δὲ νηυσὶ οἱ Φοίνικες περιέπλεον τὴν ἄκρην αἳ καλεῦνται Κληῖδες τῆς Κύπρου .
and the Phoenicians were sailing around the headland which is called the keys of Cyprus.


5.109.1
6114
τούτου δὲ τοιούτου γινομένου ἔλεξαν οἱ τύραννοι τῆς Κύπρου , συγκαλέσαντες τῶν Ἰώνων τοὺς στρατηγούς , " ἄνδρες Ἴωνες , αἵρεσιν ὑμῖν δίδομεν ἡμεῖς οἱ Κύπριοι ὁκοτέροισι βούλεσθε προσφέρεσθαι , ἢ Πέρσῃσι ἢ Φοίνιξι .
In this turn of affairs, the tyrants of  Cyprus called together the generals of the Ionians, and said to them: “Ionians, we Cyprians offer you the choice of engaging either the Persians or the Phoenicians.


5.109.2
6115
εἰ μὲν γὰρ πεζῇ βούλεσθε ταχθέντες Περσέων διαπειρᾶσθαι , ὥρη ἂν εἴη ὑμῖν ἐκβάντας ἐκ τῶν νεῶν τάσσεσθαι πεζῇ , ἡμέας δὲ ἐς τὰς νέας ἐσβαίνειν τὰς ὑμετέρας Φοίνιξι ἀνταγωνιευμένους ·
If you want to draw up your army on land and try your strength against the Persians, then it is time for you to disembark and array yourselves on land and for us to embark in your ships to contend with the Phoenicians.


5.109.2
6116
εἰ δὲ Φοινίκων μᾶλλον βούλεσθε διαπειρᾶσθαι , ποιέειν χρεόν ἐστι ὑμέας , ὁκότερα ἂν δὴ τούτων ἕλησθε , ὅκως τὸ κατ’ ὑμέας ἔσται ἥ τε Ἰωνίη καὶ ἡ Κύπρος ἐλευθέρη " .
If, however, you desire rather to engage the Phoenicians, do so, but whichever you choose, see to it that Ionia and Cyprus become free.”


5.109.3
6117
εἶπαν Ἴωνες πρὸς ταῦτα " ἡμέας δὲ ἀπέπεμψε τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Ἰώνων φυλάξοντας τὴν θάλασσαν , ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἵνα Κυπρίοισι τὰς νέας παραδόντες αὐτοὶ πεζῇ Πέρσῃσι προσφερώμεθα .
To this the Ionians answered, “We were sent by the common voice of Ionia to guard the seas, not to deliver our ships to men of Cyprus and encounter the Persians on land.


5.109.3
6118
ἡμεῖς μέν νυν ἐπ’ οὗ ἐτάχθημεν , ταύτῃ πειρησόμεθα εἶναι χρηστοί ·
We will attempt then to bear ourselves bravely in the task which was given us.


5.109.3
6119
ὑμέας δὲ χρεόν ἐστι ἀναμνησθέντας οἶα ἐπάσχετε δουλεύοντες πρὸς τῶν Μήδων , γίνεσθαι ἄνδρας ἀγαθούς " .
It is for you to prove yourselves valiant men, remembering what you suffered when you were enslaved by the Medians.”


5.110.1
6120
Ἴωνες μὲν τούτοισι ἀμείψαντο ·
This was the Ionians' response,


5.110.1
6121
μετὰ δε ἡκόντων ἐς τὸ πεδίον τὸ Σαλαμινίων τῶν Περσέων , διέτασσον οἱ βασιλέες τῶν Κυπρίων , τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους Κυπρίους κατὰ τοὺς ἄλλους στρατιώτας ἀντιτάσσοντες , Σαλαμινίων δὲ καὶ Σολίων ἀπολέξαντες τὸ ἄριστον ἀντέτασσον Πέρσῃσι ·
and when the Persian army afterwards arrived on the plain of Salamis, the Cyprian kings ordered their battle line. They drew up the best of the Salaminians and Solians against the Persians, leaving the remaining Cyprians to face the rest of the enemy's army.


5.110.1
6122
Ἀρτυβίῳ δὲ τῷ στρατηγῷ τῶν Περσέων ἐθελοντὴς ἀντετάσσετο Ὀνήσιλος .
Onesilus placed himself opposite Artybius, the Persian general.


5.111.1
6123
ἤλαυνε δὲ ἵππον ὁ Ἀρτύβιος δεδιδαγμένον πρὸς ὁπλίτην ἵστασθαι ὀρθόν .
Now the horse which Artybius rode was trained to fight with infantrymen by rearing up.


5.111.1
6124
πυθόμενος ὦν ταῦτα ὁ Ὀνήσιλος , ἦν γάρ οἱ ὑπασπιστὴς γένος μὲν Κὰρ τὰ δὲ πολέμια κάρτα δόκιμος καὶ ἄλλως λήματος πλέος , εἶπε πρὸς τοῦτον " πυνθάνομαι τὸν Ἀρτυβίου ἵππον ἱστάμενον ὀρθὸν καὶ ποσὶ καὶ στόματι κατεργάζεσθαι πρὸς τὸν ἂν προσενειχθῇ ·
Hearing this, Onesilus said to his attendant, a Carian of great renown in war and a valiant man,


5.111.2
6125
σὺ ὦν βουλευσάμενος εἰπὲ αὐτίκα ὁκότερον βούλεαι φυλάξας πλῆξαι , εἴτε τὸν ἵππον εἴτε αὐτὸν Ἀρτύβιον " .
“I learn that Artybius' horse rears up and kicks and bites to death whomever he encounters. In light of this decide and tell me straightway which you will watch and strike down, Artybius himself or his horse.”


5.111.3
6126
εἶπε πρὸς ταῦτα ὁ ὀπάων αὐτοῦ " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἕτοιμος μὲν ἐγώ εἰμι ποιέειν καὶ ἀμφότερα καὶ τὸ ἕτερον αὐτῶν , καὶ πάντως τὸ ἂν σὺ ἐπιτάσσῃς ·
To this his henchman answered, “My King, ready am I to do either or both, whatever you desire.


5.111.3
6127
ὡς μέντοι ἔμοιγε δοκέει εἶναι τοῖσι σοῖσι πρήγμασι προσφερέστερον , φράσω .
Nevertheless, I will tell you what I think is in your best interest.


5.111.4
6128
βασιλέα μὲν καὶ στρατηγὸν χρεὸν εἶναι φημὶ βασιλέι τε καὶ στρατηγῷ προσφέρεσθαι .
To my mind, a king and general should be met in battle by a king and general


5.111.4
6129
ἤν τε γὰρ κατέλῃς ἄνδρα στρατηγόν , μέγα τοι γίνεται , καὶ δεύτερα , ἢν σὲ ἐκεῖνος , τὸ μὴ γένοιτο , ὑπὸ ἀξιοχρέου καὶ ἀποθανεῖν ἡμίσεα συμφορή ·
(For if you lay low a man who is a general, you have achieved a great feat. Failing that, if he lays you low, as I pray he may not, it is but half the misfortune to be slain by a noble enemy).


5.111.4
6130
ἡμέας δὲ τοὺς ὑπηρέτας ἑτέροισί τε ὑπηρέτῃσι προσφέρεσθαι καὶ πρὸς ἵππον ·
For us servants it is fitting that we fight with servants like ourselves and with that horse.


5.111.4
6131
τοῦ σὺ τὰς μηχανὰς μηδὲν φοβηθῇς ·
Do not fear his tricks,


5.111.4
6132
ἐγὼ γάρ τοι ὑποδέκομαι μή μιν ἀνδρὸς ἔτι γε μηδενὸς στήσεσθαι ἐναντίον " .
for I promise that he will never again do battle with any man.”


5.112.1
6133
ταῦτα εἶπε , καὶ μεταυτίκα συνέμισγε τὰ στρατόπεδα πεζῇ καὶ νηυσί .
This, then, was his response, and immediately afterwards war broke out on land and sea.


5.112.1
6134
νηυσὶ μέν νυν Ἴωνες ἄκροι γενόμενοι ταύτην τὴν ἡμέρην ὑπερεβάλοντο τοὺς Φοίνικας , καὶ τούτων Σάμιοι ἠρίστευσαν ·
The Ionians in their ships, displaying surpassing excellence that day, overcame the Phoenicians, and it was the Samnians who were most brave.


5.112.1
6135
πεζῇ δέ , ὡς συνῆλθε τὰ στρατόπεδα , συμπεσόντα ἐμάχοντο .
On land, when the armies met, they charged and fought.


5.112.2
6136
κατὰ δὲ τοὺς στρατηγοὺς ἀμφοτέρους τάδε ἐγίνετο ·
As for the two generals,


5.112.2
6137
ὡς προσεφέρετο πρὸς τὸν Ὀνήσιλον ὁ Ἀρτύβιος ἐπὶ τοῦ ἵππου κατήμενος , ὁ Ὀνήσιλος κατὰ τὰ συνεθήκατο τῷ ὑπασπιστῇ παίει προσφερόμενον αὐτὸν τὸν Ἀρτύβιον ·
Artybius rode against Onesilus who as he had agreed with his attendant, dealt Artybius a blow as he bore down upon him.


5.112.2
6138
ἐπιβαλόντος δὲ τοῦ ἵππου τοὺς πόδας ἐπὶ τὴν Ὀνησίλου ἀσπίδα , ἐνθαῦτα ὁ Κὰρ δρεπάνῳ πλήξας ἀπαράσσει τοῦ ἵππου τοὺς πόδας .
When the horse struck his hooves on Onesilus' shield, the Carian shore away the horse's legs with a stroke of his curved sword.


5.113.1
6139
Ἀρτύβιος μὲν δὴ ὁ στρατηγὸς τῶν Περσέων ὁμοῦ τῷ ἵππῳ πίπτει αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ .
It was in this way that Artybius the Persian general, together with his horse, fell.


5.113.1
6140
μαχομένων δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων , Στησήνωρ τύραννος ἐὼν Κουρίου προδιδοῖ ἔχων δύναμιν ἀνδρῶν περὶ ἑωυτὸν οὐ σμικρήν .
While the rest were still fighting, Stesenor the ruler of Curium, played the traitor with a great company of men under him.


5.113.1
6141
οἱ δὲ Κουριέες οὗτοι λέγονται εἶναι Ἀργείων ἄποικοι .
The Curies are said to be colonists from Argos.


5.113.1
6142
προδόντων δὲ τῶν Κουριέων αὐτίκα καὶ τὰ Σαλαμινίων πολεμιστήρια ἅρματα τ- αὐτὸ τοῖσι Κουριεῦσι ἐποίεε .
The war-chariots of the Salaminians immediately followed their lead,


5.113.1
6143
γινομένων δὲ τούτων κατυπέρτεροι ἦσαν οἱ Πέρσαι τῶν Κυπρίων .
and the Persians accordingly gained the upper hand over the Cyprians.


5.113.2
6144
τετραμμένου δὲ τοῦ στρατοπέδου ἄλλοι τε ἔπεσον πολλοὶ καὶ δὴ καὶ Ὀνήσιλός τε ὁ Χέρσιος , ὅς περ τὴν Κυπρίων ἀπόστασιν ἔπρηξε , καὶ ὁ Σολίων βασιλεὺς Ἀριστόκυπρος ὁ Φιλοκύπρου , Φιλοκύπρου δὲ τούτου τὸν Σόλων ὁ Ἀθηναῖος ἀπικόμενος ἐς Κύπρον ἐν ἔπεσι αἴνεσε τυράννων μάλιστα .
So the army was routed, and many were slain, among them Onesilus, son of Chersis, who had contrived the Cyprian revolt, as well as the king of the Solians, Aristocyprus son of Philocyprus, that Philocyprus whom Solon of  Athens, when he came to  Cyprus, extolled in a poem above all other tyrants.


5.114.1
6145
Ὀνησίλου μέν νυν Ἀμαθούσιοι , ὅτι σφέας ἐπολιόρκησε , ἀποταμόντες τὴν κεφαλὴν ἐκόμισαν ἐς Ἀμαθοῦντα καί μιν ἀνεκρέμασαν ὑπὲρ τῶν πυλέων ·
As for Onesilus, the Amathusians cut off his head and brought it to Amathus, where they hung it above their gates, because he had besieged their city.


5.114.1
6146
κρεμαμένης δὲ τῆς κεφαλῆς καὶ ἤδη ἐούσης κοίλης , ἐσμὸς μελισσέων ἐσδὺς ἐς αὐτὴν κηρίων μιν ἐνέπλησε .
When this head became hollow, a swarm of bees entered it and filled it with their honeycomb.


5.114.2
6147
τούτου δὲ γενομένου τοιούτου , ἐχρέωντο γὰρ περὶ αὐτῆς οἱ Ἀμαθούσιοι , ἐμαντεύθη σφι τὴν μὲν κεφαλὴν κατελόντας θάψαι , Ὀνησίλῳ δὲ θύειν ὡς ἥρωϊ ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος , καί σφι ποιεῦσι ταῦτα ἄμεινον συνοίσεσθαι .
In consequence of this the Amathusians, who had inquired concerning the matter, received an oracle which stated that they should take the head down and bury it, and offer yearly sacrifice to Onesilus as to a hero. If they did this, things would go better for them.


5.115.1
6148
Ἀμαθούσιοι μέν νυν ἐποίευν ταῦτα καὶ τὸ μέχρι ἐμεῦ ·
This the Amathusians did, and have done to this day.


5.115.1
6149
Ἴωνες δὲ οἱ ἐν Κύπρῳ ναυμαχήσαντες ἐπείτε ἔμαθον τὰ πρήγματα τὰ Ὀνησίλου διεφθαρμένα καὶ τὰς πόλις τῶν Κυπρίων πολιορκευμένας τὰς ἄλλας πλὴν Σαλαμῖνος , ταύτην δὲ Γόργῳ τῷ προτέρῳ βασιλέι τοὺς Σαλαμινίους παραδόντας , αὐτίκα μαθόντες οἱ Ἴωνες ταῦτα ἀπέπλεον ἐς τὴν Ἰωνίην .
When, however, the Ionians engaged in the sea-battle off Cyprus learned that Onesilus' cause was lost and that the cities of Cyprus, with the exception of Salamis which the Salaminians had handed over to their former king Gorgus, were besieged, they sailed off to Ionia without delay.


5.115.2
6150
τῶν δὲ ἐν Κύπρῳ πολίων ἀντέσχε χρόνον ἐπὶ πλεῖστον πολιορκευμένη Σόλοι , τὴν πέριξ ὑπορύσσοντες τὸ τεῖχος πέμπτῳ μηνὶ εἷλον οἱ Πέρσαι .
Soli was the Cyprian city which withstood siege longest; the Persians took it in the fifth month by digging a mine under its walls.


5.116.1
6151
Κύπριοι μὲν δὴ ἐνιαυτὸν ἐλεύθεροι γενόμενοι αὖτις ἐκ νέης κατεδεδούλωντο .
So the Cyprians, after winning freedom for a year, were enslaved once more.


5.116.1
6152
Δαυρίσης δὲ ἔχων Δαρείου θυγατέρα καὶ Ὑμαίης τε καὶ Ὀτάνης ἄλλοι Πέρσαι στρατηγοί , ἔχοντες καὶ οὗτοι Δαρείου θυγατέρας , ἐπιδιώξαντες τοὺς ἐς Σάρδις στρατευσαμένους Ἰώνων καὶ ἐσαράξαντες σφέας ἐς τὰς νέας , τῇ μάχῃ ὡς ἐπεκράτησαν , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν ἐπιδιελόμενοι τὰς πόλις ἐπόρθεον .
Daurises, Hymaees, and Otanes, all of them Persian generals and married to daughters of Darius, pursued those Ionians who had marched to Sardis, and drove them to their ships. After this victory they divided the cities among themselves and sacked them.


5.117.1
6153
Δαυρίσης μὲν τραπόμενος πρὸς τὰς ἐν Ἑλλησπόντῳ πόλις εἷλε μὲν Δάρδανον , εἷλε δὲ Ἄβυδόν τε καὶ Περκώτην καὶ Λάμψακον καὶ Παισόν .
Daurises made for the cities of the Hellespont and took Dardanus, Abydus, Percote, Lampsacus, and Paesus, each in a single day.


5.117.1
6154
ταύτας μὲν ἐπ’ ἡμέρῃ ἑκάστῃ αἵρεε , ἀπὸ δὲ Παισοῦ ἐλαύνοντί οἱ ἐπὶ Πάριον πόλιν ἦλθε ἀγγελίη τοὺς Κᾶρας τ- αὐτὸ Ἴωσι φρονήσαντας ἀπεστάναι ἀπὸ Περσέων .
Then as he marched from Paesus against Parius, news came to him that the Carians had made common cause with the Ionians and revolted from the Persians.


5.117.1
6155
ἀποστρέψας ὦν ἐκ τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου ἤλαυνε τὸν στρατὸν ἐπὶ τὴν Καρίην .
For this reason he turned aside from the Hellespont and marched his army to Caria.


5.118.1
6156
καί κως ταῦτα τοῖσι Καρσὶ ἐξαγγέλθη πρότερον ἢ τὸν Δαυρίσην ἀπικέσθαι ·
It so happened that news of this was brought to the Carians before Daurises' coming,


5.118.1
6157
πυθόμενοι δὲ οἱ Κᾶρες συνελέγοντο ἐπὶ Λευκάς τε στήλας καλεομένας καὶ ποταμὸν Μαρσύην , ὃς ῥέων ἐκ τῆς Ἰδριάδος χώρης ἐς τὸν Μαίανδρον ἐκδιδοῖ .
and when the Carians heard, they mustered at the place called the White Pillars by the river Marsyas which flows from the region of Idria and issues into the Maeander.


5.118.2
6158
συλλεχθέντων δὲ τῶν Καρῶν ἐνθαῦτα ἐγίνοντο βουλαὶ ἄλλαι τε πολλαὶ καὶ ἀρίστη γε δοκέουσα εἶναι ἐμοὶ Πιξωδάρου τοῦ Μαυσώλου ἀνδρὸς Κινδυέος , ὃς τοῦ Κιλίκων βασιλέος Συεννέσιος εἶχε θυγατέρα ·
When they had gathered together, many plans were laid before them, the best of which, in my judgment, was that of Pixodarus of Cindya, the son of Mausolus and husband of the daughter of Syennesis, king of Cilicia.


5.118.2
6159
τούτου τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἡ γνώμη ἔφερε διαβάντας τὸν Μαίανδρον τοὺς Κᾶρας καὶ κατὰ νώτου ἔχοντας τὸν ποταμὸν οὕτω συμβάλλειν , ἵνα μὴ ἔχοντες ὀπίσω φεύγειν οἱ Κᾶρες αὐτοῦ τε μένειν ἀναγκαζόμενοι γινοίατο ἔτι ἀμείνονες τῆς φύσιος .
He proposed that the Carians should cross the Maeander and fight with the river at their back, so that being unable to flee and compelled to stand their ground they might prove themselves even braver than nature made them.


5.118.3
6160
αὕτη μέν νυν οὐκ ἐνίκα ἡ γνώμη , ἀλλὰ τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι κατὰ νώτου γίνεσθαι τὸν Μαίανδρον μᾶλλον ἢ σφίσι , δηλαδὴ ἢν φυγὴ τῶν Περσέων γένηται καὶ ἑσσωθέωσι τῇ συμβολῇ , ὡς οὐκ ἀπονοστήσουσι ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν ἐσπίπτοντες .
This opinion, however, did not prevail, and it was decided instead that the Persians and not the Cilicians should have the  Maeander at their back, the intent being that if the Persians were overcome in the battle and put to flight, they would not escape but be hurled into the river.


5.119.1
6161
μετὰ δὲ παρεόντων καὶ διαβάντων τὸν Μαίανδρον τῶν Περσέων , ἐνθαῦτα ἐπὶ τῷ Μαρσύῃ ποταμῷ συνέβαλόν τε τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι οἱ Κᾶρες καὶ μάχην ἐμαχέσαντο ἰσχυρὴν καὶ ἐπὶ χρόνον πολλόν , τέλος δὲ ἑσσώθησαν διὰ πλῆθος .
Presently, when the Persians had come and had crossed the Maeander, they and the Carians joined battle by the river Marsyas.


5.119.1
6162
Περσέων μὲν δὴ ἔπεσον ἄνδρες ἐς δισχιλίους , Καρῶν δὲ ἐς μυρίους .
The Carians fought obstinately and for a long time, but at the last they were overcome by the odds. Of the Persians, as many as two thousand men fell, and of the Carians ten thousand.


5.119.2
6163
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ οἱ διαφυγόντες αὐτῶν κατειλήθησαν ἐς Λάβραυνδα ἐς Διὸς στρατίου ἱρόν , μέγα τε καὶ ἅγιον ἄλσος πλατανίστων .
Those of them who escaped were driven into the precinct of Zeus of Armies at Labraunda, a large and a holy grove of plane-trees.


5.119.2
6164
μοῦνοι δὲ τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν Κᾶρες εἰσὶ οἳ Διὶ στρατίῳ θυσίας ἀνάγουσι .
(The Carians are the only people whom we know who offer sacrifices to Zeus by this name.)


5.119.2
6165
κατειληθέντες δὲ ὦν οὗτοι ἐνθαῦτα ἐβουλεύοντο περὶ σωτηρίης , ὁκότερα ἢ παραδόντες σφέας αὐτοὺς Πέρσῃσι ἢ ἐκλιπόντες τὸ παράπαν τὴν Ἀσίην ἄμεινον πρήξουσι .
When they had been driven there, they deliberated how best to save themselves, whether it would be better for them to surrender to the Persians or to depart from Asia.


5.120.1
6166
βουλευομένοισι δέ σφι ταῦτα παραγίνονται βοηθέοντες Μιλήσιοί τε καὶ οἱ τούτων σύμμαχοι ·
While they took counsel, the Milesians and their allies came to their aid,


5.120.1
6167
ἐνθαῦτα δὲ τὰ μὲν πρότερον οἱ Κᾶρες ἐβουλεύοντο μετῆκαν , οἳ δὲ αὖτις πολεμέειν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἀρτέοντο .
whereupon the Carians put aside their former plans, and prepared to wage a new war over again.


5.120.1
6168
καὶ ἐπιοῦσί τε τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι συμβάλλουσι καὶ μαχεσάμενοι ἐπὶ πλέον ἢ πρότερον ἑσσώθησαν ·
They met the Persian attack and suffered a heavier defeat in the battle than the first; many of their whole army fell,


5.120.1
6169
πεσόντων δὲ τῶν πάντων πολλῶν μάλιστα Μιλήσιοι ἐπλήγησαν .
but the Milesians were hardest stricken.


5.121.1
6170
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο τὸ τρῶμα ἀνέλαβόν τε καὶ ἀνεμαχέσαντο οἱ Κᾶρες ·
The Carians, however, rallied and fought again after this disaster,


5.121.1
6171
πυθόμενοι γὰρ ὡς στρατεύεσθαι ὁρμέαται οἱ Πέρσαι ἐπὶ τὰς πόλις σφέων , ἐλόχησαν τὴν ἐν Πηδάσῳ ὁδόν , ἐς τὴν ἐμπεσόντες οἱ Πέρσαι νυκτὸς διεφθάρησαν καὶ αὐτοὶ καὶ οἱ στρατηγοὶ αὐτῶν Δαυρίσης καὶ Ἀμόργης καὶ Σισιμάκης ·
for learning that the Persians had set forth to march against their cities, they beset the road with an ambush at Pedasus. The Persians fell into this by night and perished, they and their generals, Daurises and Amorges and Sisimaces.


5.121.1
6172
σὺν δέ σφι ἀπέθανε καὶ Μύρσος ὁ Γύγεω .
With these fell also Myrsus, son of Gyges.


5.121.1
6173
τοῦ δὲ λόχου τούτου ἡγεμὼν ἦν Ἡρακλείδης Ἰβανώλλιος ἀνὴρ Μυλασσεύς .
The leader of this ambush was Heraclides of Mylasas, son of Ibanollis.


5.122.1
6174
οὗτοι μέν νυν τῶν Περσέων οὕτω διεφθάρησαν ·
This, then, is how these Persians perished.


5.122.1
6175
Ὑμαίης δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ἐὼν τῶν ἐπιδιωξάντων τοὺς ἐς Σάρδις στρατευσαμένους Ἰώνων , τραπόμενος ἐς τὸν Προποντίδα εἷλε Κίον τὴν Μυσίην ·
Hymaees, who had been one of those who went in pursuit of the Ionians who marched on Sardis, now turned towards the Propontis, and there took Cius in Mysia.


5.122.2
6176
ταύτην δὲ ἐξελών , ὡς ἐπύθετο τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἐκλελοιπέναι Δαυρίσην καὶ στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ Καρίης , καταλιπὼν τὴν Προποντίδα ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἦγε τὸν στρατόν , καὶ εἷλε μὲν Αἰολέας πάντας ὅσοι τὴν Ἰλιάδα νέμονται , εἷλε δὲ Γέργιθας τοὺς ὑπολειφθέντας τῶν ἀρχαίων Τευκρῶν ·
When he had taken this place and heard that Daurises had left the Hellespont and was marching towards Caria, he left the Propontis and led his army to the Hellespont, making himself master of all the Aeolians who dwell in the territory of Ilium, and of the Gergithae, a remnant of the ancient Trojans.


5.122.2
6177
αὐτός τε Ὑμαίης αἱρέων ταῦτα τὰ ἔθνεα νούσῳ τελευτᾷ ἐν τῇ Τρῳάδι .
While he was conquering these nations, however, Hymaees himself died of a sickness in the Troad.


5.123.1
6178
οὗτος μὲν δὴ οὕτω ἐτελεύτησε , Ἀρταφρένης δὲ ὁ Σαρδίων ὕπαρχος καὶ Ὀτάνης ὁ τρίτος στρατηγὸς ἐτάχθησαν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἰωνίην καὶ τὴν προσεχέα Αἰολίδα στρατεύεσθαι .
This is how he met his end, and Artaphrenes, viceroy of Sardis, and Otanes, the third general, were appointed to lead the army against Ionia and the Aeolian territory on its borders.


5.123.1
6179
Ἰωνίης μέν νυν Κλαζομενὰς αἱρέουσι , Αἰολέων δὲ Κύμην .
They took Clazomenae in Ionia, and Cyme in Aeolia.


5.124.1
6180
ἁλισκομενέων δὲ τῶν πολίων , ἦν γὰρ ὡς διέδεξε Ἀρισταγόρης ὁ Μιλήσιος ψυχὴν οὐκ ἄκρος , ὃς ταράξας τὴν Ἰωνίην καὶ ἐγκερασάμενος πρήγματα μεγάλα δρησμὸν ἐβούλευε ὁρέων ταῦτα ·
Aristagoras the Milesian, as he clearly demonstrated, was a man of little courage, for after he had disturbed Ionia and thrown all into utter confusion, he, perceiving what he had done, began to deliberate flight.


5.124.1
6181
πρὸς δέ οἱ καὶ ἀδύνατα ἐφάνη βασιλέα Δαρεῖον ὑπερβαλέσθαι ·
Moreover, it seemed to him to be impossible to overcome Darius.


5.124.2
6182
πρὸς ταῦτα δὴ ὦν συγκαλέσας τοὺς συστασιώτας ἐβουλεύετο , λέγων ὡς ἄμεινον σφίσι εἴη κρησφύγετόν τι ὑπάρχον εἶναι , ἢν ἄρα ἐξωθέωνται ἐκ τῆς Μιλήτου , εἴτε δὴ ὦν ἐς Σαρδὼ ἐκ τοῦ τόπου τούτου ἄγοι ἐς ἀποικίην , εἴτε ἐς Μύρκινον τὴν Ἠδωνῶν , τὴν Ἱστιαῖος ἐτείχεε παρὰ Δαρείου δωρεὴν λαβών .
While the cities were being taken, he accordingly called his fellow-rebels together and took counsel with them, saying that it was best for them to have some place of refuge in case they should be thrown out of Miletus.


5.124.2
6183
ταῦτα ἐπειρώτα ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης .
He also asked them whether he should lead them from there to a settlement in Sardo, or Myrcinus in Edonia, which Histiaeus had received as a gift from Darius and fortified.


5.125.1
6184
Ἑκαταίου μέν νυν τοῦ Ἡγησάνδρου , ἀνδρὸς λογοποιοῦ , τουτέων μὲν ἐς οὐδετέρην στέλλειν ἔφερε ἡ γνώμη , ἐν Λέρῳ δὲ τῇ νήσῳ τεῖχος οἰκοδομησάμενον ἡσυχίην ἄγειν , ἢν ἐκπέσῃ ἐκ τῆς Μιλήτου ·
Hecataeus the historian, son of Hegesander, was of the opinion that they should set forth to neither of these places, but that Aristagoras should build a fortress in the island of Leros and reside there, if he were driven from Miletus.


5.125.1
6185
ἔπειτα δὲ ἐκ ταύτης ὁρμώμενον κατελεύσεσθαι ἐς τὴν Μίλητον .
Afterwards, with this as a base, he could return to Miletus.


5.126.1
6186
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ Ἑκαταῖος συνεβούλευε , αὐτῷ δὲ Ἀρισταγόρῃ ἡ πλείστη γνώμη ἦν ἐς τὴν Μύρκινον ἀπάγειν .
Such was the advice of Hecataeus, but Aristagoras himself thought it best to depart for Myrcinus.


5.126.1
6187
τὴν μὲν δὴ Μίλητον ἐπιτράπει Πυθαγόρῃ ἀνδρὶ τῶν ἀστῶν δοκίμῳ , αὐτὸς δὲ παραλαβὼν πάντα τὸν βουλόμενον ἔπλεε ἐς τὴν Θρηίκην , καὶ ἔσχε τὴν χώρην ἐπ’ ἣν ἐστάλη ·
He accordingly entrusted Miletus to Pythagoras, a citizen of repute, and himself sailed to Thrace with any that would follow him and then took possession of the place to which he had come.


5.126.2
6188
ἐκ δὲ ταύτης ὁρμώμενος ἀπόλλυται ὑπὸ Θρηίκων αὐτός τε ὁ Ἀρισταγόρης καὶ ὁ στρατὸς αὐτοῦ , πόλιν περικατήμενος καὶ βουλομένων τῶν Θρηίκων ὑποσπόνδων ἐξιέναι .
After this he was put to the sword by the Thracians, he and his army, as he was besieging a town, even though the Thracians were ready to depart from it under treaty.




6.1.1
6189
Ἀρισταγόρης μέν νυν Ἰωνίην ἀποστήσας οὕτω τελευτᾷ .
This was the end of Aristagoras, after he had brought about the Ionian revolt.


6.1.1
6190
Ἱστιαῖος δὲ ὁ Μιλήτου τύραννος μεμετιμένος ὑπὸ Δαρείου παρῆν ἐς Σάρδις ·
Histiaeus, the tyrant of Miletus, arrived in Sardis after he was let go by Darius.


6.1.1
6191
ἀπιγμένον δὲ αὐτὸν ἐκ τῶν Σούσων εἴρετο Ἀρταφρένης ὁ Σαρδίων ὕπαρχος κατὰ κοῖόν τι δοκέοι Ἴωνας ἀπεστάναι .
When he came there from Susa, Artaphrenes, the governor of Sardis, asked him for what reason he supposed the Ionians had rebelled;


6.1.1
6192
ὁ δὲ οὔτε εἰδέναι ἔφη ἐθώμαζέ τε τὸ γεγονός , ὡς οὐδὲν δῆθεν τῶν παρεόντων πρηγμάτων ἐπιστάμενος .
Histiaeus said that he did not know and marvelled at what had happened, pretending to have no knowledge of the present troubles.


6.1.2
6193
ὁ δὲ Ἀρταφρένης ὁρέων αὐτὸν τεχνάζοντα εἶπε , εἰδὼς τὴν ἀτρεκείην τῆς ἀποστάσιος , " οὕτω τοι Ἱστιαῖε ἔχει κατὰ ταῦτα τὰ πρήγματα ·
But Artaphrenes saw that he dissembled and, knowing the exact story of the revolt, said:


6.1.2
6194
τοῦτο τὸ ὑπόδημα ἔρραψας μὲν σύ , ὑπεδήσατο δὲ Ἀρισταγόρης " .
“I will tell you, Histiaeus, the truth of this business: it was you who stitched this shoe, and Aristagoras who put it on.”


6.2.1
6195
Ἀρταφρένης μὲν ταῦτα ἐς τὴν ἀπόστασιν ἔχοντα εἶπε .
Thus spoke Artaphrenes regarding the revolt.


6.2.1
6196
Ἱστιαῖος δὲ δείσας ὡς συνιέντα Ἀρταφρένεα ὑπὸ τὴν πρώτην ἐπελθοῦσαν νύκτα ἀπέδρη ἐπὶ θάλασσαν , βασιλέα Δαρεῖον ἐξηπατηκώς ·
Histiaeus was frightened by Artaphrenes' understanding of the matter and fled the next night to the sea,


6.2.1
6197
ὃς Σαρδὼ νῆσον τὴν μεγίστην ὑποδεξάμενος κατεργάσασθαι ὑπέδυνε τῶν Ἰώνων τὴν ἡγεμονίην τοῦ πρὸς Δαρεῖον πολέμου .
for he had deceived Darius by promising to subdue Sardo, the greatest of the islands, while secretly intending to make himself leader of the Ionians in their war against Darius.


6.2.2
6198
διαβὰς δὲ ἐς Χίον ἐδέθη ὑπὸ Χίων , καταγνωσθεὶς πρὸς αὐτῶν νεώτερα πρήσσειν πρήγματα ἐς αὐτοὺς ἐκ Δαρείου .
Crossing over to Chios, he was taken and bound by the Chians, because they judged him to have been sent by Darius to make trouble for them.


6.2.2
6199
μαθόντες μέντοι οἱ Χῖοι τὸν πάντα λόγον , ὡς πολέμιος εἴη βασιλέι , ἔλυσαν αὐτόν .
But when they learned the whole story of his hostility to the king, they set him free.


6.3.1
6200
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ εἰρωτώμενος ὑπὸ τῶν Ἰώνων ὁ Ἱστιαῖος κατ’ ὅ τι προθύμως οὕτω ἐπέστειλε τῷ Ἀρισταγόρῃ ἀπίστασθαι ἀπὸ βασιλέος καὶ κακὸν τοσοῦτον εἴη Ἴωνας ἐξεργασμένος , τὴν μὲν γενομένην αὐτοῖσι αἰτίην οὐ μάλα ἐξέφαινε , ὁ δὲ ἔλεγέ σφι ὡς βασιλεὺς Δαρεῖος ἐβουλεύσατο Φοίνικας μὲν ἐξαναστήσας ἐν τῇ Ἰωνίῃ κατοικίσαι , Ἴωνας δὲ ἐν τῇ Φοινίκῃ , καὶ τούτων εἵνεκα ἐπιστείλειε .
Then Histiaeus was asked by the Ionians why he had so zealously ordered Aristagoras to revolt from the king and done the Ionians such great harm.


6.3.1
6201
οὐδέν τι πάντως ταῦτα βασιλέος βουλευσαμένου ἐδειμάτου τοὺς Ἴωνας .
He did not at all reveal the true reason to them, telling them instead that king Darius had planned to remove the Phoenicians and settle them in Ionia, and the Ionians in Phoenicia; for this reason, he said, he had sent the order. The king had made no such plan, but Histiaeus wanted to frighten the Ionians.


6.4.1
6202
μετὰ δὲ ὁ Ἱστιαῖος δι’ ἀγγέλου ποιεύμενος Ἑρμίππου ἀνδρὸς Ἀταρνίτεω τοῖσι ἐν Σάρδισι ἐοῦσι Περσέων ἔπεμπε βυβλία , ὡς προλελεσχηνευμένων αὐτῷ ἀποστάσιος πέρι .
Then Histiaeus, using Hermippus, a man of Atarneus, as messenger, sent letters to the Persians at Sardis, because they had previously talked with him about revolt.


6.4.1
6203
ὁ δὲ Ἕρμιππος πρὸς τοὺς μὲν ἀπεπέμφθη οὐ διδοῖ , φέρων δὲ ἐνεχείρισε τὰ βυβλία Ἀρταφρένεϊ ·
But Hermippus did not give the letters to the men to whom he was sent, and went and delivered them to Artaphrenes instead.


6.4.2
6204
ὁ δὲ μαθὼν πᾶν τὸ γινόμενον ἐκέλευε τὸν Ἕρμιππον τὰ μὲν παρὰ τοῦ Ἱστιαίου δοῦναι φέροντα τοῖσί περ ἔφερε , τὰ δὲ ἀμοιβαῖα τὰ παρὰ τῶν Περσέων ἀντιπεμπόμενα Ἱστιαίω ἑωυτῷ δοῦναι .
Artaphrenes, learning all that was afoot, bade Hermippus carry Histiaeus' letters to those for whom he was bringing them, and give him those which the Persians sent in answer to Histiaeus.


6.4.2
6205
τούτων δὲ γενομένων φανερῶν ἀπέκτεινε ἐνθαῦτα πολλοὺς Περσέων ὁ Ἀρταφρένης .
Thus these men became known, and then Artaphrenes put many Persians to death.


6.5.1
6206
περὶ Σάρδις μὲν δὴ ἐγίνετο ταραχή .
So troubles arose in Sardis.


6.5.1
6207
Ἱστιαῖον δὲ ταύτης ἀποσφαλέντα τῆς ἐλπίδος Χῖοι κατῆγον ἐς Μίλητον , αὐτοῦ Ἱστιαίου δεηθέντος .
Since he failed in this hope, the Chians brought Histiaeus back to Miletus at his own request.


6.5.1
6208
οἱ δὲ Μιλήσιοι , ἄσμενοι ἀπαλλαχθέντες καὶ Ἀρισταγόρεω , οὐδαμῶς πρόθυμοι ἦσαν ἄλλον τύραννον δέκεσθαι ἐς τὴν χώρην , οἷα ἐλευθερίης γευσάμενοι .
But the Milesians were glad enough to be rid of Aristagoras himself, and they had no wish to receive another tyrant into their country now that they had tasted freedom.


6.5.2
6209
καὶ δὴ νυκτὸς γὰρ ἐούσης βίῃ ἐπειρᾶτο κατιὼν ὁ Ἱστιαῖος ἐς τὴν Μίλητον , τιτρώσκεται τὸν μηρὸν ὑπό τευ τῶν Μιλησίων .
When Histiaeus tried to force his way into Miletus by night, he was wounded in the thigh by a Milesian.


6.5.2
6210
ὃ μὲν δὴ ὡς ἀπωστὸς τῆς ἑωυτοῦ γίνεται , ἀπικνέεται ὀπίσω ἐς τὴν Χίον ·
Since he was thrust out from his own city, he went back to Chios;


6.5.2
6211
ἐνθεῦτεν δέ , οὐ γὰρ ἔπειθε τοὺς Χίους ὥστε ἑωυτῷ δοῦναι νέας , διέβη ἐς Μυτιλήνην καὶ ἔπεισε Λεσβίους δοῦναί οἱ νέας .
when he could not persuade the Chians to give him ships, he then crossed over to Mytilene and persuaded the Lesbians to give him ships.


6.5.3
6212
οἳ δὲ πληρώσαντες ὀκτὼ τριήρεας ἔπλεον ἅμα Ἱστιαίῳ ἐς Βυζάντιον , ἐνθαῦτα δὲ ἱζόμενοι τὰς ἐκ τοῦ Πόντου ἐκπλεούσας τῶν νεῶν ἐλάμβανον , πλὴν ἢ ὅσοι αὐτῶν Ἱστιαίῳ ἔφασαν ἕτοιμοι εἶναι πείθεσθαι .
They manned eight triremes, and sailed with Histiaeus to  Byzantium; there they encamped, and seized all the ships that were sailing out of the  Euxine, except when the crews consented to serve Histiaeus.


6.6.1
6213
Ἱστιαῖος μέν νυν καὶ Μυτιληναῖοι ἐποίευν ταῦτα .
Such were the doings of Histiaeus and the Mytilenaeans.


6.6.1
6214
ἐπὶ δὲ Μίλητον αὐτὴν ναυτικὸς πολλὸς καὶ πεζὸς ἦν στρατὸς προσδόκιμος ·
Against Miletus itself a great fleet and army were expected,


6.6.1
6215
συστραφέντες γὰρ οἱ στρατηγοὶ τῶν Περσέων καὶ ἓν ποιήσαντες στρατόπεδον ἤλαυνον ἐπὶ τὴν Μίλητον , τ- ἄλλα πολίσματα περὶ ἐλάσσονος ποιησάμενοι .
for the Persian generals had joined their power together and made one army, which they led against Miletus, taking less account of the other fortresses.


6.6.1
6216
τοῦ δὲ ναυτικοῦ Φοίνικες μὲν ἦσαν προθυμότατοι , συνεστρατεύοντο δὲ καὶ Κύπριοι νεωστὶ κατεστραμμένοι καὶ Κίλικές τε καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι .
Of the fleet, the Phoenicians were the most eager to fight, and there came with them to the war the newly subdued Cyprians, and the Cilicians and Egyptians.


6.7.1
6217
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἐπὶ τὴν Μίλητον καὶ τὴν ἄλλην Ἰωνίην ἐστρατεύοντο , Ἴωνες δὲ πυνθανόμενοι ταῦτα ἔπεμπον προβούλους σφέων αὐτῶν ἐς Πανιώνιον .
These were coming to attack Miletus and the rest of Ionia.


6.7.1
6218
ἀπικομένοισι δὲ τούτοισι ἐς τοῦτον τὸν χῶρον καὶ βουλευομένοισι ἔδοξε πεζὸν μὲν στρατὸν μηδένα συλλέγειν ἀντίξοον Πέρσῃσι , ἀλλὰ τὰ τείχεα ῥύεσθαι αὐτοὺς Μιλησίους , τὸ δὲ ναυτικὸν πληροῦν ὑπολιπομένους μηδεμίαν τῶν νεῶν πληρώσαντας δὲ συλλέγεσθαι τὴν ταχίστην ἐς Λάδην προναυμαχήσοντας τῆς Μιλήτου .
When the Ionians learned of it, they sent deputies to take counsel for them in the Panionium.


6.7.1
6219
ἡ δὲ Λάδη ἐστὶ νῆσος μικρὴ ἐπὶ τῇ πόλι τῇ Μιλησίων κειμένη .
When they came to that place and consulted, they resolved not to collect a land army to meet the Persians, but to leave the Milesians to defend their walls themselves, and to man their fleet to the last ship and gather as quickly as possible at Lade to fight for Miletus at sea. This Lade is a small island lying off the city of Miletus.


6.8.1
6220
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πεπληρωμένῃσι τῇσι νηυσὶ παρῆσαν οἱ Ἴωνες , σὺν δέ σφι καὶ Αἰολέων ὅσοι τὴν Λέσβον νέμονται .
The Ionians then came there with their ships manned, and with them the Aeolians who dwell in Lesbos.


6.8.1
6221
ἐτάσσοντο δὲ ὧδε .
This was their order of battle:


6.8.1
6222
τὸ μὲν πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ εἶχον κέρας αὐτοὶ Μιλήσιοι , νέας παρεχόμενοι ὀγδώκοντα ·
The Milesians themselves had the eastern wing, bringing eighty ships;


6.8.1
6223
εἴχοντο δὲ τούτων Πριηνέες δυώδεκα νηυσὶ καὶ Μυήσιοι τρισὶ νηυσί , Μυησίων δὲ Τήιοι εἴχοντο ἑπτακαίδεκα νηυσί , Τηίων δὲ εἴχοντο Χῖοι ἑκατὸν νηυσί ·
next to them were the Prieneans with twelve ships, and the Myesians with three; next to the Myesians were the Teians with seventeen ships; next to these the Chians with a hundred;


6.8.2
6224
πρὸς δὲ τούτοισι Ἐρυθραῖοί τε ἐτάσσοντο καὶ Φωκαέες , Ἐρυθραῖοι μὲν ὀκτὼ νέας παρεχόμενοι , Φωκαέες δὲ τρεῖς ·
near these in the line were the Erythraeans, bringing eight ships, and the Phocaeans with three,


6.8.2
6225
Φωκαέων δὲ εἴχοντο Λέσβιοι νηυσὶ ἑβδομήκοντα ·
the Lesbians were next to the Phocaeans   with seventy ships;


6.8.2
6226
τελευταῖοι δὲ ἐτάσσοντο ἔχοντες τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρην κέρας Σάμιοι ἑξήκοντα νηυσί .
last of all in the line were the Samians, holding the western wing with sixty ships.


6.8.2
6227
πάντων δὲ τούτων ὁ σύμπας ἀριθμὸς ἐγένετο τρεῖς καὶ πεντήκοντα καὶ τριηκόσιαι τριήρεες .
The total number of all these together was three hundred and fifty-three triremes.


6.9.1
6228
αὗται μὲν Ἰώνων ἦσαν , τῶν δὲ βαρβάρων τὸ πλῆθος τῶν νεῶν ἦσαν ἑξακόσιαι .
These were the Ionian ships; the ships of the foreigners were six hundred.


6.9.1
6229
ὡς δὲ καὶ αὗται ἀπίκατο πρὸς τὴν Μιλησίην καὶ ὁ πεζός σφι ἅπας παρῆν , ἐνθαῦτα οἱ Περσέων στρατηγοὶ πυθόμενοι τὸ πλῆθος τῶν Ἰάδων νεῶν καταρρώδησαν μὴ οὐ δυνατοὶ γένωνται ὑπερβαλέσθαι , καὶ οὕτω οὔτε τὴν Μίλητον οἷοί τε ἔωσι ἐξελεῖν μὴ οὐκ ἐόντες ναυκράτορες , πρός τε Δαρείου κινδυνεύσωσι κακόν τι λαβεῖν .
When these, too, reached the Milesian shore, and all their land power was present, the Persian generals, learning the number of the Ionian ships, feared they would be too weak to overcome the Greeks. If they did not have mastery of the sea, they would not be able to take Miletus, and would be in danger of some evil treatment by Darius.


6.9.2
6230
ταῦτα ἐπιλεγόμενοι , συλλέξαντες τῶν Ἰώνων τοὺς τυράννους , οἳ ὑπ’ Ἀρισταγόρεω μὲν τοῦ Μιλησίου καταλυθέντες τῶν ἀρχέων ἔφευγον ἐς Μήδους , ἐτύγχανον δὲ τότε συστρατευόμενοι ἐπὶ τὴν Μίλητον , τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν τοὺς παρεόντας συγκαλέσαντες ἔλεγόν σφι τάδε .
With this in mind, they gathered the tyrants of the Ionians who had been deposed from their governments by Aristagoras of  Miletus and had fled to the Medes, and who now were with the army that was led against  Miletus. They gathered as many of these men as were with them and said to them:


6.9.3
6231
" ἄνδρες Ἴωνες , νῦν τις ὑμέων εὖ ποιήσας φανήτω τὸν βασιλέος οἶκον ·
“Men of Ionia, let each one of you now show that he has done good service to the king's house;


6.9.3
6232
τοὺς γὰρ ἑωυτοῦ ἕκαστος ὑμέων πολιήτας πειράσθω ἀποσχίζων ἀπὸ τοῦ λοιποῦ συμμαχικοῦ .
let each one of you try to separate your own countrymen from the rest of the allied power.


6.9.3
6233
προϊσχόμενοι δὲ ἐπαγγείλασθε τάδε , ὡς πείσονταί τε ἄχαρι οὐδὲν διὰ τὴν ἀπόστασιν , οὐδέ σφι οὔτε τὰ ἱρὰ οὔτε τὰ ἴδια ἐμπεπρήσεται , οὐδὲ βιαιότερον ἕξουσι οὐδὲν ἢ πρότερον εἶχον .
Set this promise before them: they will suffer no harm for their rebellion, neither their temples nor their houses will be burnt, nor will they in any way be treated more violently than before.


6.9.4
6234
εἰ δὲ ταῦτα μὲν οὐ ποιήσουσι , οἳ δὲ πάντως διὰ μάχης ἐλεύσονται , τάδε ἤδη σφι λέγετε ἐπηρεάζοντες , τά περ σφέας κατέξει , ὡς ἑσσωθέντες τῇ μάχῃ ἐξανδραποδιεῦνται , καὶ ὡς σφέων τοὺς παῖδας ἐκτομίας ποιήσομεν , τὰς δὲ παρθένους ἀνασπάστους ἐς Βάκτρα , καὶ ὡς τὴν χώρην ἄλλοισι παραδώσομεν " .
But if they will not do so and are set on fighting, then utter a threat that will restrain them: if they are defeated in battle, they will be enslaved; we will make eunuchs of their boys, and carry their maidens captive to  Bactra, and hand over their land to others.”


6.10.1
6235
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἔλεγον τάδε .
So they spoke;


6.10.1
6236
τῶν δὲ Ἰώνων οἱ τύραννοι διέπεμπον νυκτὸς ἕκαστος ἐς τοὺς ἑωυτοῦ ἐξαγγελλόμενος .
the Ionian tyrants sent their messages by night, each to his own countrymen.


6.10.1
6237
οἱ δὲ Ἴωνες , ἐς τοὺς καὶ ἀπίκοντο αὗται αἱ ἀγγελίαι , ἀγνωμοσύνῃ τε διεχρέωντο καὶ οὐ προσίεντο τὴν προδοσίην ·
But the Ionians to whom these messages came were stubborn and would have no part of the treachery, each thinking that the Persians made this offer to them alone.


6.10.1
6238
ἑωυτοῖσι δὲ ἕκαστοι ἐδόκεον μούνοισι ταῦτα τοὺς Πέρσας ἐξαγγέλλεσθαι .
This happened immediately after the Persians arrived at Miletus.


6.11.1
6239
ταῦτα μέν νυν ἰθέως ἀπικομένων ἐς τὴν Μίλητον τῶν Περσέων ἐγίνετο ·
Then the Ionians who had gathered at Lade held assemblies;


6.11.1
6240
μετὰ δὲ τῶν Ἰώνων συλλεχθέντων ἐς τὴν Λάδην ἐγίνοντο ἀγοραί , καὶ δή κού σφι καὶ ἄλλοι ἠγορόωντο , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ ὁ Φωκαεὺς στρατηγὸς Διονύσιος λέγων τάδε .
among those whom I suppose to have addressed them was Dionysius, the Phocaean general, who spoke thus:


6.11.2
6241
" ἐπὶ ξυροῦ γὰρ ἀκμῆς ἔχεται ἡμῖν τὰ πρήγματα , ἄνδρες Ἴωνες , ἢ εἶναι ἐλευθέροισι ἢ δούλοισι , καὶ τούτοισι ὡς δρηπέτῃσι ·
“Our affairs, men of Ionia, stand on the edge of a razor, whether to be free men or slaves, and runaway slaves at that.


6.11.2
6242
νῦν ὦν ὑμεῖς ἢν μὲν βούλησθε ταλαιπωρίας ἐνδέκεσθαι , τὸ παραχρῆμα μὲν πόνος ὑμῖν ἔσται , οἷοί τε δὲ ἔσεσθε ὑπερβαλόμενοι τοὺς ἐναντίους εἶναι ἐλεύθεροι ·
If you now consent to endure hardships, you will have toil for the present time, but it will be in your power to overcome your enemies and gain freedom;


6.11.2
6243
εἰ δὲ μαλακίῃ τε καὶ ἀταξίῃ διαχρήσησθε , οὐδεμίαν ὑμέων ἔχω ἐλπίδα μὴ οὐ δώσειν ὑμέας δίκην βασιλέι τῆς ἀποστάσιος .
but if you will be weak and disorderly, I see nothing that can save you from paying the penalty to the king for your rebellion.


6.11.3
6244
ἀλλ’ ἐμοί τε πείθεσθε καὶ ἐμοὶ ὑμέας αὐτοὺς ἐπιτρέψατε ·
Believe me and entrust yourselves to me;


6.11.3
6245
καὶ ὑμῖν ἐγώ , θεῶν τὰ ἴσα νεμόντων , ὑποδέκομαι ἢ οὐ συμμίξειν τοὺς πολεμίους ἢ συμμίσγοντας πολλὸν ἐλασσωθήσεσθαι " .
I promise you that (if the gods deal fairly with us) either our enemies shall not meet us in battle, or if they do they shall be utterly vanquished.”


6.12.1
6246
ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες οἱ Ἴωνες ἐπιτρέπουσι σφέας αὐτοὺς τῷ Διονυσίῳ .
When the Ionians heard this, they put themselves in Dionysius' hands.


6.12.1
6247
ὁ δὲ ἀνάγων ἑκάστοτε ἐπὶ κέρας τὰς νέας , ὅκως τοῖσι ἐρέτῃσι χρήσαιτο διέκπλοον ποιεύμενος τῇσι νηυσὶ δι’ ἀλληλέων καὶ τοὺς ἐπιβάτας ὁπλίσειε , τὸ λοιπὸν τῆς ἡμέρης τὰς νέας ἔχεσκε ἐπ’ ἀγκυρέων , παρεῖχέ τε τοῖσι Ἴωσι πόνον δι’ ἡμέρης .
He then each day put out to sea with ships in column, using the rowers to pierce each other's line of ships, and arming the fighting men on board; for the rest of the day he kept the fleet at anchor; all day he made the Ionians work.


6.12.2
6248
μέχρι μέν νυν ἡμερέων ἑπτὰ ἐπείθοντό τε καὶ ἐποίευν τὸ κελευόμενον ·
For seven days they obeyed him and did his bidding;


6.12.2
6249
τῇ δὲ ἐπὶ ταύτῃσι οἱ Ἴωνες , οἷα ἀπαθέες ἐόντες πόνων τοιούτων τετρυμένοι τε ταλαιπωρίῃσί τε καὶ ἡλίῳ , ἔλεξαν πρὸς ἑωυτοὺς τάδε .
but on the next day, untried as they were in such labor and worn out by hard work and by the sun, the Ionians began to say each to other:


6.12.3
6250
" τίνα δαιμόνων παραβάντες τάδε ἀναπίμπλαμεν ;
“Against what god have we sinned that we have to fulfill this task?


6.12.3
6251
οἵτινες παραφρονήσαντες καὶ ἐκπλώσαντες ἐκ τοῦ νόου ἀνδρὶ Φωκαέι ἀλαζόνι , παρεχομένῳ νέας τρεῖς , ἐπιτρέψαντες ἡμέας αὐτοὺς ἔχομεν ·
We have lost our minds and launched out into folly, committing ourselves into the hands of this Phocaean braggart, who brings but three ships; and having got us he afflicts us with afflictions incurable.


6.12.3
6252
ὁ δὲ παραλαβὼν ἡμέας λυμαίνεται λύμῃσι ἀνηκέστοισι , καὶ δὴ πολλοὶ μὲν ἡμέων ἐς νούσους πεπτώκασι , πολλοὶ δὲ ἐπίδοξοι τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο πείσεσθαι εἰσί , πρό τε τούτων τῶν κακῶν ἡμῖν γε κρέσσον καὶ ὅ τι ὦν ἄλλο παθεῖν ἐστι καὶ τὴν μέλλουσαν δουληίην ὑπομεῖναι ἥτις ἔσται , μᾶλλον ἢ τῇ παρεούσῃ συνέχεσθαι .
Many of us have fallen sick already, and many are likely to suffer the same thing; instead of these ills, it would be better for us to suffer anything, and endure this coming slavery, whatever it will be, rather than be oppressed by that which is now upon us.


6.12.3
6253
φέρετε , τοῦ λοιποῦ μὴ πειθώμεθα αὐτοῦ " .
Come, let us obey him no longer!”


6.12.4
6254
ταῦτα ἔλεξαν , καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα αὐτίκα πείθεσθαι οὐδεὶς ἤθελε , ἀλλ’ οἷα στρατιὴ σκηνάς τε πηξάμενοι ἐν τῇ νήσῳ ἐσκιητροφέοντο καὶ ἐσβαίνειν οὐκ ἐθέλεσκον ἐς τὰς νέας οὐδ’ ἀναπειρᾶσθαι .
So they spoke, and from then on no man would obey. As if they were an army, they raised tents on the island where they stayed in the shade, and they were unwilling to embark upon their ships or to continue their exercises.


6.13.1
6255
μαθόντες δὲ ταῦτα τὰ γινόμενα ἐκ τῶν Ἰώνων οἱ στρατηγοὶ τῶν Σαμίων ἐνθαῦτα δὴ παρ’ Αἰάκεος τοῦ Συλοσῶντος κείνους τοὺς πρότερον ἔπεμπε λόγους ὁ Αἰάκης κελευόντων τῶν Περσέων , δεόμενος σφέων ἐκλιπεῖν τὴν Ἰώνων συμμαχίην ·
When the generals of the Samians learned what the Ionians were doing, they recalled that message which Aeaces son of Syloson had already sent them at the Persians' bidding, entreating them to desert the Ionian alliance;


6.13.1
6256
οἱ Σάμιοι ὦν ὁρῶντες ἐοῦσαν ἅμα μὲν ἀταξίην πολλὴν ἐκ τῶν Ἰώνων ἐδέκοντο τοὺς λόγους , ἅμα δὲ κατεφαίνετό σφι εἶναι ἀδύνατα τὰ βασιλέος πρήγματα ὑπερβαλέσθαι , εὖ δὲ ἐπιστάμενοι ὡς εἰ καὶ τὸ παρεὸν ναυτικὸν ὑπερβαλοίατο τὸν Δαρεῖον , ἄλλο σφι παρέσται πενταπλήσιον .
seeing great disorder on the Ionian side, they consented to the message; moreover, it seemed impossible to them to overcome the king's power, and they were well assured that if they overcame Darius' present fleet, another one five times as large would come.


6.13.2
6257
προφάσιος ὦν ἐπιλαβόμενοι , ἐπείτε τάχιστα εἶδον τοὺς Ἴωνας οὐ βουλομένους εἶναι χρηστούς , ἐν κέρδεϊ ἐποιεῦντο περιποιῆσαι τά τε ἱρὰ τὰ σφέτερα καὶ τὰ ἴδια .
Therefore, as soon as they saw the Ionians refusing to be useful, they took up that for a pretext, considering it advantageous to save their own temples and houses.


6.13.2
6258
ὁ δὲ Αἰάκης , παρ’ ὅτευ τοὺς λόγους ἐδέκοντο οἱ Σάμιοι , παῖς μὲν ἦν Συλοσῶντος τοῦ Αἰάκεος , τύραννος δὲ ἐὼν Σάμου ὑπὸ τοὺ Μιλησίου Ἀρισταγόρεω ἀπεστέρητο τὴν ἀρχὴν κατά περ οἱ ἄλλοι τῆς Ἰωνίης τύραννοι .
This Aeaces, from whom they received the message, was the son of Syloson son of Aeaces, and had been tyrant of Samos until he was deposed from his rule by Aristagoras of Miletus, just like the other Ionian tyrants.


6.14.1
6259
τότε ὦν ἐπεὶ ἐπέπλεον οἱ Φοίνικες , οἱ Ἴωνες ἀντανῆγον καὶ αὐτοὶ τὰς νέας ἐπὶ κέρας .
Now when the Phoenician fleet came sailing against them, the Ionians put out to sea against them with their ships in column.


6.14.1
6260
ὡς δὲ καὶ ἀγχοῦ ἐγίνοντο καὶ συνέμισγον ἀλλήλοισι , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν οὐκ ἔχω ἀτρεκέως συγγράψαι οἵτινες τῶν Ἰώνων ἐγίνοντο ἄνδρες κακοὶ ἢ ἀγαθοὶ ἐν τῇ ναυμαχίῃ ταύτῃ ·
When they drew near and met each other in battle, which of the Ionians were brave men or cowards then in that sea-fight I cannot exactly say;


6.14.1
6261
ἀλλήλους γὰρ καταιτιῶνται .
for they all blame each other.


6.14.2
6262
λέγονται δὲ Σάμιοι ἐνθαῦτα κατὰ τὰ συγκείμενα πρὸς τὸν Αἰάκεα ἀειράμενοι τὰ ἱστία ἀποπλῶσαι ἐκ τῆς τάξιος ἐς τὴν Σάμον , πλὴν ἕνδεκα νεῶν ·
The Samians are said, according to their agreement with Aeaces, to have raised their sails and gone off to Samos, leaving their post, all except eleven ships.


6.14.2
6263
τουτέων δὲ οἱ τριήραρχοι παρέμενον καὶ ἐναυμάχεον ἀνηκουστήσαντες τοῖσι στρατηγοῖσι ·
The captains of these stood their ground and fought, disobeying their admirals.


6.14.3
6264
καί σφι τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Σαμίων ἔδωκε διὰ τοῦτο τὸ πρῆγμα ἐν στήλῃ ἀναγραφῆναι πατρόθεν ὡς ἀνδράσι ἀγαθοῖσι γενομένοισι , καὶ ἔστι αὕτη ἡ στήλη ἐν τῇ ἀγορῇ .
For this deed the Samian people granted that their names and patronymics should be engraved on a pillar as brave men; this pillar now stands in their market-place.


6.14.3
6265
ἰδόμενοι δὲ καὶ Λέσβιοι τοὺς προσεχέας φεύγοντας τ- αὐτὸ ἐποίευν τοῖσι Σαμίοισι ·
But the Lesbians, seeing their neighbors fleeing, did the same as the Samians;


6.14.3
6266
ὣς δὲ καὶ οἱ πλεῦνες τῶν Ἰώνων ἐποίευν τὰ αὐτὰ ταῦτα .
and most of the Ionians did likewise.


6.15.1
6267
τῶν δὲ παραμεινάντων ἐν τῇ ναυμαχίῃ περιέφθησαν τρηχύτατα Χῖοι ὡς ἀποδεικνύμενοί τε ἔργα λαμπρὰ καὶ οὐκ ἐθελοκακέοντες .
The most roughly handled of those that stood their ground in the sea-fight were the Chians, since they refused to be cowards and achieved deeds of renown.


6.15.1
6268
παρείχοντο μὲν γάρ , ὥσπερ καὶ πρότερον εἰρέθη , νέας ἑκατόν , καὶ ἐπ’ ἑκάστης αὐτέων ἄνδρας τεσσεράκοντα τῶν ἀστῶν λογάδας ἐπιβατεύοντας .
They brought a hundred ships to the fleet, as was mentioned above, and on each ship were forty picked men of their citizens.


6.15.2
6269
ὁρέοντες δὲ τοὺς πολλοὺς τῶν συμμάχων προδιδόντας οὐκ ἐδικαίευν γίνεσθαι τοῖσι κακοῖσι αὐτῶν ὅμοιοι , ἀλλὰ μετ’ ὀλίγων συμμάχων μεμουνωμένοι διεκπλέοντες ἐναυμάχεον , ἐς ὃ τῶν πολεμίων ἑλόντες νέας συχνὰς ἀπέβαλον τῶν σφετερέων τὰς πλεῦνας .
Seeing themselves betrayed by the greater part of their allies, they did not think it right to act like the worst among them; with only a few allies to aid them they fought on and broke the enemy's line, until they had taken many ships but lost most of their own.


6.16.1
6270
Χῖοι μὲν δὴ τῇσι λοιπῇσι τῶν νεῶν ἀποφεύγουσι ἐς τὴν ἑωυτῶν ·
The Chians escaped to their own country with their remaining ships,


6.16.1
6271
ὅσοισι δὲ τῶν Χίων ἀδύνατοι ἦσαν αἱ νέες ὑπὸ τρωμάτων , οὗτοι δὲ ὡς ἐδιώκοντο καταφυγγάνουσι πρὸς τὴν Μυκάλην .
but the crews of the Chian ships that were damaged and disabled were pursued and took refuge in Mykale.


6.16.1
6272
νέας μὲν δὴ αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ ἐποκείλαντες κατέλιπον , οἳ δὲ πεζῇ ἐκομίζοντο διὰ τῆς ἠπείρου .
There the men beached and left their ships, and made their way across the mainland.


6.16.2
6273
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἐσέβαλον ἐς τὴν Ἐφεσίην κομιζόμενοι οἱ Χῖοι , νυκτός τε γὰρ ἀπίκατο ἐς αὐτὴν καὶ ἐόντων τῇσι γυναιξὶ αὐτόθι θεσμοφορίων , ἐνθαῦτα δὴ οἱ Ἐφέσιοι , οὔτε προακηκοότες ὡς εἶχε περὶ τῶν Χίων ἰδόντες τε στρατὸν ἐς τὴν χώρην ἐσβεβληκότα , πάγχυ σφέας καταδόξαντες εἶναι κλῶπας καὶ ἰέναι ἐπὶ τὰς γυναῖκας , ἐξεβοήθεον πανδημεὶ καὶ ἔκτεινον τοὺς Χίους .
But when the Chians entered the lands of  Ephesus on their march, they came by night while the women were celebrating the Thesmophoria; then the Ephesians, never having heard the story of the Chians and seeing an army invading their country, were fully persuaded that these were robbers come after their women; so they mustered all their force and killed the Chians.


6.17.1
6274
οὗτοι μὲν τοίνυν τοιαύτῃσι περιέπιπτον τύχῃσι .
So these men met with such a fate.


6.17.1
6275
Διονύσιος δὲ ὁ Φωκαεὺς ἐπείτε ἔμαθε τῶν Ἰώνων τὰ πρήγματα διεφθαρμένα , νέας ἑλὼν τρεῖς τῶν πολεμίων ἀπέπλεε ἐς μὲν Φώκαιαν οὐκέτι , εὖ εἰδὼς ὡς ἀνδραποδιεῖται σὺν τῇ ἄλλῃ Ἰωνίῃ ·
As for Dionysius the Phocaean, when he saw that the Ionian cause was lost, he sailed away with the three enemy ships that he had captured; but not to Phocaea, now that he knew well that it would be enslaved with the rest of Ionia;


6.17.1
6276
ὁ δὲ ἰθέως ὡς εἶχε ἔπλεε ἐς Φοινίκην , γαύλους δὲ ἐνθαῦτα καταδύσας καὶ χρήματα λαβὼν πολλὰ ἔπλεε ἐς Σικελίην , ὁρμώμενος δὲ ἐνθεῦτεν ληιστὴς κατεστήκεε Ἑλλήνων μὲν οὐδενός , Καρχηδονίων δὲ καὶ Τυρσηνῶν .
he right away sailed straight to Phoenicia instead, sunk some merchant ships, took a lot of money, and sailed to Sicily; from this base he set himself up as a pirate, robbing Carthaginians and Tyrrhenians, but no Greeks.


6.18.1
6277
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ἐπείτε τῇ ναυμαχίῃ ἐνίκων τοὺς Ἴωνας , τὴν Μίλητον πολιορκέοντες ἐκ γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης καὶ ὑπορύσσοντες τὰ τείχεα καὶ παντοίας μηχανὰς προσφέροντες , αἱρέουσι κατ’ ἄκρης ἕκτῳ ἔτεϊ ἀπὸ τῆς ἀποστάσιος τῆς Ἀρισταγόρεω καὶ ἠνδραποδίσαντο τὴν πόλιν , ὥστε συμπεσεῖν τὸ πάθος τῷ χρηστηρίῳ τῷ ἐς Μίλητον γενομένῳ .
When the Persians had conquered the Ionians by sea, they laid siege to  Miletus by sea and land, mining the walls and using every device against it, until they utterly captured it in the sixth year after the revolt of Aristagoras. They enslaved the city, and thus the calamity agreed with the oracle concerning  Miletus.


6.19.1
6278
χρεωμένοισι γὰρ Ἀργείοισι ἐν Δελφοῖσι περὶ σωτηρίης τῆς πόλιος τῆς σφετέρης ἐχρήσθη ἐπίκοινον χρηστήριον , τὸ μὲν ἐς αὐτοὺς τοὺς Ἀργείους φέρον , τὴν δὲ παρενθήκην ἔχρησε ἐς Μιλησίους .
When the Argives inquired at Delphi about the safety of their city, a common response was given, one part regarding the Argives themselves, but there was an additional response for the Milesians.


6.19.1
6279
τὸ μέν νυν ἐς τοὺς Ἀργείους ἔχον , ἐπεὰν κατὰ τοῦτο γένωμαι τοῦ λόγου , τότε μνησθήσομαι ·
I will mention the part concerning the Argives when I come to that part of my history;


6.19.2
6280
τὰ δὲ τοῖσι Μιλησίοισι οὐ παρεοῦσι ἔχρησε , ἔχει ὧδε .
this was the prophecy given to the Milesians in their absence:


6.19.2
6281
καὶ τότε δή , Μίλητε κακῶν ἐπιμήχανε ἔργων , πολλοῖσιν δεῖπνόν τε καὶ ἀγλαὰ δῶρα γενήσῃ , σαὶ δ’ ἄλοχοι πολλοῖσι πόδας νίψουσι κομήταις , νηοῦ δ’ ἡμετέρου Διδύμοις ἄλλοισι μελήσει .
"Then, Miletus, contriver of evil deeds, For many will you become a banquet and glorious gifts; Your wives will wash the feet of many long-haired men; Other ministers will tend my Didyman shrine!"


6.19.3
6282
τότε δὴ ταῦτα τοὺς Μιλησίους κατελάμβανε , ὁκότε ἄνδρες μὲν οἱ πλεῦνες ἐκτείνοντο ὑπὸ τῶν Περσέων ἐόντων κομητέων , γυναῖκες δὲ καὶ τέκνα ἐν ἀνδραπόδων λόγῳ ἐγίνοντο , ἱρὸν δὲ τὸ ἐν Διδύμοισι καὶ ὁ νηός τε καὶ τὸ χρηστήριον .
All this now came upon the Milesians, since most of their men were slain by the Persians, who wore long hair, and their women and children were accounted as slaves,


6.19.3
6283
συληθέντα ἐνεπίμπρατο .
and the temple at Didyma with its shrine and place of divination was plundered and burnt.


6.19.3
6284
τῶν δ’ ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ τούτῳ χρημάτων πολλάκις μνήμην ἑτέρωθι τοῦ λόγου ἐποιησάμην .
Of the wealth that was in this temple I have often spoken elsewhere in my history.


6.20.1
6285
ἐνθεῦτεν οἱ ζωγρηθέντες τῶν Μιλησίων ἤγοντο ἐς Σοῦσα .
After that, the captive Milesians were brought to Susa.


6.20.1
6286
βασιλεὺς δὲ σφέας Δαρεῖος κακὸν οὐδὲν ἄλλο ποιήσας κατοίκισε ἐπὶ τῇ Ἐρυθρῇ καλεομένῃ θαλάσσῃ ἐν Ἄμπῃ πόλι , παρ’ ἣν Τίγρης ποταμὸς παραρρέων ἐς θάλασσαν ἐξιεῖ .
King Darius did them no further harm, settling them by the sea called Red, in the city of Ampe, by which the river Tigris flows as it issues into the sea.


6.20.1
6287
τῆς δὲ Μιλησίων χώρης αὐτοὶ μὲν οἱ Πέρσαι εἶχον τὰ περὶ τὴν πόλιν καὶ τὸ πεδίον , τὰ δὲ ὑπεράκρια ἔδοσαν Καρσὶ Πηδασεῦσι ἐκτῆσθαι .
Of the Milesian land the Persians themselves held what was nearest to the city, and the plain, giving the hill country into the possession of Carians from Pedasa.


6.21.1
6288
παθοῦσι δὲ ταῦτα Μιλησίοισι πρὸς Περσέων οὐκ ἀπέδοσαν τὴν ὁμοίην Συβαρῖται , οἳ Λᾶόν τε καὶ Σκίδρον οἴκεον τῆς πόλιος ἀπεστερημένοι .
Now when the Milesians suffered all this at the hands of the Persians, the Sybarites (who had lost their city and dwelt in Laus and Scidrus) did not give them equal return for what they had done.


6.21.1
6289
Συβάριος γὰρ ἁλούσης ὑπὸ Κροτωνιητέων Μιλήσιοι πάντες ἡβηδὸν ἀπεκείραντο τὰς κεφαλὰς καὶ πένθος μέγα προσεθήκαντο ·
When Sybaris was taken by the Crotoniates, all the people of Miletus, young and old, shaved their heads and made great public lamentation;


6.21.1
6290
πόλιες γὰρ αὗται μάλιστα δὴ τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν ἀλλήλῃσι ἐξεινώθησαν ·
no cities which we know were ever so closely joined in friendship as these.


6.21.2
6291
οὐδὲν ὁμοίως καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι .
The Athenians acted very differently.


6.21.2
6292
Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν γὰρ δῆλον ἐποίησαν ὑπεραχθεσθέντες τῇ Μιλήτου ἁλώσι τῇ τε ἄλλῃ πολλαχῇ , καὶ δὴ καὶ ποιήσαντι Φρυνίχῳ δρᾶμα Μιλήτου ἅλωσιν καὶ διδάξαντι ἐς δάκρυά τε ἔπεσε τὸ θέητρον , καὶ ἐζημίωσάν μιν ὡς ἀναμνήσαντα οἰκήια κακὰ χιλίῃσι δραχμῇσι , καὶ ἐπέταξαν μηδένα χρᾶσθαι τούτῳ τῷ δράματι .
The Athenians made clear their deep grief for the taking of Miletus in many ways, but especially in this: when Phrynichus wrote a play entitled “The Fall of Miletus” and produced it, the whole theater fell to weeping; they fined Phrynichus a thousand drachmas for bringing to mind a calamity that affected them so personally, and forbade the performance of that play forever.


6.22.1
6293
Μίλητος μέν νυν Μιλησίων ἠρήμωτο .
Miletus then was left empty of Milesians.


6.22.1
6294
Σαμίων δὲ τοῖσί τι ἔχουσι τὸ μὲν ἐς τοὺς Μήδους ἐκ τῶν στρατηγῶν τῶν σφετέρων ποιηθὲν οὐδαμῶς ἤρεσκε , ἐδόκεε δὲ μετὰ τὴν ναυμαχίην αὐτίκα βουλευομένοισι , πρὶν ἤ σφι ἐς τὴν χώρην ἀπικέσθαι τὸν τύραννον Αἰάκεα , ἐς ἀποικίην ἐκπλέειν μηδὲ μένοντας Μήδοισί τε καὶ Αἰάκεϊ δουλεύειν .
The men of property among the Samians were displeased by the dealings of their generals with the Medes, so after the sea-fight they took counsel immediately and resolved that before Aeaces the tyrant came to their country they would sail to a colony, rather than remain and be slaves of the Medes and Aeaces.


6.22.2
6295
Ζαγκλαῖοι γὰρ οἱ ἀπὸ Σικελίης τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον τοῦτον πέμποντες ἐς τὴν Ἰωνίην ἀγγέλους ἐπεκαλέοντο τοὺς Ἴωνας ἐς Καλὴν ἀκτήν , βουλόμενοι αὐτόθι πόλιν κτίσαι Ἰώνων .
The people of Zancle in Sicily about this time sent messengers to Ionia inviting the Ionians to the Fair Coast, desiring there to found an Ionian city.


6.22.2
6296
ἡ δὲ Καλὴ αὕτη ἀκτὴ καλεομένη ἔστι μὲν Σικελῶν , πρὸς δὲ Τυρσηνίην τετραμμένη τῆς Σικελίης .
This Fair Coast, as it is called, is in Sicily, in that part which looks towards Tyrrhenia.


6.22.2
6297
τούτων ὦν ἐπικαλεομένων οἱ Σάμιοι μοῦνοι Ἰώνων ἐστάλησαν , σὺν δέ σφι Μιλησίων οἱ ἐκπεφευγότες ·
At this invitation, the Samians alone of the Ionians, with those Milesians who had escaped, set forth.


6.22.2
6298
ἐν ᾧ τοιόνδε δή τι συνήνεικε γενέσθαι .
In doing so, the following incident occurred.


6.23.1
6299
Σάμιοι γὰρ κομιζόμενοι ἐς Σικελίην ἐγίνοντο ἐν Λοκροῖσι τοῖσι Ἐπιζεφυρίοισι , καὶ Ζαγκλαῖοι αὐτοί τε καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς αὐτῶν , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Σκύθης , περικατέατο πόλιν τῶν Σικελῶν ἐξελεῖν βουλόμενοι .
In their journey a thing happened to them such as I will show. As they voyaged to  Sicily, the Samians came to the country of the Epizephyrian Locrians at a time when the people of  Zancle and their king (whose name was Scythes) were besieging a Sicilian town desiring to take it.


6.23.2
6300
μαθὼν δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Ῥηγίου τύραννος Ἀναξίλεως , τότε ἐὼν διάφορος τοῖσι Ζαγκλαίοισι , συμμίξας τοῖσι Σαμίοισι ἀναπείθει ὡς χρεὸν εἴη Καλὴν μὲν ἀκτήν , ἐπ’ ἣν ἔπλεον , ἐᾶν χαίρειν , τὴν δὲ Ζάγκλην σχεῖν ἐοῦσαν ἔρημον ἀνδρῶν .
Learning this, Anaxilaus the tyrant of  Rhegium, being then in a feud with the Zanclaeans, joined forces with the Samians and persuaded them to leave off their voyage to the Fair Coast and seize  Zancle while it was deserted by its men.


6.23.3
6301
πειθομένων δὲ τῶν Σαμίων καὶ σχόντων τὴν Ζάγκλην , ἐνθαῦτα οἱ Ζαγκλαῖοι , ὡς ἐπύθοντο ἐχομένην τὴν πόλιν ἑωυτῶν , ἐβοήθεον αὐτῇ καὶ ἐπεκαλέοντο Ἱπποκράτεα τὸν Γέλης τύραννον ·
The Samians consented and seized Zancle; when they learned that their city was taken, the Zanclaeans came to deliver it,


6.23.3
6302
ἦν γὰρ δή σφι οὗτος σύμμαχος .
calling to their aid Hippocrates the tyrant of Gela, who was their ally.


6.23.4
6303
ἐπείτε δὲ αὐτοῖσι καὶ ὁ Ἱπποκράτης σὺν τῇ στρατιῇ ἧκε βοηθέων , Σκύθην μὲν τὸν μούναρχον τῶν Ζαγκλαίων ὡς ἀποβαλόντα τὴν πόλιν ὁ Ἱπποκράτης πεδήσας καὶ τὸν ἀδελφεὸν αὐτοῦ Πυθογένεα ἐς Ἴνυκα πόλιν ἀπέπεμψε , τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς Ζαγκλαίους κοινολογησάμενος τοῖσι Σαμίοισι καὶ ὅρκους δοὺς καὶ δεξάμενος προέδωκε .
But Hippocrates, when he came bringing his army to aid them, put Scythes the monarch of  Zancle and his brother Pythogenes in chains for losing the city, and sent them away to the city of Inyx. He betrayed the rest of the Zanclaeans to the Samians, with whom he had made an agreement and exchanged oaths.


6.23.5
6304
μισθὸς δέ οἱ ἦν εἰρημένος ὅδε ὑπὸ τῶν Σαμίων , πάντων τῶν ἐπίπλων καὶ ἀνδραπόδων τὰ ἡμίσεα μεταλαβεῖν τῶν ἐν τῇ πόλι , τὰ δ’ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀγρῶν πάντα Ἱπποκράτεα λαγχάνειν .
The price which the Samians agreed to give him was that Hippocrates should take for his share half of the movable goods and slaves in the city, and all that was in the country.


6.23.6
6305
τοὺς μὲν δὴ πλεῦνας τῶν Ζαγκλαίων αὐτὸς ἐν ἀνδραπόδων λόγῳ εἶχε δήσας , τοὺς δὲ κορυφαίους αὐτῶν τριηκοσίους ἔδωκε τοῖσι Σαμίοισι κατασφάξαι ·
Most of the Zanclaeans were kept in chains as slaves by Hippocrates himself; he gave three hundred chief men to the Samians to be put to death,


6.23.6
6306
οὐ μέντοι οἵ γε Σάμιοι ἐποίησαν ταῦτα .
but the Samians did not do so.


6.24.1
6307
Σκύθης δὲ ὁ τῶν Ζαγκλαίων μούναρχος ἐκ τῆς Ἴνυκος ἐκδιδρήσκει ἐς Ἱμέρην , ἐκ δὲ ταύτης παρῆν ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην καὶ ἀνέβη παρὰ βασιλέα Δαρεῖον ·
Scythes the monarch of Zancle escaped from Inyx to Himera, and from there he came to Asia and went up country to king Darius.


6.24.1
6308
καί μιν ἐνόμισε Δαρεῖος πάντων ἀνδρῶν δικαιότατον εἶναι , ὅσοι ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος παρ’ ἑωυτὸν ἀνέβησαν .
Darius considered him the most honest man of all who had come up to him from Hellas;


6.24.2
6309
καὶ γὰρ παραιτησάμενος βασιλέα ἐς Σικελίην ἀπίκετο καὶ αὖτις ἐκ τῆς Σικελίης ὀπίσω παρὰ βασιλέα , ἐς ὃ γήραϊ μέγα ὄλβιος ἐὼν ἐτελεύτησε ἐν Πέρσῃσι .
for he returned by the king's permission to Sicily and from Sicily back again to Darius, until in old age he ended his life in Persia in great wealth.


6.24.2
6310
Σάμιοι δὲ ἀπαλλαχθέντες Μήδων ἀπονητὶ πόλιν καλλίστην Ζάγκλην περιεβεβλέατο .
Without trouble the Samians planted themselves in that most excellent city of Zancle, after they had escaped from the Medes.


6.25.1
6311
μετὰ δὲ τὴν ναυμαχίην τὴν ὑπὲρ Μιλήτου γενομένην Φοίνικες κελευσάντων Περσέων κατῆγον ἐς Σάμον Αἰάκεα τὸν Συλοσῶντος ὡς πολλοῦ τε ἄξιον γενόμενον σφίσι καὶ μεγάλα κατεργασάμενον ·
After the fight at sea for  Miletus, the Phoenicians at the Persians' bidding brought Aeaces son of Syloson back to  Samos, for the high worth of his service to them and for his great achievements. Because of the desertion of their ships in the sea-fight, the Samians were the only rebel people whose city and temples were not burnt.


6.25.2
6312
καὶ Σαμίοισι μούνοισι τῶν ἀποστάντων ἀπὸ Δαρείου διὰ τὴν ἔκλειψιν τῶν νεῶν ἐν τῇ ναυμαχίῃ οὔτε ἡ πόλις οὔτε τὰ ἱρὰ ἐνεπρήσθη .
After Miletus was captured, the Persians at once gained possession of Caria.


6.25.2
6313
Μιλήτου δὲ ἁλούσης αὐτίκα Καρίην ἔσχον οἱ Πέρσαι , τὰς μὲν ἐθελοντὴν τῶν πολίων ὑποκυψάσας , τὰς δὲ ἀνάγκῃ προσηγάγοντο .
Some of the towns submitted voluntarily; others were brought over by force.


6.26.1
6314
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ οὕτω ἐγίνετο .
All this happened so.


6.26.1
6315
Ἱστιαίῳ δὲ τῷ Μιλησίῳ ἐόντι περὶ Βυζάντιον καὶ συλλαμβάνοντι τὰς Ἰώνων ὁλκάδας ἐκπλεούσας ἐκ τοῦ Πόντου ἐξαγγέλλεται τὰ περὶ τὴν Μίλητον γενόμενα .
Histiaeus the Milesian was at Byzantium, seizing the Ionian merchant ships as they sailed out of the Euxine, when he had news of the business of Miletus.


6.26.1
6316
τὰ μὲν δὴ περὶ Ἑλλήσποντον ἔχοντα πρήγματα ἐπιτράπει Βισάλτῃ Ἀπολλοφάνεος παιδὶ Ἀβυδηνῷ , αὐτὸς δὲ ἔχων Λεσβίους ἐς Χίον ἔπλεε , καὶ Χίων φρουρῇ οὐ προσιεμένῃ μιν συνέβαλε ἐν Κοίλοισι καλεομένοισι τῆς Χίης χώρης .
Leaving all matters concerning the Hellespont in charge of Bisaltes of Abydos, son of Apollophanes, he himself sailed with the Lesbians to Chios and, when the Chian guardships would not receive him, fought in the Hollows of Chios (as they are called).


6.26.2
6317
τούτων τε δὴ ἐφόνευσε συχνούς , καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν Χίων , οἷα δὴ κεκακωμένων ἐκ τῆς ναυμαχίης , ὁ Ἱστιαῖος ἔχων τοὺς λεσβίους ἐπεκράτησε , ἐκ Πολίχνης τῆς Χίων ὁρμώμενος .
Many of their crews he killed; the rest of the people of the country, since they were crippled by the sea-fight, were mastered by Histiaeus with his Lesbians, setting out from Polichne in  Chios.


6.27.1
6318
φιλέει δέ κως προσημαίνειν , εὖτ’ ἂν μέλλῃ μεγάλα κακὰ ἢ πόλι ἢ ἔθνεϊ ἔσεσθαι ·
It is common for some sign to be given when great ills threaten cities or nations;


6.27.1
6319
καὶ γὰρ Χίοισι πρὸ τούτων σημήια μεγάλα ἐγένετο ·
for before all this plain signs had been sent to the Chians.


6.27.2
6320
τοῦτο μέν σφι πέμψασι ἐς Δελφοὺς χορὸν νεηνιέων ἑκατὸν δύο μοῦνοι τούτων ἀπενόστησαν , τοὺς δὲ ὀκτώ τε καὶ ἐνενήκοντα αὐτῶν λοιμὸς ὑπολαβὼν ἀπήνεικε ·
Of a band of a hundred youths whom they had sent to Delphi only two returned, ninety-eight being caught and carried off by pestilence;


6.27.2
6321
τοῦτο δὲ ἐν τῇ πόλι τὸν αὐτὸν τοῦτον χρόνον , ὀλίγον πρὸ τῆς ναυμαχίης , παισὶ γράμματα διδασκομένοισι ἐνέπεσε ἡ στέγη , ὥστε ἀπ’ ἑκατὸν καὶ εἴκοσι παίδων εἷς μοῦνος ἀπέφυγε .
moreover, at about this same time, a little before the sea-fight, the roof fell in on boys learning their letters: of one hundred and twenty of them one alone escaped.


6.27.3
6322
ταῦτα μὲν σφι σημήια ὁ θεὸς προέδεξε , μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἡ ναυμαχίη ὑπολαβοῦσα ἐς γόνυ τὴν πόλιν ἔβαλε , ἐπὶ δὲ τῇ ναυμαχίῃ ἐπεγένετο Ἱστιαῖος Λεσβίους ἄγων ·
These signs a god showed to them; then the sea-fight broke upon them and beat the city to its knees; on top of the sea-fight came Histiaeus and the Lesbians.


6.27.3
6323
κεκακωμένων δὲ τῶν Χίων , καταστροφὴν εὐπετέως αὐτῶν ἐποιήσατο .
Since the Chians were in such a bad state, he easily subdued them.


6.28.1
6324
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὁ Ἱστιαῖος ἐστρατεύετο ἐπὶ Θάσον ἄγων Ἰώνων καὶ Αἰολέων συχνούς .
Then Histiaeus brought a great force of Ionians and Aeolians against Thasos.


6.28.1
6325
περικατημένῳ δέ οἱ Θάσον ἦλθε ἀγγελίη ὡς οἱ Φοίνικες ἀναπλέουσι ἐκ τῆς Μιλήτου ἐπὶ τὴν ἄλλην Ἰωνίην .
While he was besieging Thasos a message came that the Phoenicians were putting out to sea from Miletus to attack the rest of Ionia.


6.28.1
6326
πυθόμενος δὲ ταῦτα Θάσον μὲν ἀπόρθητον λείπει , αὐτὸς δὲ ἐς τὴν Λέσβον ἠπείγετο ἄγων πᾶσαν τὴν στρατιήν .
When he learned this, he left Thasos unsacked, and hastened instead with all his army to Lesbos.


6.28.2
6327
ἐκ Λέσβου δὲ λιμαινούσης οἱ τῆς στρατιῆς πέρην διαβαίνει , ἐκ τοῦ Ἀταρνέος ὡς ἀμήσων τὸν σῖτον τόν τε ἐνθεῦτεν καὶ τὸν ἐκ Καϊκου πεδίου τὸν τῶν Μυσῶν .
From there, since his army suffered from hunger, he crossed over to reap from Atarneus the corn there and the Mysian corn of the Caicus plain.


6.28.2
6328
ἐν δὲ τούτοισι τοῖσι χωρίοισι ἐτύγχανε ἐὼν Ἅρπαγος ἀνὴρ Πέρσης στρατηγὸς στρατιῆς οὐκ ὀλίγης ·
Now it chanced that in that region was Harpagus, a Persian, with no small force under him;


6.28.2
6329
ὅς οἱ ἀποβάντι συμβαλὼν αὐτόν τε Ἱστιαῖον ζωγρίῃ ἔλαβε καὶ τὸν στρατὸν αὐτοῦ τὸν πλέω διέφθειρε .
when Histiaeus landed, Harpagus met him in battle and took Histiaeus himself alive and killed most of his army.


6.29.1
6330
ἐζωγρήθη δὲ ὁ Ἱστιαῖος ὧδε .
Histiaeus was taken prisoner in this way:


6.29.1
6331
ὡς ἐμάχοντο οἱ Ἕλληνες τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι ἐν τῇ Μαλήνῃ τῆς Ἀταρνείτιδος χώρης , οἳ μὲν συνέστασαν χρόνον ἐπὶ πολλόν , ἡ δὲ ἵππος ὕστερον ὁρμηθεῖσα ἐπιπίπτει τοῖσι Ἕλλησι .
the Greeks fought with the Persians at Malene in the country of Atarneus; the armies fought for a long time, until the Persian cavalry charged and fell upon the Greeks.


6.29.1
6332
τό τε δὴ ἔργον τῆς ἵππου τοῦτο ἐγένετο , καὶ τετραμμένων τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὁ Ἱστιαῖος ἐλπίζων οὐκ ἀπολέεσθαι ὑπὸ βασιλέος διὰ τὴν παρεοῦσαν ἁμαρτάδα φιλοψυχίην τοιήνδε τινὰ ἀναιρέεται ·
So this was the accomplishment of the cavalry; when the Greeks were routed, Histiaeus, supposing that the king would not put him to death for his present transgression, did what showed that he loved his life too well.


6.29.2
6333
ὡς φεύγων τε κατελαμβάνετο ὑπὸ ἀνδρὸς Πέρσεω καὶ ὡς καταιρεόμενος ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ ἔμελλε συγκεντηθήσεσθαι , Περσίδα γλῶσσαν μετεὶς καταμηνύει ἑωυτὸν ὡς εἴη Ἱστιαῖος ὁ Μιλήσιος .
He was overtaken in his flight by a Persian, and when he was caught and about to be stabbed, he cried out in the Persian language and revealed himself to be Histiaeus the Milesian.


6.30.1
6334
εἰ μέν νυν , ὡς ἐζωγρήθη , ἄχθη ἀγόμενος παρὰ βασιλέα Δαρεῖον , ὁ δὲ οὔτ’ ἂν ἔπαθε κακὸν οὐδὲν δοκέειν ἐμοί , ἀπῆκέ τ’ ἂν αὐτῷ τὴν αἰτίην ·
Now if he had been taken prisoner and brought to king Darius, he would have suffered no harm (to my thinking) and the king would have forgiven his guilt;


6.30.1
6335
νῦν δέ μιν αὐτῶν τε τούτων εἵνεκα καὶ ἵνα μὴ διαφυγὼν αὖτις μέγας παρὰ βασιλέι γένηται , Ἀρταφρένης τε ὁ Σαρδίων ὕπαρχος καὶ ὁ λαβὼν Ἅρπαγος , ὡς ἀπίκετο ἀγόμενος ἐς Σάρδις , τὸ μὲν αὐτοῦ σῶμα αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ ἀνεσταύρωσαν , τὴν δὲ κεφαλὴν ταριχεύσαντες ἀνήνεικαν παρὰ βασιλέα Δαρεῖον ἐς Σοῦσα .
but as it was, when Histiaeus was brought to Sardis, both because of what he had done, and for fear that he might escape and again win power at the court, Artaphrenes, governor of Sardis, and Harpagus, who had captured him, impaled his body on the spot, and sent his head embalmed to king Darius at Susa.


6.30.2
6336
Δαρεῖος δὲ πυθόμενος ταῦτα καὶ ἐπαιτιησάμενος τοὺς ταῦτα ποιήσαντας ὅτι μιν οὐ ζώοντα ἀνήγαγον ἐς ὄψιν τὴν ἑωυτοῦ , τὴν κεφαλὴν τὴν Ἱστιαίου λούσαντάς τε καὶ περιστείλαντας εὖ ἐνετείλατο θάψαι ὡς ἀνδρὸς μεγάλως ἑωυτῷ τε καὶ Πέρσῃσι εὐεργέτεω .
When Darius learned of this, he blamed those who had done it because they had not brought Histiaeus before him alive, and he commanded that the head should be washed and buried with due ceremony, as of a man who had done great good to Darius himself and to  Persia.


6.31.1
6337
τὰ μὲν περὶ Ἱστιαῖον οὕτω ἔσχε .
Thus it fared with Histiaeus.


6.31.1
6338
ὁ δὲ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς ὁ Περσέων χειμερίσας περὶ Μίλητον , τῷ δευτέρῳ ἔτεϊ ὡς ἀνέπλωσε , αἱρέει εὐπετέως τὰς νήσους τὰς πρὸς τῇ ἠπείρῳ κειμένας , Χίον καὶ Λέσβον καὶ Τένεδον .
The Persian fleet wintered at Miletus, and putting out to sea in the next year easily subdued the islands that lie off the mainland, Chios and Lesbos and Tenedos.


6.31.1
6339
ὅκως δὲ λάβοι τινὰ τῶν νήσων , ὡς ἑκάστην αἱρέοντες οἱ βάρβαροι ἐσαγήνευον τοὺς ἀνθρώπους .
Whenever they took an island, the foreigners would (net) the people.


6.31.2
6340
σαγηνεύουσι δὲ τόνδε τὸν τρόπον ·
This is the manner of their doing it:


6.31.2
6341
ἀνὴρ ἀνδρὸς ἁψάμενος τῆς χειρὸς ἐκ θαλάσσης τῆς βορηίης ἐπὶ τὴν νοτίην διήκουσι , καὶ ἔπειτα διὰ πάσης τῆς νήσου διέρχονται ἐκθηρεύοντες τοὺς ἀνθρώπους .
the men link hands and make a line reaching from the northern sea to the southern, and then advance over the whole island hunting the people down.


6.31.2
6342
αἵρεον δὲ καὶ τὰς ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ πόλιας τὰς Ἰάδας κατὰ τ- αὐτά , πλὴν οὐκ ἐσαγήνευον τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ·
They also captured the Ionian cities of the mainland in the same way, but not by netting the people;


6.31.2
6343
οὐ γὰρ οἷά τ’ ἦν .
for that was not possible.


6.32.1
6344
ἐνθαῦτα Περσέων οἱ στρατηγοὶ οὐκ ἐψεύσαντο τὰς ἀπειλὰς τὰς ἐπηπείλησαν τοῖσι Ἴωσι στρατοπεδευομένοισι ἐναντία σφίσι .
Then the Persian generals were not false to the threats they had made against the Ionians when they were encamped opposite them.


6.32.1
6345
ὡς γὰρ δὴ ἐπεκράτησαν τῶν πολίων , παῖδάς τε τοὺς εὐειδεστάτους ἐκλεγόμενοι ἐξέταμνον καὶ ἐποίευν ἀντὶ εἶναι ἐνόρχιας εὐνούχους καὶ παρθένους τὰς καλλιστευούσας ἀνασπάστους παρὰ βασιλέα ·
When they had gained mastery over the cities, they chose out the most handsome boys and castrated them, making them eunuchs instead of men, and they carried the fairest maidens away to the king;


6.32.1
6346
ταῦτά τε δὴ ἐποίευν καὶ τὰς πόλιας ἐνεπίμπρασαν αὐτοῖσι τοῖσι ἱροῖσι .
they did all this, and they burnt the cities with their temples.


6.32.1
6347
οὕτω τε τὸ τρίτον Ἴωνες κατεδουλώθησαν , πρῶτον μὲν ὑπὸ Λυδῶν , δὶς δὲ ἐπεξῆς τότε ὑπὸ Περσέων .
Thus three times had the Ionians been enslaved, first by the Lydians and now twice in a row by the Persians.


6.33.1
6348
ἀπὸ δὲ Ἰωνίης ἀπαλλασσόμενος ὁ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς τὰ ἐπ’ ἀριστερὰ ἐσπλέοντι τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου αἵρεε πάντα ·
Then the fleet departed from Ionia and captured everything which lies to the left of one sailing up the Hellespont;


6.33.1
6349
τὰ γὰρ ἐπὶ δεξιὰ αὐτοῖσι τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι ὑποχείρια ἦν γεγονότα κατ’ ἤπειρον .
the right side had been subdued by the Persians themselves from the mainland.


6.33.1
6350
εἰσὶ δὲ αἱ ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ αἵδε τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου , Χερσόνησός τε , ἐν τῇ πόλιες συχναὶ ἔνεισι , καὶ Πέρινθος καὶ τὰ τείχεα τὰ ἐπὶ Θρηίκης καὶ Σηλυμβρίη τε καὶ Βυζάντιον .
These are the regions of Europe that belong to the Hellespont: the Chersonese, in which there are many cities; Perinthus, and the forts that lie towards Thrace, and Selymbria and Byzantium.


6.33.2
6351
Βυζάντιοι μέν νυν καὶ οἱ πέρηθε Καλχηδόνιοι οὐδ’ ὑπέμειναν ἐπιπλέοντας τοὺς Φοίνικας , ἀλλ’ οἴχοντο ἀπολιπόντες τὴν σφετέρην ἔσω ἐς τὸν Εὔξεινον πόντον , καὶ ἐνθαῦτα πόλιν Μεσαμβρίην οἴκησαν .
The Byzantines and the Calchedonians beyond them did not even wait for the attack of the Phoenicians, but left their own land and fled away into the Euxine, and there settled in the city of Mesambria.


6.33.2
6352
οἱ δὲ Φοίνικες κατακαύσαντες ταύτας τὰς χώρας τὰς καταλεχθείσας τρέπονται ἐπί τε Προκόννησον καὶ Ἀρτάκην , πυρὶ δὲ καὶ ταύτας νείμαντες ἔπλεον αὖτις ἐς τὴν Χερσόνησον ἐξαιρήσοντες τὰς ἐπιλοίπους τῶν πολίων , ὅσας πρότερον προσσχόντες οὐ κατέσυραν .
The Phoenicians burnt the aforementioned places and turned against Proconnesus and Artace; after giving these also to the flames they sailed back to the Chersonese to finish off the remaining cities, as many as they had not destroyed at their former landing.


6.33.3
6353
ἐπὶ δὲ Κύζικον οὐδὲ ἔπλωσαν ἀρχήν ·
But they did not sail against Cyzicus at all;


6.33.3
6354
αὐτοὶ γὰρ Κυζικηνοὶ ἔτι πρότερον τοῦ Φοινίκων ἐσπλόου ἐγεγόνεσαν ὑπὸ βασιλέϊ , Οἰβάρεϊ τῷ Μεγαβάζου ὁμολογήσαντες τῷ ἐν Δασκυλείῳ ὑπάρχῳ .
the Cyzicenes had already made themselves the king's subjects before the Phoenician expedition, by an agreement with the governor at Dascyleum, Oebares son of Megabazus.


6.34.1
6355
τῆς δὲ Χερσονήσου πλὴν Καρδίης πόλιος τὰς ἄλλας πάσας ἐχειρώσαντο οἱ Φοίνικες .
The Phoenicians subdued all the cities in the Chersonese except Cardia.


6.34.1
6356
ἐτυράννευε δὲ αὐτέων μέχρι τότε Μιλτιάδης ὁ Κίμωνος τοῦ Στησαγόρεω , κτησαμένου τὴν ἀρχὴν ταύτην πρότερον Μιλτιάδεω τοῦ Κυψέλου τρόπῳ τοιῷδε .
Miltiades son of Cimon son of Stesagoras was tyrant there.


6.34.1
6357
εἶχον Δόλογκοι Θρήικες τὴν Χερσόνησον ταύτην .
Miltiades son of Cypselus had gained the rule earlier in the following manner:


6.34.1
6358
οὗτοι ὦν οἱ Δόλογκοι πιεσθέντες πολέμῳ ὑπὸ Ἀψινθίων ἐς Δελφοὺς ἔπεμψαν τοὺς βασιλέας περὶ τοῦ πολέμου χρησομένους .
the Thracian Dolonci held possession of this Chersonese. They were crushed in war by the Apsinthians, so they sent their kings to Delphi to inquire about the war.


6.34.2
6359
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη σφι ἀνεῖλε οἰκιστὴν ἐπάγεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν χώρην τοῦτον ὃς ἂν σφέας ἀπιόντας ἐκ τοῦ ἱροῦ πρῶτος ἐπὶ ξείνια καλέσῃ .
The Pythia answered that they should bring to their land as founder the first man who offered them hospitality after they left the sacred precinct.


6.34.2
6360
ἰόντες δὲ οἱ Δόλογκοι τὴν ἱρὴν ὁδὸν διὰ Φωκέων τε καὶ Βοιωτῶν ἤισαν ·
But as the Dolonci passed through Phocis and Boeotia, going along the Sacred Way, no one invited them,


6.34.2
6361
καί σφεας ὡς οὐδεὶς ἐκάλεε , ἐκτρέπονται ἐπ’ Ἀθηνέων .
so they turned toward Athens.


6.35.1
6362
ἐν δὲ τῇσι Ἀθήνῃσι τηνικαῦτα εἶχε μὲν τὸ πᾶν κράτος Πεισίστρατος , ἀτὰρ ἐδυνάστευέ γε καὶ Μιλτιάδης ὁ Κυψέλου ἐὼν οἰκίης τεθριπποτρόφου , τὰ μὲν ἀνέκαθεν ἀπ’ Αἰακοῦ τε καὶ Αἰγίνης γεγονώς , τὰ δὲ νεώτερα Ἀθηναῖος , Φιλαίου τοῦ Αἴαντος παιδὸς γενομένου πρώτου τῆς οἰκίης ταύτης Ἀθηναίου .
At that time in  Athens, Pisistratus held all power, but Miltiades son of Cypselus also had great influence. His household was rich enough to maintain a four-horse chariot, and he traced his earliest descent to Aeacus and  Aegina, though his later ancestry was Athenian. Philaeus son of Ajax was the first of that house to be an Athenian.


6.35.2
6363
οὗτος ὁ Μιλτιάδης κατήμενος ἐν τοῖσι προθύροισι τοῖσι ἑωυτοῦ , ὁρέων τοὺς Δολόγκους παριόντας ἐσθῆτα ἔχοντας οὐκ ἐγχωρίην καὶ αἰχμὰς προσεβώσατο καί σφι προσελθοῦσι ἐπηγγείλατο καταγωγὴν καὶ ξείνια .
Miltiades was sitting on his porch when he saw the Dolonci go by with their foreign clothing and spears, so he called out to them, and when they came over, he invited them in for lodging and hospitality.


6.35.2
6364
οἳ δὲ δεξάμενοι καὶ ξεινισθέντες ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ ἐξέφαινον πᾶν τὸ μαντήιον , ἐκφήναντες δὲ ἐδέοντο αὐτοῦ τῷ θεῷ μιν πείθεσθαι .
They accepted, and after he entertained them, they revealed the whole story of the oracle to him and asked him to obey the god.


6.35.3
6365
Μιλτιάδεα δὲ ἀκούσαντα παραυτίκα ἔπεισε ὁ λόγος οἷα ἀχθόμενόν τε τῇ Πεισιστράτου ἀρχῇ καὶ βουλόμενον ἐκποδὼν εἶναι .
He was persuaded as soon as he heard their speech, for he was tired of Pisistratus' rule and wanted to be away from it.


6.35.3
6366
αὐτίκα δὲ ἐστάλη ἐς Δελφούς , ἐπειρησόμενος τὸ χρηστήριον εἰ ποιοίη τά περ αὐτοῦ οἱ Δόλογκοι προσεδέοντο .
He immediately set out for Delphi to ask the oracle if he should do what the Dolonci asked of him.


6.36.1
6367
κελευούσης δὲ καὶ τῆς Πυθίης , οὕτω δὴ Μιλτιάδης ὁ Κυψέλου , Ὀλύμπια ἀναραιρηκὼς πρότερον τούτων τεθρίππῳ , τότε παραλαβὼν Ἀθηναίων πάντα τὸν βουλόμενον μετέχειν τοῦ στόλου ἔπλεε ἅμα τοῖσι Δολόγκοισι , καὶ ἔσχε τὴν χώρην ·
The Pythia also bade him do so. Then Miltiades son of Cypselus, previously an Olympic victor in the four-horse chariot, recruited any Athenian who wanted to take part in the expedition, sailed off with the Dolonci, and took possession of their land.


6.36.1
6368
καί μιν οἱ ἐπαγαγόμενοι τύραννον κατεστήσαντο .
Those who brought him appointed him tyrant.


6.36.2
6369
ὁ δὲ πρῶτον μὲν ἀπετείχισε τὸν ἰσθμὸν τῆς Χερσονήσου ἐκ Καρδίης πόλιος ἐς Πακτύην , ἵνα μὴ ἔχοιεν σφέας οἱ Ἀψίνθιοι δηλέεσθαι ἐσβάλλοντες ἐς τὴν χώρην .
His first act was to wall off the isthmus of the Chersonese from the city of Cardia across to Pactye, so that the Apsinthians would not be able to harm them by invading their land.


6.36.2
6370
εἰσὶ δὲ οὗτοι στάδιοι ἕξ τε καὶ τριήκοντα τοῦ ἰσθμοῦ ·
The isthmus is thirty-six stadia across,


6.36.2
6371
ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ ἰσθμοῦ τούτου ἡ Χερσόνησος ἔσω πᾶσα ἐστὶ σταδίων εἴκοσι καὶ τετρακοσίων τὸ μῆκος .
and to the south of the isthmus the Chersonese is four hundred and twenty stadia in length.


6.37.1
6372
ἀποτειχίσας ὦν τὸν αὐχένα τῆς Χερσονήσου ὁ Μιλτιάδης καὶ τοὺς Ἀψινθίους τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ ὠσάμενος , τῶν λοιπῶν πρώτοισι ἐπολέμησε Λαμψακηνοῖσι ·
After Miltiades had pushed away the Apsinthians by walling off the neck of the Chersonese, he made war first on the people of Lampsacus,


6.37.1
6373
καί μιν οἱ Λαμψακηνοὶ λοχήσαντες αἱρέουσι ζωγρίῃ .
but the Lampsacenes laid an ambush and took him prisoner.


6.37.1
6374
ἦν δὲ ὁ Μιλτιάδης Κροίσῳ τῷ Λυδῷ ἐν γνώμῃ γεγονώς ·
However, Miltiades stood high in the opinion of Croesus the Lydian,


6.37.1
6375
πυθόμενος ὦν ὁ Κροῖσος ταῦτα , πέμπων προηγόρευε τοῖσι Λαμψακηνοῖσι μετιέναι Μιλτιάδεα ·
and when Croesus heard what had happened, he sent to the Lampsacenes and commanded them to release Miltiades.


6.37.1
6376
εἰ δὲ μή σφεας πίτυος τρόπον ἀπείλεε ἐκτρίψειν .
If they did not do so, he threatened to cut them down like a pine tree.


6.37.2
6377
πλανωμένων δὲ τῶν Λαμψακηνῶν ἐν τοῖσι λόγοισι τὸ θέλει τὸ ἔπος εἶναι τό σφι ἀπείλησε ὁ Κροῖσος , πίτυος τρόπον ἐκτρίψειν , μόγις κοτὲ μαθὼν τῶν τις πρεσβυτέρων εἶπε τὸ ἐόν , ὅτι πίτυς μούνη πάντων δενδρέων ἐκκοπεῖσα βλαστὸν οὐδένα μετιεῖ ἀλλὰ πανώλεθρος ἐξαπόλλυται .
The Lampsacenes went astray in their counsels as to what the utterance meant which Croesus had threatened them with, saying he would devastate them like a pine tree,


6.37.2
6378
δείσαντες ὦν οἱ Λαμψακηνοὶ Κροῖσον λύσαντες μετῆκαν Μιλτιάδεα .
until at last one of the elders understood and said what it was: the pine is the only tree that once cut down never sends out any shoots; it is utterly destroyed.


6.38.1
6379
οὗτος μὲν δὴ διὰ Κροῖσον ἐκφεύγει , μετὰ δὲ τελευτᾷ ἄπαις , τὴν ἀρχήν τε καὶ τὰ χρήματα παραδοὺς Στησαγόρῃ τῷ Κίμωνος ἀδελφεοῦ παιδὶ ὁμομητρίου .
So out of fear of Croesus the Lampsacenes released Miltiades and let him go.


6.38.1
6380
καί οἱ τελευτήσαντι Χερσονησῖται θύουσι ὡς νόμος οἰκιστῇ , καὶ ἀγῶνα ἱππικόν τε καὶ γυμνικὸν ἐπιστᾶσι , ἐν τῷ Λαμψακηνῶν οὐδενὶ ἐγγίνεται ἀγωνίζεσθαι .
So he escaped by the intervention of Croesus, but he later died childless and left his rule and possessions to Stesagoras, the son of his half-brother Cimon.


6.38.2
6381
πολέμου δὲ ἐόντος πρὸς Λαμψακηνοὺς καὶ Στησαγόρεα κατέλαβε ἀποθανεῖν ἄπαιδα , πληγέντα τὴν κεφαλὴν πελέκεϊ ἐν τῷ πρυτανηίῳ πρὸς ἀνδρὸς αὐτομόλου μὲν τῷ λόγῳ πολεμίου δὲ καὶ ὑποθερμοτέρου τῷ ἔργῳ .
But in the war against the Lampsacenes Stesagoras too met his end and died childless; he was struck on the head with an axe in the town-hall by a man who pretended to be a deserter but in truth was an enemy and a man of violence.


6.39.1
6382
τελευτήσαντος δὲ καὶ Στησαγόρεω τρόπῳ τοιῷδε , ἐνθαῦτα Μιλτιάδεα τὸν Κίμωνος , Στησαγόρεω δὲ τοῦ τελευτήσαντος ἀδελφεόν , καταλαμψόμενον τὰ πρήγματα ἐπὶ Χερσονήσου ἀποστέλλουσι τριήρεϊ οἱ Πεισιστρατίδαι , οἵ μιν καὶ ἐν Ἀθήνῃσι ἐποίευν εὖ ὡς οὐ συνειδότες δῆθεν τοῦ πατρὸς Κίμωνος αὐτοῦ τὸν θάνατον , τὸν ἐγὼ ἐν ἄλλῳ λόγῳ σημανέω ὡς ἐγένετο .
Stesagoras met his end in this way. The sons of Pisistratus sent Miltiades, son of Cimon and brother of the dead Stesagoras, in a trireme to the  Chersonese to take control of the country; they had already treated him well at  Athens, feigning that they had not been accessory to the death of Cimon his father, which I will relate in another place.


6.39.2
6383
Μιλτιάδης δὲ ἀπικόμενος ἐς τὴν Χερσόνησον εἶχε κατ’ οἴκους , τὸν ἀδελφεὸν Στησαγόρεα δηλαδὴ ἐπιτιμέων .
Reaching the Chersonese, Miltiades kept himself within his house, professing thus to honor the memory of his brother Stesagoras.


6.39.2
6384
οἱ δὲ Χερσονησῖται πυνθανόμενοι ταῦτα συνελέχθησαν ἀπὸ πασέων τῶν πολίων οἱ δυναστεύοντες πάντοθεν , κοινῷ δὲ στόλῳ ἀπικόμενοι ὡς συλλυπηθησόμενοι ἐδέθησαν ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ .
When the people of the Chersonese learned this, their ruling men gathered together from all the cities on every side, and came together in a group to show fellow-feeling with his mourning; but he put them in bonds.


6.39.2
6385
Μιλτιάδης τε δὴ ἴσχει τὴν Χερσόνησον , πεντακοσίους βόσκων ἐπικούρους , καὶ γαμέει Ὀλόρου τοῦ Θρηίκων βασιλέος τὴν θυγατέρα Ἡγησιπύλην .
So Miltiades made himself master of the Chersonese; there he maintained a guard of five hundred men, and married Hegesipyle the daughter of Olorus, king of Thrace.


6.40.1
6386
οὗτος δὲ ὁ Κίμωνος Μιλτιάδης νεωστὶ μὲν ἐληλύθεε ἐς τὴν Χερσόνησον , κατελάμβανε δέ μιν ἐλθόντα ἄλλα τῶν καταλαβόντων πρηγμάτων χαλεπώτερα .
But not long after this Miltiades son of Cimon had come to the Chersonese, greater difficulties than the present afflictions overtook him.


6.40.1
6387
τρίτῳ μὲν γὰρ ἔτεϊ πρὸ τούτων Σκύθας ἐκφεύγει .
He had been driven from the country three years before this by the Scythians.


6.40.1
6388
Σκύθαι γὰρ οἱ νομάδες ἐρεθισθέντες ὑπὸ βασιλέος Δαρείου συνεστράφησαν καὶ ἤλασαν μέχρι τῆς Χερσονήσου ταύτης ·
The nomadic Scythians, provoked by Darius, gathered themselves together and rode as far as the Chersonese.


6.40.2
6389
τούτους ἐπιόντας οὐκ ὑπομείνας ὁ Μιλτιάδης ἔφευγε Χερσόνησον , ἐς ὃ οἵ τε Σκύθαι ἀπαλλάχθησαν καὶ ἐκεῖνον Δόλογκοι κατήγαγον ὀπίσω .
Miltiades did not await their attack and fled from the Chersonese,


6.40.2
6390
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ τρίτῳ ἔτεϊ πρότερον ἐγεγόνεε τῶν τότε μιν κατεχόντων .
until the Scythians departed and the Dolonci brought him back again. All this had happened three years before the matters that now engaged him.


6.41.1
6391
τότε δὲ πυνθανόμενος εἶναι τοὺς Φοίνικας ἐν Τενέδῳ , πληρώσας τριήρεας πέντε χρημάτων τῶν παρεόντων ἀπέπλεε ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας .
But now, learning that the Phoenicians were in Tenedos, he sailed away to Athens with five triremes loaded with the possessions that he had nearby.


6.41.1
6392
καὶ ὥσπερ ὁρμήθη ἐκ Καρδίης πόλιος ἔπλεε διὰ τοῦ Μέλανος κόλπου ·
He set out from Cardia and crossed the Black Bay,


6.41.1
6393
παραμείβετό τε τὴν Χερσόνησον καὶ οἱ Φοίνικές οἱ περιπίπτουσι τῇσι νηυσί .
and as he was sailing along the Chersonese the Phoenicians fell upon him with their ships.


6.41.2
6394
αὐτὸς μὲν δὴ Μιλτιάδης σὺν τῇσι τέσσερσι τῶν νεῶν καταφεύγει ἐς Ἴμβρον , τὴν δέ οἱ πέμπτην τῶν νεῶν κατεῖλον διώκοντες οἱ Φοίνικες .
Miltiades himself escaped with four of his ships to Imbros, but the fifth was pursued and overtaken by the Phoenicians.


6.41.2
6395
τῆς δὲ νεὸς ταύτης ἔτυχε τῶν Μιλτιάδεω παίδων ὁ πρεσβύτατος ἄρχων Μητίοχος , οὐκ ἐκ τῆς Ὀλόρου τοῦ Θρήικος ἐὼν θυγατρὸς ἀλλ’ ἐξ ἄλλης ·
It happened that the captain of this ship was Metiochus, the eldest son of Miltiades by another wife, not the daughter of Olorus the Thracian.


6.41.3
6396
καὶ τοῦτον ἅμα τῇ νηὶ εἷλον οἱ Φοίνικες , καί μιν πυθόμενοι ὡς εἴη Μιλτιάδεω παῖς ἀνήγαγον παρὰ βασιλέα , δοκέοντες χάριτα μεγάλην καταθήσεσθαι , ὅτι δὴ Μιλτιάδης γνώμην ἀπεδέξατο ἐν τοῖσι Ἴωσι πείθεσθαι κελεύων τοῖσι Σκύθῃσι , ὅτε οἱ Σκύθαι προσεδέοντο λύσαντας τὴν σχεδίην ἀποπλέειν ἐς τὴν ἑωυτῶν .
The Phoenicians took this man captive with his ship; and when they heard that he was Miltiades' son, they brought him up to the king, thinking that this would be a very favorable service, because Miltiades had declared his opinion among the Ionians that they should obey the Scythians in their demand to break the bridge of boats and sail away to their homes.


6.41.4
6397
Δαρεῖος δέ , ὡς οἱ Φοίνικες Μητίοχον τὸν Μιλτιάδεω ἀνήγαγον , ἐποίησε κακὸν μὲν οὐδὲν Μητίοχον , ἀγαθὰ δὲ συχνά ·
But when the Phoenicians brought Miltiades' son Metiochus before him, Darius did him no harm but much good,


6.41.4
6398
καὶ γὰρ οἶκον καὶ κτῆσιν ἔδωκε καὶ Περσίδα γυναῖκα , ἐκ τῆς οἱ τέκνα ἐγένετο τὰ ἐς Πέρσας κεκοσμέαται .
giving him a house and possessions and a Persian wife, who bore him children who were reckoned as Persians.


6.41.4
6399
Μιλτιάδης δὲ ἐξ Ἴμβρου ἀπικνέεται ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας .
Miltiades made his way from Imbros to Athens.


6.42.1
6400
καὶ κατὰ τὸ ἔτος τοῦτο ἐκ τῶν Περσέων οὐδὲν ἐπὶ πλέον ἐγένετο τούτων ἐς νεῖκος φέρον Ἴωσι , ἀλλὰ τάδε μὲν χρήσιμα κάρτα τοῖσι Ἴωσι ἐγένετο τούτου τοῦ ἔτεος ·
In this year the Persians caused no further trouble for the Ionians, and at this same time certain things happened which greatly benefited the Ionians.


6.42.1
6401
Ἀρταφρένης ὁ Σαρδίων ὕπαρχος μεταπεμψάμενος ἀγγέλους ἐκ τῶν πολίων συνθήκας σφίσι αὐτοῖσι τοὺς Ἴωνας ἠνάγκασε ποιέεσθαι , ἵνα δωσίδικοι εἶεν καὶ μὴ ἀλλήλους φέροιέν τε καὶ ἄγοιεν .
Artaphrenes governor of Sardis summoned ambassadors from the cities and compelled the Ionians to make agreements among themselves that they would abide by the law and not rob and plunder each other.


6.42.2
6402
ταῦτά τε ἠνάγκασε ποιέειν , καὶ τὰς χώρας μετρήσας σφέων κατὰ παρασάγγας , τοὺς καλέουσι οἱ Πέρσαι τὰ τριήκοντα στάδια , κατὰ δὴ τούτους μετρήσας φόρους ἔταξε ἑκάστοισι , οἳ κατὰ χώρην διατελέουσι ἔχοντες ἐκ τούτου τοῦ χρόνου αἰεὶ ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ὡς ἐτάχθησαν ἐξ Ἀρταφρένεος ·
He compelled them to do this, and he measured their lands by parasangs, which is the Persian name for a distance of thirty stadia, and ordered that each people should according to this measurement pay a tribute


6.42.2
6403
ἐτάχθησαν δὲ σχεδὸν κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ καὶ πρότερον εἶχον .
which has remained fixed as assessed by Artaphrenes ever since that time up to this day; the sum appointed was about the same as that which they had rendered before.


6.42.2
6404
καί σφι ταῦτα μὲν εἰρηναῖα ἦν .
This then kept them peaceable.


6.43.1
6405
ἅμα δὲ τῷ ἔαρι , τῶν ἄλλων καταλελυμένων στρατηγῶν ἐκ βασιλέος , Μαρδόνιος ὁ Γοβρύεω κατέβαινε ἐπὶ θάλασσαν , στρατὸν πολλὸν μὲν κάρτα πεζὸν ἅμα ἀγόμενος πολλὸν δὲ ναυτικόν , ἡλικίην τε νέος ἐὼν καὶ νεωστὶ γεγαμηκὼς βασιλέος Δαρείου θυγατέρα Ἀρτοζώστρην ·
But at the beginning of spring the other generals were deposed by the king from their offices, and Mardonius son of Gobryas, a man young in years and recently married to Darius' daughter Artozostre, came down to the coast at the head of a very great army and fleet.


6.43.2
6406
ἄγων δὲ τὸν στρατὸν τοῦτον ὁ Μαρδόνιος ἐπείτε ἐγένετο ἐν τῇ Κιλικίῃ , αὐτὸς μὲν ἐπιβὰς ἐπὶ νεὸς ἐκομίζετο ἅμα τῇσι ἄλλῃσι νηυσί , στρατιὴν δὲ τὴν πεζὴν ἄλλοι ἡγεμόνες ἦγον ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον .
When Mardonius reached  Cilicia at the head of this army, he himself embarked on shipboard and sailed with the rest of his ships, while other captains led the land army to the  Hellespont.


6.43.3
6407
ὡς δὲ παραπλέων τὴν Ἀσίην ἀπίκετο ὁ Μαρδόνιος ἐς τὴν Ἰωνίην , ἐνθαῦτα μέγιστον θῶμα ἐρέω τοῖσι μὴ ἀποδεκομένοισι Ἑλλήνων Περσέων τοῖσι ἑπτὰ Ὀτάνεα γνώμην ἀποδέξασθαι ὡς χρεὸν εἴη δημοκρατέεσθαι Πέρσας ·
When Mardonius arrived in Ionia in his voyage along the coast of Asia, he did a thing which I here set down for the wonder of those Greeks who will not believe Otanes to have declared his opinion among the Seven that democracy was best for Persia:


6.43.3
6408
τοὺς γὰρ τυράννους τῶν Ἰώνων καταπαύσας πάντας ὁ Μαρδόνιος δημοκρατίας κατίστα ἐς τὰς πόλιας .
Mardonius deposed all the Ionian tyrants and set up democracies in their cities.


6.43.4
6409
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας ἠπείγετο ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον .
He did this and hurried to the Hellespont.


6.43.4
6410
ὡς δὲ συνελέχθη μὲν χρῆμα πολλὸν νεῶν συνελέχθη δὲ καὶ πεζὸς στρατὸς πολλός , διαβάντες τῇσι νηυσὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἐπορεύοντο διὰ τῆς Εὐρώπης , ἐπορεύοντο δὲ ἐπί τε Ἐρέτριαν καὶ Ἀθήνας .
When a great multitude of ships and a great army were assembled, the Persians crossed the Hellespont on shipboard and marched through Europe, with Eretria and Athens as their goal.


6.44.1
6411
αὗται μὲν ὦν σφι πρόσχημα ἦσαν τοῦ στόλου ·
This was the stated end of their expedition,


6.44.1
6412
ἀτὰρ ἐν νόῳ ἔχοντες ὅσας ἂν πλείστας δύνωνται καταστρέφεσθαι τῶν Ἑλληνίδων πολίων , τοῦτο μὲν δὴ τῇσι νηυσὶ Θασίους οὐδὲ χεῖρας ἀνταειραμένους κατεστρέψαντο , τοῦτο δὲ τῷ πεζῷ Μακεδόνας πρὸς τοῖσι ὑπάρχουσι δούλους προσεκτήσαντο ·
but they intended to subdue as many of the Greek cities as they could. Their fleet subdued the Thasians, who did not so much as lift up their hands against it; their land army added the Macedonians to the slaves that they had already,


6.44.1
6413
τὰ γὰρ ἐντὸς Μακεδόνων ἔθνεα πάντα σφι ἦν ἤδη ὑποχείρια γεγονότα .
for all the nations nearer to them than Macedonia had been made subject to the Persians before this.


6.44.2
6414
ἐκ μὲν δὴ Θάσου διαβαλόντες πέρην ὑπὸ τὴν ἤπειρον ἐκομίζοντο μέχρι Ἀκάνθου , ἐκ δὲ Ἀκάνθου ὁρμώμενοι τὸν Ἄθων περιέβαλλον .
Crossing over from Thasos they travelled near the land as far as Acanthus, and putting out from there they tried to round Athos.


6.44.2
6415
ἐπιπεσὼν δέ σφι περιπλέουσι βορέης ἄνεμος μέγας τε καὶ ἄπορος κάρτα τρηχέως περιέσπε , πλήθεϊ πολλὰς τῶν νεῶν ἐκβάλλων πρὸς τὸν Ἄθων .
But a great and irresistible north wind fell upon them as they sailed past and dealt very roughly with them, driving many of their ships upon Athos.


6.44.3
6416
λέγεται γὰρ τριηκοσίας μὲν τῶν νεῶν τὰς διαφθαρείσας εἶναι , ὑπὲρ δὲ δύο μυριάδας ἀνθρώπων .
It is said that about three hundred ships were lost, and more than twenty thousand men.


6.44.3
6417
ὥστε γὰρ θηριωδεστάτης ἐούσης τῆς θαλάσσης ταύτης τῆς περὶ τὸν Ἄθων , οἳ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν θηρίων διεφθείροντο ἁρπαζόμενοι , οἳ δὲ πρὸς τὰς πέτρας ἀρασσόμενοι ·
Since the coasts of Athos abound in wild beasts, some men were carried off by beasts and so perished; others were dashed against the rocks;


6.44.3
6418
οἳ δὲ αὐτῶν νέειν οὐκ ἐπιστέατο καὶ κατὰ τοῦτο διεφθείροντο , οἳ δὲ ῥίγεϊ .
those who could not swim perished because of that, and still others by the cold.


6.45.1
6419
ὁ μὲν δὴ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς οὕτω ἔπρησσε , Μαρδονίῳ δὲ καὶ τῷ πεζῷ στρατοπεδευομένῳ ἐν Μακεδονίῃ νυκτὸς Βρύγοι Θρήικες ἐπεχείρησαν ·
Thus it fared with the fleet; as for Mardonius and his land army, while they were encamped in Macedonia, the Brygi of Thrace attacked them by night.


6.45.1
6420
καί σφεων πολλοὺς φονεύουσι οἱ Βρύγοι , Μαρδόνιον δὲ αὐτὸν τρωματίζουσι .
The Brygi killed many of them, wounding Mardonius himself.


6.45.1
6421
οὐ μέντοι οὐδὲ αὐτοὶ δουλοσύνην διέφυγον πρὸς Περσέων ·
But not even these could escape being enslaved by the Persians;


6.45.1
6422
οὐ γὰρ δὴ πρότερον ἀπανέστη ἐκ τῶν χωρέων τουτέων Μαρδόνιος πρὶν ἤ σφεας ὑποχειρίους ἐποιήσατο .
Mardonius did not depart from those lands before he had subjugated them.


6.45.2
6423
τούτους μέντοι καταστρεψάμενος ἀπῆγε τὴν στρατιὴν ὀπίσω , ἅτε τῷ πεζῷ τε προσπταίσας πρὸς τοὺς Βρύγους καὶ τῷ ναυτικῷ μεγάλως περὶ Ἄθων .
After conquering them, he led his army away homewards, since the Brygi had dealt a heavy blow to his army and Athos an even heavier blow to his fleet.


6.45.2
6424
οὗτος μέν νυν ὁ στόλος αἰσχρῶς ἀγωνισάμενος ἀπαλλάχθη ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην .
This expedition after an inglorious adventure returned back to Asia.


6.46.1
6425
δευτέρῳ δὲ ἔτεϊ τούτων ὁ Δαρεῖος πρῶτα μὲν Θασίους διαβληθέντας ὑπὸ τῶν ἀστυγειτόνων ὡς ἀπόστασιν μηχανῴατο , πέμψας ἄγγελον ἐκέλευε σφέας τὸ τεῖχος περιαιρέειν καὶ τὰς νέας ἐς Ἄβδηρα κομίζειν .
In the next year after this, Darius first sent a message bidding the Thasians, who were falsely reported by their neighbors to be planning rebellion, to destroy their walls and bring their ships to  Abdera.


6.46.2
6426
οἱ γὰρ δὴ Θάσιοι , οἷα ὑπὸ Ἱστιαίου τε τοῦ Μιλησίου πολιορκηθέντες καὶ προσόδων ἐουσέων μεγαλέων , ἐχρέωντο τοῖσι χρήμασι νέας τε ναυπηγεύμενοι μακρὰς καὶ τεῖχος ἰσχυρότερον περιβαλλόμενοι .
Since they had been besieged by Histiaeus of Miletus and had great revenues, the Thasians had used their wealth to build ships of war and surround themselves with stronger walls.


6.46.2
6427
ἡ δὲ πρόσοδός σφι ἐγίνετο ἔκ τε τῆς ἠπείρου καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν μετάλλων ·
Their revenue came from both the mainland and from their mines;


6.46.3
6428
ἐκ μέν γε τῶν ἐκ Σκαπτησύλης τῶν χρυσέων μετάλλων τὸ ἐπίπαν ὀγδώκοντα τάλαντα προσήιε , ἐκ δὲ τῶν ἐν αὐτῇ Θάσῳ ἐλάσσω μὲν τούτων , συχνὰ δὲ οὓτω ὣστε τὸ ἐπίπαν Θασίοισι ἐοῦσι καρπῶν ἀτελέσι προσήιε ἀπό τε τῆς ἠπείρου καὶ τῶν μετάλλων ἔτεος ἑκάστου διηκόσια τάλαντα , ὅτε δὲ τὸ πλεῖστον προσῆλθε , τριηκόσια .
Their revenue came from the mainland and from the mines. About eighty talents on average came in from the gold-mines of the “Dug Forest”, and less from the mines of  Thasos itself, yet so much that the Thasians, paying no tax on their crops, drew a yearly revenue from the mainland and the mines of two hundred talents on average, and three hundred when the revenue was greatest.


6.47.1
6429
εἶδον δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς τὰ μέταλλα ταῦτα , καὶ μακρῷ ἦν αὐτῶν θωμασιώτατα τὰ οἱ Φοίνικες ἀνεῦρον οἱ μετὰ Θάσου κτίσαντες τὴν νῆσον ταύτην , ἥτις νῦν ἀπὸ τοῦ Θάσου τούτου τοῦ Φοίνικος τὸ οὔνομα ἔσχε .
I myself have seen these mines; by far the most marvellous were those that were found by the Phoenicians who with  Thasos colonized this island, which is now called after that Phoenician Thasos.


6.47.2
6430
τὰ δὲ μέταλλα τὰ Φοινικικὰ ταῦτα ἐστὶ τῆς Θάσου μεταξὺ Αἰνύρων τε χώρου καλεομένου καὶ Κοινύρων , ἀντίον δὲ Σαμοθρηίκης , ὄρος μέγα ἀνεστραμμένον ἐν τῇ ζητήσι .
These Phoenician mines are between the place called Aenyra and Coenyra in Thasos, opposite Samothrace; they are in a great hill that has been dug up in the searching.


6.47.2
6431
τοῦτο μέν νυν ἐστὶ τοιοῦτον .
So much for that.


6.47.2
6432
οἱ δὲ Θάσιοι τῷ βασιλέι κελεύσαντι καὶ τὸ τεῖχος τὸ σφέτερον κατεῖλον καὶ τὰς νέας τὰς πάσας ἐκόμισαν ἐς Ἄβδηρα .
The Thasians at the king's command destroyed their walls and brought all their ships to Abdera.


6.48.1
6433
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο ἀπεπειρᾶτο ὁ Δαρεῖος τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὅ τι ἐν νόῳ ἔχοιεν , κότερα πολεμέειν ἑωυτῷ ἢ παραδιδόναι σφέας αὐτούς .
Then Darius attempted to learn whether the Greeks intended to wage war against him or to surrender themselves. He sent heralds this way and that throughout  Hellas, bidding them demand a gift of earth and water for the king.


6.48.2
6434
διέπεμπε ὦν κήρυκας ἄλλους ἄλλῃ τάξας ἀνὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , κελεύων αἰτέειν βασιλέι γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ .
He despatched some to Hellas,


6.48.2
6435
τούτους μὲν δὴ ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἔπεμπε , ἄλλους δὲ κήρυκας διέπεμπε ἐς τὰς ἑωυτοῦ δασμοφόρους πόλιας τὰς παραθαλασσίους , κελεύων νέας τε μακρὰς καὶ ἱππαγωγὰ πλοῖα ποιέεσθαι .
and he sent others to his own tributary cities of the coast, commanding that ships of war and transports for horses be built.


6.49.1
6436
οὗτοί τε δὴ παρεσκευάζοντο ταῦτα , καὶ τοῖσι ἥκουσι ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα κήρυξι πολλοὶ μὲν ἠπειρωτέων ἔδοσαν τὰ προΐσχετο αἰτέων ὁ Πέρσης , πάντες δὲ νησιῶται ἐς τοὺς ἀπικοίατο αἰτήσοντες .
So the cities set about these preparations. The heralds who went to Hellas received what the king's proclamation demanded from many of those dwelling on the mainland


6.49.1
6437
οἵ τε δὴ ἄλλοι νησιῶται διδοῦσι γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ Δαρείῳ καὶ δὴ καὶ Αἰγινῆται .
and from all the islanders to whom they came with the demand. Among the islanders who gave earth and water to Darius were the Aeginetans.


6.49.2
6438
ποιήσασι δέ σφι ταῦτα ἰθέως Ἀθηναῖοι ἐπεκέατο , δοκέοντές τε ἐπὶ σφίσι ἐπέχοντας τοὺς Αἰγινήτας δεδωκέναι ὡς ἅμα τῷ Πέρσῃ ἐπὶ σφέας στρατεύωνται , καὶ ἄσμενοι προφάσιος ἐπελάβοντο , φοιτέοντές τε ἐς τὴν Σπάρτην κατηγόρεον τῶν Αἰγινητέων τὰ πεποιήκοιεν προδόντες τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
The Athenians immediately came down upon them for doing this, for they supposed the Aeginetans to have given the gift out of enmity for  Athens, so they might join with the Persians in attacking the Athenians. Gladly laying hold of this pretext, they went to  Sparta and there accused the Aeginetans of acting to betray  Hellas.


6.50.1
6439
πρὸς ταύτην δὲ τὴν κατηγορίην Κλεομένης ὁ Ἀναξανδρίδεω βασιλεὺς ἐὼν Σπαρτιητέων διέβη ἐς Αἴγιναν , βουλόμενος συλλαβεῖν Αἰγινητέων τοὺς αἰτιωτάτους .
Regarding this accusation, Cleomenes son of Anaxandrides, king of  Sparta, crossed over to  Aegina intending to arrest the most culpable of its people.


6.50.2
6440
ὡς δὲ ἐπειρᾶτο συλλαμβάνων , ἄλλοι τε δὴ ἐγίνοντο αὐτῷ ἀντίξοοι τῶν Αἰγινητέων , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ Κριὸς ὁ Πολυκρίτου μάλιστα , ὃς οὐκ ἔφη αὐτὸν οὐδένα ἄξειν χαίροντα Αἰγινητέων ·
But when he attempted to make the arrests, the Aeginetans opposed him, especially Crius son of Polycritus, who told him he would not take away any Aeginetan with impunity,


6.50.2
6441
ἄνευ γάρ μιν Σπαρτιητέων τοῦ κοινοῦ ποιέειν ταῦτα , ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίων ἀναγνωσθέντα χρήμασι ·
for he had no authority from the Spartans for what he was doing; instead he had been bribed by the Athenians;


6.50.2
6442
ἅμα γὰρ ἄν μιν τῷ ἑτέρῳ βασιλέι ἐλθόντα συλλαμβάνειν .
otherwise he would have come to make the arrests with the other king. He said this because of a letter from Demaratus.


6.50.3
6443
ἔλεγε δὲ ταῦτα ἐξ ἐπιστολῆς τῆς Δημαρήτου .
He said this because of a letter from Demaratus.


6.50.3
6444
Κλεομένης δὲ ἀπελαυνόμενος ἐκ τῆς Αἰγίνης εἴρετο τὸν Κριὸν ὅ τι οἱ εἴη τὸ οὔνομα ·
Driven from Aegina, Cleomenes asked Crius his name; and when Crius told him what it was,


6.50.3
6445
ὁ δέ οἱ τὸ ἐὸν ἔφρασε .
Cleomenes said to him,


6.50.3
6446
ὁ δὲ Κλεομένης πρὸς αὐτὸν ἔφη " ἤδη νῦν καταχαλκοῦ ὦ κριὲ τὰ κέρεα , ὡς συνοισόμενος μεγάλῳ κακῷ " .
“Now is the time to put bronze on your horns, Mr. Ram, for great calamity will confront you.”


6.51.1
6447
ἐν δὲ τῇ Σπάρτῃ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ὑπομένων Δημάρητος ὁ Ἀρίστωνος διέβαλλε τὸν Κλεομένεα , ἐὼν βασιλεὺς καὶ οὗτος Σπαρτιητέων , οἰκίης δὲ τῆς ὑποδεεστέρης , κατ’ ἄλλο μὲν οὐδὲν ὑποδεεστέρης ·
All this time Demaratus son of Ariston remained at Sparta and spread evil reports of Cleomenes.


6.51.1
6448
ἀπὸ γὰρ τοῦ αὐτοῦ γεγόνασι ·
This Demaratus was also king of Sparta, but of the inferior house;


6.51.1
6449
κατὰ πρεσβυγενείην δε κως τετίμηται μᾶλλον ἡ Εὐρυσθένεος .
not indeed inferior in any other regard (for they have a common ancestor), but the house of Eurysthenes has in some sort the greater honor by right of primogeniture.


6.52.1
6450
Λακεδαιμόνιοι γὰρ ὁμολογέοντες οὐδενὶ ποιητῇ λέγουσι αὐτὸν Ἀριστόδημον τὸν Ἀριστομάχου τοῦ Κλεοδαίου τοῦ Ὕλλου βασιλεύοντα ἀγαγεῖν σφεας ἐς ταύτην τὴν χώρην τὴν νῦν ἐκτέαται , ἀλλ’ οὐ τοὺς Ἀριστοδήμου παῖδας .
The Lacedaemonians say (but no poet agrees) that it was Aristodemus son of Aristomachus son of Cleodaeus son of Hyllus, and not his sons, who led them to that land which they now possess.


6.52.2
6451
μετὰ δὲ χρόνον οὐ πολλὸν Ἀριστοδήμῳ τεκεῖν τὴν γυναῖκα , τῇ οὔνομα εἶναι Ἀργείην ·
After no long time Aristodemus' wife, whose name was Argeia, bore him offspring;


6.52.2
6452
θυγατέρα δὲ αὐτὴν λέγουσι εἶναι Αὐτεσίωνος τοῦ Τισαμενοῦ τοῦ Θερσάνδρου τοῦ Πολυνείκεος ·
they say she was daughter of Autesion son of Tisamenus son of Thersander son of Polynices;


6.52.2
6453
ταύτην δὴ τεκεῖν δίδυμα , ἐπιδόντα δὲ τὸν Ἀριστόδημον τὰ τέκνα νούσῳ τελευτᾶν .
she bore him twins; Aristodemus lived to see the children, then died of a sickness.


6.52.3
6454
Λακεδαιμονίους δὲ τοὺς τότε ἐόντας βουλεῦσαι κατὰ νόμον βασιλέα τῶν παίδων τὸν πρεσβύτερον ποιήσασθαι .
The Lacedaemonians of that day planned to follow their custom and make the eldest of the children king.


6.52.3
6455
οὔκων δή σφεας ἔχειν ὁκότερον ἕλωνται ὥστε καὶ ὁμοίων καὶ ἴσων ἐόντων ·
But the children were identical in all respects, so the Lacedaemonians did not know which to choose;


6.52.3
6456
οὐ δυναμένους δὲ γνῶναι , ἢ καὶ πρὸ τούτου , ἐπειρωτᾶν τὴν τεκοῦσαν .
when they could not judge between them, or perhaps even before this, they asked the mother.


6.52.4
6457
τὴν δὲ οὐδὲ αὐτὴν φάναι διαγινώσκειν .
She said she knew no better than the Lacedaemonians which was the elder;


6.52.4
6458
εἰδυῖαν μὲν καὶ τὸ κάρτα λέγειν ταῦτα , βουλομένην δὲ εἴ κως ἀμφότεροι γενοίατο βασιλέες .
she knew perfectly well, but she said this because she desired that by some means both might be made kings.


6.52.4
6459
τοὺς ὦν δὴ Λακεδαιμονίους ἀπορέειν , ἀπορέοντας δὲ πέμπειν ἐς Δελφοὺς ἐπειρησομένους ὅ τι χρήσωνται τῷ πρήγματι .
The Lacedaemonians were at a loss, so they sent to Delphi to inquire how they should deal with the matter.


6.52.5
6460
τὴν δὲ Πυθίην σφέας κελεύειν ἀμφότερα τὰ παιδία ἡγήσασθαι βασιλέας , τιμᾶν δὲ μᾶλλον τὸν γεραίτερον .
The priestess bade them make both children kings but give greater honor to the elder.


6.52.5
6461
τὴν μὲν δὴ Πυθίην ταῦτά σφι ἀνελεῖν , τοῖσι δὲ Λακεδαιμονίοισι ἀπορέουσι οὐδὲν ἧσσον ὅκως ἐξεύρωσι αὐτῶν τὸν πρεσβύτερον , ὑποθέσθαι ἄνδρα Μεσσήνιον τῷ οὔνομα εἶναι Πανίτην ·
When the priestess gave this response, the Lacedaemonians knew no better than before how to discover the elder child, and a man of Messenia, whose name was Panites, gave them advice:


6.52.6
6462
ὑποθέσθαι δὲ τοῦτον τὸν Πανίτην τάδε τοῖσι Λακεδαιμονίοισι , φυλάξαι τὴν γειναμένην ὁκότερον τῶν παίδων πρότερον λούει καὶ σιτίζει ·
he advised them to watch the mother and see which of the children she washed and fed before the other;


6.52.6
6463
καὶ ἢν μὲν κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ φαίνηται αἰεὶ ποιεῦσα , τοὺς δὲ πᾶν ἕξειν ὅσον τι καὶ δίζηνται καὶ θέλουσι ἐξευρεῖν , ἢν δὲ πλανᾶται καὶ ἐκείνη ἐναλλὰξ ποιεῦσα , δῆλά σφι ἔσεσθαι ὡς οὐδὲ ἐκείνη πλέον οὐδὲν οἶδε , ἐπ’ ἄλλην τε τραπέσθαι σφέας ὁδόν .
if she was seen to do this always in the same order, they would then have all that they sought and desired to discover; but if she changed her practice haphazardly, then it would be manifest to the Lacedaemonians that she knew no more than they did, and they must have recourse to some other means.


6.52.7
6464
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ τοὺς Σπαρτιήτας κατὰ τὰς τοῦ Μεσσηνίου ὑποθήκας φυλάξαντας τὴν μητέρα τῶν Ἀριστοδήμου παίδων λαβεῖν κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ τιμῶσαν τὸν πρότερον καὶ σίτοισι καὶ λουτροῖσι , οὐκ εἰδυῖαν τῶν εἵνεκεν ἐφυλάσσετο .
Then the Spartans did as the Messenian advised; as they watched the mother of Aristodemus' children, they found her always preferring the elder when she fed and washed them,


6.52.7
6465
λαβόντας δὲ τὸ παιδίον τὸ τιμώμενον πρὸς τῆς γειναμένης ὡς ἐὸν πρότερον τρέφειν ἐν τῷ δημοσίῳ ·
since she did not know why she was being watched. So they took the child that was preferred by its mother and brought it up at public expense as the first-born;


6.52.7
6466
καί οἱ οὔνομα τεθῆναι Εὐρυσθένεα , τῷ δὲ Προκλέα .
and they called it Eurysthenes, and the other Procles.


6.52.8
6467
τούτους ἀνδρωθέντας αὐτούς τε ἀδελφεοὺς ἐόντας λέγουσι διαφόρους εἶναι τὸν πάντα χρόνον τῆς ζόης ἀλλήλοισι , καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τούτων γενομένους ὡσαύτως διατελέειν .
They say that when these two brothers grew to manhood, they feuded with each other as long as they lived, and their descendants continued to do likewise.


6.53.1
6468
ταῦτα μὲν Λακεδαιμόνιοι λέγουσι μοῦνοι Ἑλλήνων ·
The Lacedaemonians are the only Greeks who tell this story.


6.53.1
6469
τάδε δὲ κατὰ τὰ λεγόμενα ὑπ’ Ἑλλήνων ἐγὼ γράφω , τούτους τοὺς Δωριέων βασιλέας μέχρι μὲν δὴ Περσέος τοῦ Δανάης , τοῦ θεοῦ ἀπεόντος , καταλεγομένους ὀρθῶς ὑπ’ Ἑλλήνων καὶ ἀποδεικνυμένους ὡς εἰσὶ Ἕλληνες ·
But in what I write I follow the Greek report, and hold that the Greeks correctly recount these kings of the Dorians as far back as Perseus son of Danae — they make no mention of the god  —


6.53.1
6470
ἤδη γὰρ τηνικαῦτα ἐς Ἕλληνας οὗτοι ἐτέλεον .
and prove these kings to be Greek; for by that time they had come to be classified as Greeks.


6.53.2
6471
ἔλεξα δὲ μέχρι Περσέος τοῦδε εἵνεκα , ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἀνέκαθεν ἔτι ἔλαβον , ὅτι οὐκ ἔπεστι ἐπωνυμίη Περσέι οὐδεμία πατρὸς θνητοῦ , ὥσπερ Ἡρακλέι Ἀμφιτρύων .
I said as far back as Perseus, and I took the matter no further than that, because no one is named as the mortal father of Perseus, as Amphitryon is named father of Heracles.


6.53.2
6472
ἤδη ὦν ὀρθῷ χρεωμένῳ μέχρι Περσέος ὀρθῶς εἴρηταί μοι ·
So I used correct reasoning when I said that the Greek record is correct as far back as Perseus;


6.53.2
6473
ἀπὸ δὲ Δανάης τῆς Ἀκρισίου καταλέγοντι τοὺς ἄνω αἰεὶ πατέρας αὐτῶν φαινοίατο ἂν ἐόντες οἱ τῶν Δωριέων ἡγεμόνες Αἰγύπτιοι ἰθαγενέες .
farther back than that, if the king's ancestors in each generation, from Danae daughter of Acrisius upward, be reckoned, then the leaders of the Dorians will be shown to be true-born Egyptians.


6.54.1
6474
ταῦτα μέν νυν κατὰ τὰ Ἕλληνες λέγουσι γεγενεηλόγηται ·
Thus have I traced their lineage according to the Greek story;


6.54.1
6475
ὡς δὲ ὁ παρὰ Περσέων λόγος λέγεται , αὐτὸς ὁ Περσεὺς ἐὼν Ἀσσύριος ἐγένετο Ἕλλην , ἀλλ’ οὐκ οἱ Περσέος πρόγονοι ·
but the Persian tale is that Perseus himself was an Assyrian, and became a Greek, which his forebears had not been;


6.54.1
6476
τοὺς δὲ Ἀκρισίου γε πατέρας ὁμολογέοντας κατ’ οἰκηιότητα Περσέι οὐδέν , τούτους δὲ εἶναι , κατά περ Ἕλληνες λέγουσι , Αἰγυπτίους .
the Persians say that the ancestors of Acrisius had no bond of kinship with Perseus, and they indeed were, as the Greeks say, Egyptians.


6.55.1
6477
καὶ ταῦτα μέν νυν περὶ τούτων εἰρήσθω .
Enough of these matters.


6.55.1
6478
ὅ τι δὲ ἐόντες Αἰγύπτιοι καὶ ὅ τι ἀποδεξάμενοι ἔλαβον τὰς Δωριέων βασιληίας , ἄλλοισι γὰρ περὶ αὐτῶν εἴρηται , ἐάσομεν αὐτά ·
Why and for what achievements these men, being Egyptian, won the kingship of the Dorians has been told by others, so I will let it go.


6.55.1
6479
τὰ δὲ ἄλλοι οὐ κατελάβοντο , τούτων μνήμην ποιήσομαι .
I will make mention of matters which others have not touched.


6.56.1
6480
γέρεά τε δὴ τάδε τοῖσι βασιλεῦσι Σπαρτιῆται δεδώκασι , ἱρωσύνας δύο , Διός τε Λακεδαίμονος καὶ Διὸς οὐρανίου , καὶ πόλεμον ἐκφέρειν ἐπ’ ἣν ἂν βούλωνται χώρην , τούτου δὲ μηδένα εἶναι Σπαρτιητέων διακωλυτήν , εἰ δὲ μὴ αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ ἄγεϊ ἐνέχεσθαι .
These privileges the Spartans have given to their kings: two priesthoods, of Zeus called  Lacedaemon and of Zeus of Heaven;


6.56.1
6481
στρατευομένων δὲ πρώτους ἰέναι τοὺς βασιλέας , ὑστάτους δὲ ἀπιέναι ·
they wage war against whatever land they wish, and no Spartan can hinder them in this on peril of being put under a curse;


6.56.1
6482
ἑκατὸν δὲ ἄνδρας λογάδας ἐπὶ στρατιῆς φυλάσσειν αὐτούς ·
when the armies go forth the kings go out first and return last;


6.56.1
6483
προβάτοισι δὲ χρᾶσθαι ἐν τῇσι ἐξοδίῃσι ὁκόσοισι ἂν ὦν ἐθέλωσι , τῶν δὲ θυομένων πάντων τὰ δέρματά τε καὶ τὰ νῶτα λαμβάνειν σφεας .
one hundred chosen men guard them in their campaigns; they sacrifice as many sheep and goats as they wish at the start of their expeditions, and take the hides and backs of all sacrificed beasts.


6.57.1
6484
ταῦτα μὲν τὰ ἐμπολέμια , τὰ δὲ ἄλλα τὰ εἰρηναῖα κατὰ τάδε σφι δέδοται .
Such are their rights in war; in peace the powers given them are as follows: at all public sacrifices the kings first sit down to the banquet and are first served, each of them receiving a portion double of what is given to the rest of the company;


6.57.1
6485
ἢν θυσίη τις δημοτελὴς ποιέηται , πρώτους ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον ἵζειν τοὺς βασιλέας , καὶ ἀπὸ τούτων πρῶτον ἄρχεσθαι διπλήσια νέμοντας ἑκατέρῳ τὰ πάντα ἢ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι δαιτυμόνεσι , καὶ σπονδαρχίας εἶναι τούτων καὶ τῶν τυθέντων τὰ δέρματα .
they make the first libations, and the hides of the sacrificed beasts are theirs.


6.57.2
6486
νεομηνίας δὲ πάσας καὶ ἑβδόμας ἱσταμένου τοῦ μηνὸς δίδοσθαι ἐκ τοῦ δημοσίου ἱρήιον τέλεον ἑκατέρῳ ἐς Ἀπόλλωνος καὶ μέδιμνον ἀλφίτων καὶ οἴνου τετάρτην Λακωνικήν , καὶ ἐν τοῖσι ἀγῶσι πᾶσι προεδρίας ἐξαιρέτους .
At each new moon and each seventh day of the first part of the month, a full-grown victim for Apollo's temple, a bushel of barley-meal, and a Laconian quart of wine are given to each from the public store, and chief seats are set apart for them at the games.


6.57.2
6487
καὶ προξείνους ἀποδεικνύναι τούτοισι προσκεῖσθαι τοὺς ἂν ἐθέλωσι τῶν ἀστῶν , καὶ Πυθίους αἱρέεσθαι δύο ἑκάτερον .
It is their right to appoint whatever citizens they wish to be protectors of foreigners; and they each choose two Pythians.


6.57.2
6488
οἱ δὲ Πύθιοι εἰσὶ θεοπρόποι ἐς Δελφούς , σιτεόμενοι μετὰ τῶν βασιλέων τὰ δημόσια .
(The Pythians are the ambassadors to  Delphi and eat with the kings at the public expense.)


6.57.3
6489
μὴ ἐλθοῦσι δὲ τοῖσι βασιλεῦσι ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον ἀποπέμπεσθαί σφι ἐς τὰ οἰκία ἀλφίτων τε δύο χοίνικας ἑκατέρῳ καὶ οἴνου κοτύλην , παρεοῦσι δὲ διπλήσια πάντα δίδοσθαι ·
If the kings do not come to the public dinner, two choenixes of barley-meal and half a pint of wine are sent to their houses, but when they come, they receive a double share of everything;


6.57.3
6490
τ- αὐτὸ δὲ τοῦτο καὶ πρὸς ἰδιωτέων κληθέντας ἐπὶ δεῖπνον τιμᾶσθαι .
and the same honor shall be theirs when they are invited by private citizens to dinner.


6.57.4
6491
τὰς δὲ μαντηίας τὰς γινομένας τούτους φυλάσσειν , συνειδέναι δὲ καὶ τοὺς Πυθίους .
They keep all oracles that are given, though the Pythians also know them.


6.57.4
6492
δικάζειν δὲ μούνους τοὺς βασιλέας τοσάδε μοῦνα , πατρούχου τε παρθένου πέρι , ἐς τὸν ἱκνέεται ἔχειν , ἢν μή περ ὁ πατὴρ αὐτὴν ἐγγυήσῃ , καὶ ὁδῶν δημοσιέων πέρι ·
The kings alone judge cases concerning the rightful possessor of an unwedded heiress, if her father has not betrothed her, and cases concerning public roads.


6.57.5
6493
καὶ ἤν τις θετὸν παῖδα ποιέεσθαι ἐθέλῃ , βασιλέων ἐναντίον ποιέεσθαι .
If a man desires to adopt a son, it is done in the presence of the kings.


6.57.5
6494
καὶ παρίζειν βουλεύουσι τοῖσι γέρουσι ἐοῦσι δυῶν δέουσι τριήκοντα ·
They sit with the twenty-eight elders in council; if they do not come, the elders most closely related to them hold the king's privilege,


6.57.5
6495
ἢν δὲ μὴ ἔλθωσι , τοὺς μάλιστά σφι τῶν γερόντων προσήκοντας ἔχειν τὰ τῶν βασιλέων γέρεα , δύο ψήφους τιθεμένους , τρίτην δὲ τὴν ἑωυτῶν .
giving two votes over and above the third which is their own.


6.58.1
6496
ταῦτα μὲν ζῶσι τοῖσι βασιλεῦσι δέδοται ἐκ τοῦ κοινοῦ τῶν Σπαρτιητέων , ἀποθανοῦσι δὲ τάδε .
The kings are granted these rights from the Spartan commonwealth while they live; when they die, their rights are as follows:


6.58.1
6497
ἱππέες περιαγγέλλουσι τὸ γεγονὸς κατὰ πᾶσαν τὴν Λακωνικήν , κατὰ δὲ τὴν πόλιν γυναῖκες περιιοῦσαι λέβητα κροτέουσι .
Horsemen proclaim their death in all parts of  Laconia, and in the city women go about beating on cauldrons.


6.58.1
6498
ἐπεὰν ὦν τοῦτο γίνηται τοιοῦτο , ἀνάγκη ἐξ οἰκίης ἑκάστης ἐλευθέρους δύο καταμιαίνεσθαι , ἄνδρα τε καὶ γυναῖκα ·
When this happens, two free persons from each house, a man and a woman, are required to wear mourning.


6.58.1
6499
μὴ ποιήσασι δὲ τοῦτο ζημίαι μεγάλαι ἐπικέαται .
heavy penalties are set for those who  fail to do so.


6.58.2
6500
νόμος δὲ τοῖσι Λακεδαιμονίοισι κατὰ τῶν βασιλέων τοὺς θανάτους ἐστὶ ὡυτὸς καὶ τοῖσι βαρβάροισι τοῖσι ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ ·
The Lacedaemonians have the same custom at the deaths of their kings as the foreigners in  Asia;


6.58.2
6501
τῶν γὰρ ὦν βαρβάρων οἱ πλεῦνες τῷ αὐτῷ νόμῳ χρέωνται κατὰ τοὺς θανάτους τῶν βασιλέων .
most foreigners use the same custom at their kings' deaths.


6.58.2
6502
ἐπεὰν γὰρ ἀποθάνῃ βασιλεὺς Λακεδαιμονίων , ἐκ πάσης δεῖ Λακεδαίμονος , χωρὶς Σπαρτιητέων , ἀριθμῷ τῶν περιοίκων ἀναγκαστοὺς ἐς τὸ κῆδος ἰέναι .
When a king of the Lacedaemonians dies, a fixed number of their subject neighbors must come to the funeral from all  Lacedaemon, besides the Spartans.


6.58.3
6503
τούτων ὦν καὶ τῶν εἱλωτέων καὶ αὐτῶν Σπαρτιητέων ἐπεὰν συλλεχθέωσι ἐς τ- αὐτὸ πολλαὶ χιλιάδες σύμμιγα τῇσι γυναιξί , κόπτονταί τε τὰ μέτωπα προθύμως καὶ οἰμωγῇ διαχρέωνται ἀπλέτῳ , φάμενοι τὸν ὕστατον αἰεὶ ἀπογενόμενον τῶν βασιλέων , τοῦτον δὴ γενέσθαι ἄριστον .
When these and the helots and the Spartans themselves have assembled in one place to the number of many thousands, together with the women, they zealously beat their foreheads and make long and loud lamentation, calling that king that is most recently dead the best of all their kings.


6.58.3
6504
ὃς δ’ ἂν ἐν πολέμῳ τῶν βασιλέων ἀποθάνῃ , τούτῳ δὲ εἴδωλον σκευάσαντες ἐν κλίνῃ εὖ ἐστρωμένῃ ἐκφέρουσι .
Whenever a king dies in war, they make an image of him and carry it out on a well-spread bier.


6.58.3
6505
ἐπεὰν δὲ θάψωσι , ἀγορὴ δέκα ἡμερέων οὐκ ἵσταταί σφι οὐδ’ ἀρχαιρεσίη συνίζει , ἀλλὰ πενθέουσι ταύτας τὰς ἡμέρας .
For ten days after the burial there are no assemblies or elections, and they mourn during these days.


6.59.1
6506
συμφέρονται δὲ ἄλλο οὗτοι τόδε τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι ·
The Lacedaemonians also resemble the Persians in this:


6.59.1
6507
ἐπεὰν ἀποθανόντος τοῦ βασιλέος ἄλλος ἐνίστηται βασιλεύς , οὗτος ὁ ἐσιὼν ἐλευθεροῖ ὅστις τι Σπαρτιητέων τῷ βασιλέι ἢ τῷ δημοσίῳ ὤφειλε ·
when one king is dead and another takes his office, this successor releases from debt any Spartan who owes a debt to the king or to the commonwealth.


6.59.1
6508
ἐν δ’ αὖ Πέρσῃσι ὁ κατιστάμενος βασιλεὺς τὸν προοφειλόμενον φόρον μετιεῖ τῇσι πόλισι πάσῃσι .
Among the Persians the king at the beginning of his reign forgives all cities their arrears of tribute.


6.60.1
6509
συμφέρονται δὲ καὶ τάδε Αἰγυπτίοισι Λακεδαιμόνιοι ·
The Lacedaemonians resemble the Egyptians in that their heralds and flute-players and cooks inherit the craft from their fathers,


6.60.1
6510
οἱ κήρυκες αὐτῶν καὶ αὐληταὶ καὶ μάγειροι ἐκδέκονται τὰς πατρωίας τέχνας , καὶ αὐλητής τε αὐλητέω γίνεται καὶ μάγειρος μαγείρου καὶ κῆρυξ κήρυκος ·
a flute-player's son being a flute-player, and a cook's son a cook, and a herald's son a herald;


6.60.1
6511
οὐ κατὰ λαμπροφωνίην ἐπιτιθέμενοι ἄλλοι σφέας παρακληίουσι , ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὰ πάτρια ἐπιτελέουσι .
no others usurp their places, making themselves heralds by loudness of voice; they ply their craft by right of birth.


6.61.1
6512
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ οὕτω γίνεται .
These things happened as follows.


6.61.1
6513
τότε δὲ τὸν Κλεομένεα ἐόντα ἐν τῇ Αἰγίνῃ καὶ κοινὰ τῇ Ἑλλάδι ἀγαθὰ προεργαζόμενον ὁ Δημάρητος διέβαλε , οὐκ Αἰγινητέων οὕτω κηδόμενος ὡς φθόνῳ καὶ ἄγῃ χρεώμενος .
While Cleomenes was in  Aegina working for the common good of  Hellas, Demaratus slandered him, not out of care for the Aeginetans, but out of jealousy and envy.


6.61.1
6514
Κλεομένης δὲ νοστήσας ἀπ’ Αἰγίνης ἐβούλευε τὸν Δημάρητον παῦσαι τῆς βασιληίης , διὰ πρῆγμα τοιόνδε ἐπίβασιν ἐς αὐτὸν ποιεύμενος .
Once Cleomenes returned home from  Aegina, he planned to remove Demaratus from his kingship, using the following affair as a pretext against him:


6.61.1
6515
Ἀρίστωνι βασιλεύοντι ἐν Σπάρτῃ καὶ γήμαντι γυναῖκας δύο παῖδες οὐκ ἐγίνοντο .
Ariston, king of  Sparta, had married twice but had no children.


6.61.2
6516
καὶ οὐ γὰρ συνεγινώσκετο αὐτὸς τούτων εἶναι αἴτιος , γαμέει τρίτην γυναῖκα ·
He did not admit that he himself was responsible, so he married a third time.


6.61.2
6517
ὧδε δὲ γαμέει .
This is how he got married:


6.61.2
6518
ἦν οἱ φίλος τῶν Σπαρτιητέων ἀνήρ , τῷ προσέκειτο τῶν ἀστῶν μάλιστα ὁ Ἀρίστων .
he had among the Spartans a friend to whom he was especially attached.


6.61.2
6519
τούτῳ τῷ ἀνδρὶ ἐτύγχανε ἐοῦσα γυνὴ καλλίστη μακρῷ τῶν ἐν Σπάρτῃ γυναικῶν , καὶ ταῦτα μέντοι καλλίστη ἐξ αἰσχίστης γενομένη .
This man's wife was by far the most beautiful woman in  Sparta, but she who was now most beautiful had once been the ugliest.


6.61.3
6520
ἐοῦσαν γάρ μιν τὸ εἶδος φλαύρην ἡ τροφὸς αὐτῆς , οἷα ἀνθρώπων τε ὀλβίων θυγατέρα καὶ δυσειδέα ἐοῦσαν , πρὸς δὲ καὶ ὁρῶσα τοὺς γονέας συμφορὴν τὸ εἶδος αὐτῆς ποιευμένους , ταῦτα ἕκαστα μαθοῦσα ἐπιφράζεται τοιάδε ·
Her nurse considered her inferior looks and how she was of wealthy people yet unattractive, and, seeing how the parents felt her appearance to be a great misfortune, she contrived the following:


6.61.3
6521
ἐφόρεε αὐτὴν ἀνὰ πᾶσαν ἡμέρην ἐς τὸ τῆς Ἑλένης ἱρόν .
She used to carry the child every day to the sacred precinct of Helen.


6.61.3
6522
τὸ δ’ ἐστὶ ἐν τῇ Θεράπνῃ καλεομένῃ ὕπερθε τοῦ Φοιβηίου ἱροῦ .
This is in the place called Therapne, beyond the sacred precinct of Phoebus.


6.61.3
6523
ὅκως δὲ ἐνείκειε ἡ τροφός , πρός τε τ- ἄγαλμα ἵστα καὶ ἐλίσσετο τὴν θεὸν ἀπαλλάξαι τῆς δυσμορφίης τὸ παιδίον .
Every time the nurse carried the child there, she set her beside the image and beseeched the goddess to release the child from her ugliness.


6.61.4
6524
καὶ δή κοτε ἀπιούσῃ ἐκ τοῦ ἱροῦ τῇ τροφῷ γυναῖκα λέγεται ἐπιφανῆναι , ἐπιφανεῖσαν δὲ ἐπειρέσθαι μιν ὅ τι φέρει ἐν τῇ ἀγκάλῃ , καὶ τὴν φράσαι ὡς παιδίον φορέει , τὴν δὲ κελεῦσαί οἱ δέξαι , τὴν δὲ οὐ φάναι ·
Once as she was leaving the sacred precinct, it is said that a woman appeared to her and asked her what she was carrying in her arms.


6.61.4
6525
ἀπειρῆσθαι γάρ οἱ ἐκ τῶν γειναμένων μηδενὶ ἐπιδεικνύναι ·
The nurse said she was carrying a child and the woman bade her show it to her, but she refused, saying that the parents had forbidden her to show it to anyone.


6.61.4
6526
τὴν δὲ πάντως ἑωυτῇ κελεύειν ἐπιδέξαι .
But the woman strongly bade her show it to her,


6.61.5
6527
ὁρῶσαν δὲ τὴν γυναῖκα περὶ πολλοῦ ποιευμένην ἰδέσθαι , οὕτω δὴ τὴν τροφὸν δέξαι τὸ παιδίον ·
and when the nurse saw how important it was to her, she showed her the child.


6.61.5
6528
τὴν δὲ καταψῶσαν τοῦ παιδίου τὴν κεφαλὴν εἶπαι ὡς καλλιστεύσει πασέων τῶν ἐν Σπάρτῃ γυναικῶν .
The woman stroked the child's head and said that she would be the most beautiful woman in all  Sparta.


6.61.5
6529
ἀπὸ μὲν δὴ ταύτης τῆς ἡμέρης μεταπεσεῖν τὸ εἶδος .
From that day her looks changed, and when she reached the time for marriage, Agetus son of Alcidas married her.


6.61.5
6530
γαμέει δὲ δή μιν ἐς γάμου ὥρην ἀπικομένην Ἄγητος ὁ Ἀλκείδεω , οὗτος δὴ ὁ τοῦ Ἀρίστωνος φίλος .
This man was Ariston's friend.


6.62.1
6531
τὸν δὲ Ἀρίστωνα ἔκνιζε ἄρα τῆς γυναικὸς ταύτης ὁ ἔρως ·
So love for this woman pricked Ariston,


6.62.1
6532
μηχανᾶται δὴ τοιάδε ·
and he contrived as follows:


6.62.1
6533
αὐτός τε τῷ ἑταίρῳ , τοῦ ἦν ἡ γυνὴ αὕτη , ὑποδέκεται δωτίνην δώσειν τῶν ἑωυτοῦ πάντων ἕν , τὸ ἂν αὐτὸς ἐκεῖνος ἕληται , καὶ τὸν ἑταῖρον ἑωυτῷ ἐκέλευε ὡσαύτως τὴν ὁμοίην διδόναι ·
He promised to give to his comrade any one thing out of all he owned, whatever Agetus might choose, and he bade his comrade make him the same promise.


6.62.1
6534
ὁ δὲ οὐδὲν φοβηθεὶς ἀμφὶ τῇ γυναικί , ὁρέων ἐοῦσαν καὶ Ἀρίστωνι γυναῖκα , καταινέει ταῦτα ·
Agetus had no fear about his wife, seeing that Ariston was already married,


6.62.1
6535
ἐπὶ τούτοισι δὲ ὅρκους ἐπήλασαν .
so he agreed and they took oaths on these terms.


6.62.2
6536
μετὰ δὲ αὐτός τε ὁ Ἀρίστων ἔδωκε τοῦτο , ὅ τι δὴ ἦν , τὸ εἵλετο τῶν κειμηλίων τῶν Ἀρίστωνος ὁ Ἄγητος , καὶ αὐτὸς τὴν ὁμοίην ζητέων φέρεσθαι παρ’ ἐκείνου , ἐνθαῦτα δὴ τοῦ ἑταίρου τὴν γυναῖκα ἐπειρᾶτο ἀπάγεσθαι .
Ariston gave Agetus whatever it was that he chose out of all his treasures, and then, seeking equal recompense from him, tried to take the wife of his comrade.


6.62.2
6537
ὁ δὲ πλὴν τούτου μούνου τὰ ἄλλα ἔφη καταινέσαι ·
Agetus said that he had agreed to anything but that,


6.62.2
6538
ἀναγκαζόμενος μέντοι τῷ τε ὅρκῳ καὶ τῆς ἀπάτης τῇ παραγωγῇ ἀπιεῖ ἀπάγεσθαι .
but he was forced by his oath and by the deceitful trick to let his wife be taken.


6.63.1
6539
οὕτω μὲν δὴ τὴν τρίτην ἐσηγάγετο γυναῖκα ὁ Ἀρίστων , τὴν δευτέρην ἀποπεμψάμενος .
In this way Ariston married his third wife, after divorcing the second one.


6.63.1
6540
ἐν δέ οἱ χρόνῳ ἐλάσσονι καὶ οὐ πληρώσασα τοὺς δέκα μῆνας ἡ γυνὴ αὕτη τίκτει τοῦτον δὴ τὸν Δημάρητον .
But his new wife gave birth to Demaratus too soon, before ten lunar months had passed.


6.63.2
6541
καί τίς οἱ τῶν οἰκετέων ἐν θώκῳ κατημένῳ μετὰ τῶν ἐφόρων ἐξαγγέλλει ὥς οἱ παῖς γέγονε .
When one of his servants announced to him as he sat in council with the ephors that he had a son,


6.63.2
6542
ὁ δὲ ἐπιστάμενός τε τὸν χρόνον τῷ ἠγάγετο τὴν γυναῖκα καὶ ἐπὶ δακτύλων συμβαλλόμενος τοὺς μῆνας , εἶπε ἀπομόσας " οὐκ ἂν ἐμὸς εἴη " .
Ariston, knowing the time of the marriage, counted up the months on his fingers and swore on oath, “It's not mine.”


6.63.2
6543
τοῦτο ἤκουσαν μὲν οἱ ἔφοροι , πρῆγμα μέντοι οὐδὲν ἐποιήσαντο τὸ παραυτίκα .
The ephors heard this but did not make anything of it.


6.63.2
6544
ὁ δὲ παῖς ηὔξετο , καὶ τῷ Ἀρίστωνι τὸ εἰρημένον μετέμελε ·
When the boy grew up, Ariston regretted having said that,


6.63.2
6545
παῖδα γὰρ τὸν Δημάρητον ἐς τὰ μάλιστά οἱ ἐνόμισε εἶναι .
for he firmly believed Demaratus to be his own son.


6.63.3
6546
Δημάρητον δὲ αὐτῷ οὔνομα ἔθετο διὰ τόδε ·
He named him Demaratus because before his birth all the Spartan populace had prayed that Ariston, the man most highly esteemed out of all the kings of  Sparta, might have a son.


6.63.3
6547
πρότερον τούτων πανδημεὶ Σπαρτιῆται Ἀρίστωνι , ὡς ἀνδρὶ εὐδοκιμέοντι διὰ πάντων δὴ τῶν βασιλέων τῶν ἐν Σπάρτῃ γενομένων , ἀρὴν ἐποιήσαντο παῖδα γενέσθαι .
Thus he was named Demaratus, which means “answer to the people's prayer.”


6.64.1
6548
διὰ τοῦτο μέν οἱ τὸ οὔνομα Δημάρητος ἐτέθη ·
Time passed and Ariston died, so Demaratus held the kingship.


6.64.1
6549
χρόνου δὲ προϊόντος Ἀρίστων μὲν ἀπέθανε , Δημάρητος δὲ ἔσχε τὴν βασιληίην .
But it seems that these matters had to become known and cause Demaratus to lose his kingship.


6.64.1
6550
ἔδεε δέ , ὡς ἔοικε , ἀνάπυστα γενόμενα ταῦτα καταπαῦσαι Δημάρητον τῆς βασιληίης διὰ τὰ G? Κλεομένεϊ διεβλήθη μεγάλως πρότερόν τε ὁ Δημάρητος ἀπαγαγὼν τὴν στρατιὴν ἐξ Ἐλευσῖνος , καὶ δὴ καὶ τότε ἐπ’ Αἰγινητέων τοὺς μηδίσαντας διαβάντος Κλεομένεος .
He had already fallen out with Cleomenes when he had brought the army back from  Eleusis, and now they were even more at odds when Cleomenes crossed over after the Aeginetans who were Medizing.


6.65.1
6551
ὁρμηθεὶς ὦν ἀποτίνυσθαι ὁ Κλεομένης συντίθεται Λευτυχίδῃ τῷ Μενάρεος τοῦ Ἄγιος , ἐόντι οἰκίης τῆς αὐτῆς Δημαρήτῳ , ἐπ’ ᾧ τε , ἢν αὐτὸν καταστήσῃ βασιλέα ἀντὶ Δημαρήτου , ἕψεταί οἱ ἐπ’ Αἰγινήτας .
Cleomenes wanted revenge, so he made a deal with Leotychides son of Menares son of Agis, of the same family as Demaratus. The deal was that Leotychides would go with Cleomenes against the Aeginetans if he became king.


6.65.2
6552
ὁ δὲ Λευτυχίδης ἦν ἐχθρὸς τῷ Δημαρήτῳ μάλιστα γεγονὼς διὰ πρῆγμα τοιόνδε ·
Leotychides had already become strongly hostile to Demaratus for the following reason:


6.65.2
6553
ἁρμοσαμένου Λευτυχίδεω Πέρκαλον τὴν Χίλωνος τοῦ Δημαρμένου θυγατέρα , ὁ Δημάρητος ἐπιβουλεύσας ἀποστερέει Λευτυχίδεα τοῦ γάμου , φθάσας αὐτὸς τὴν Πέρκαλον ἁρπάσας καὶ σχὼν γυναῖκα .
Leotychides was betrothed to Percalus, daughter of Demarmenus, but Demaratus plotted and robbed him of his marriage, stealing Percalus and marrying her first.


6.65.3
6554
κατὰ τοῦτο μὲν τῷ Λευτυχίδῃ ἡ ἔχθρη ἡ ἐς τὸν Δημάρητον ἐγεγόνεε , τότε δὲ ἐκ τῆς Κλεομένεος προθυμίης ὁ Λευτυχίδης κατόμνυται Δημαρήτῳ , φὰς αὐτὸν οὐκ ἱκνεομένως βασιλεύειν Σπαρτιητέων οὐκ ἐόντα παῖδα Ἀρίστωνος ·
From this affair Leotychides was hostile toward Demaratus, so at Cleomenes' instigation he took an oath against him, saying that he was not king of the Spartans by right, since he was not Ariston's son.


6.65.3
6555
μετὰ δὲ τὴν κατωμοσίην ἐδίωκε , ἀνασώζων ἐκεῖνο τὸ ἔπος τὸ εἶπε Ἀρίστων τότε ὅτε οἱ ἐξήγγειλε ὁ οἰκέτης παῖδα γεγονέναι , ὁ δὲ συμβαλόμενος τοὺς μῆνας ἀπώμοσε φὰς οὐκ ἑωυτοῦ μιν εἶναι .
After making this oath, he prosecuted him, recalling that utterance which Ariston had made when the servant told him he had a son, and he counted up the months and swore that it was not his.


6.65.4
6556
τούτου δὴ ἐπιβατεύων τοῦ ῥήματος ὁ Λευτυχίδης ἀπέφαινε τὸν Δημάρητον οὔτε ἐξ Ἀρίστωνος γεγονότα οὔτε ἱκνευμένως βασιλεύοντα Σπάρτης , τοὺς ἐφόρους μάρτυρας παρεχόμενος κείνους οἳ τότε ἐτύγχανον πάρεδροί τε ἐόντες καὶ ἀκούσαντες ταῦτα Ἀρίστωνος .
Taking his stand on this remark, Leotychides declared that Demaratus was not Ariston's son and that he was not rightly king of  Sparta, bringing as witnesses the ephors who had been sitting beside Ariston and heard him say this.


6.66.1
6557
τέλος δὲ ἐόντων περὶ αὐτῶν νεικέων , ἔδοξε Σπαρτιήτῃσι ἐπειρέσθαι τὸ χρηστήριον τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖσι εἰ Ἀρίστωνος εἴη παῖς ὁ Δημάρητος .
Disputes arose over it, so the Spartans resolved to ask the oracle at  Delphi if Demaratus was the son of Ariston.


6.66.2
6558
ἀνοίστου δὲ γενομένου ἐκ προνοίης τῆς Κλεομένεος ἐς τὴν Πυθίην , ἐνθαῦτα προσποιέεται Κλεομένης Κόβωνα τὸν Ἀριστοφάντου , ἄνδρα ἐν Δελφοῖσι δυναστεύοντα μέγιστον , ὁ δὲ Κόβων Περίαλλαν τὴν πρόμαντιν ἀναπείθει τὰ Κλεομένης ἐβούλετο λέγεσθαι λέγειν .
At Cleomenes' instigation this was revealed to the Pythia. He had won over a man of great influence among the Delphians, Cobon son of Aristophantus, and Cobon persuaded the priestess, Periallus, to say what Cleomenes wanted her to.


6.66.3
6559
οὕτω δὴ ἡ Πυθίη ἐπειρωτώντων τῶν θεοπρόπων ἔκρινε μὴ Ἀρίστωνος εἶναι Δημάρητον παῖδα .
When the ambassadors asked if Demaratus was the son of Ariston, the Pythia gave judgment that he was not.


6.66.3
6560
ὑστέρῳ μέντοι χρόνῳ ἀνάπυστα ἐγένετο ταῦτα , καὶ Κόβων τε ἔφυγε ἐκ Δελφῶν καὶ Περίαλλα ἡ πρόμαντις ἐπαύσθη τῆς τιμῆς .
All this came to light later; Cobon was exiled from  Delphi, and Periallus was deposed from her position.


6.67.1
6561
κατὰ μὲν δὴ Δημαρήτου τὴν κατάπαυσιν τῆς βασιληίης οὕτω ἐγένετο , ἔφυγε δὲ Δημάρητος ἐκ Σπάρτης ἐς Μήδους ἐκ τοιοῦδε ὀνείδεος .
So it was concerning Demaratus' loss of the kingship, and from  Sparta he went into exile among the Medes because of the following reproach:


6.67.1
6562
μετὰ τῆς βασιληίης τὴν κατάπαυσιν ὁ Δημάρητος ἦρχε αἱρεθεὶς ἀρχήν .
after he was deposed from the kingship, he was elected to office.


6.67.2
6563
ἦσαν μὲν δὴ γυμνοπαιδίαι , θεωμένου δὲ τοῦ Δημαρήτου ὁ Λευτυχίδης γεγονὼς ἤδη βασιλεὺς αὐτὸς ἀντ’ ἐκείνου , πέμψας τὸν θεράποντα ἐπὶ γέλωτί τε καὶ λάσθῃ εἰρώτα τὸν Δημάρητον ὁκοῖόν τι εἴη τὸ ἄρχειν μετὰ τὸ βασιλεύειν .
When it was the time of the Gymnopaidia, Leotychides, now king in his place, saw him in the audience and, as a joke and an insult, sent a messenger to him to ask what it was like to hold office after being king.


6.67.3
6564
ὁ δὲ ἀλγήσας τῷ ἐπειρωτήματι εἶπε φὰς αὐτὸς μὲν ἀμφοτέρων ἤδη πεπειρῆσθαι , κεῖνον δὲ οὔ , τὴν μέντοι ἐπειρώτησιν ταύτην ἄρξειν Λακεδαιμονίοισι ἢ μυρίης κακότητος ἢ μυρίης εὐδαιμονίης .
He was grieved by the question and said that he had experience of both, while Leotychides did not, and that this question would be the beginning for  Sparta of either immense evil or immense good fortune.


6.67.3
6565
ταῦτα δὲ εἴπας καὶ κατακαλυψάμενος ἤιε ἐκ τοῦ θεήτρου ἐς τὰ ἑωυτοῦ οἰκία , αὐτίκα δὲ παρασκευασάμενος ἔθυε τῷ Διὶ βοῦν , θύσας δὲ τὴν μητέρα ἐκάλεσε .
He said this, covered his head, left the theater, and went home, where he immediately made preparations and sacrificed an ox to Zeus. Then he summoned his mother.


6.68.1
6566
ἀπικομένῃ δὲ τῇ μητρὶ ἐσθεὶς ἐς τὰς χεῖράς οἱ τῶν σπλάγχνων κατικέτευε , τοιάδε λέγων .
When she came in, he put some of the entrails in her hands and entreated her, saying,


6.68.1
6567
" ὦ μῆτερ , θεῶν σε τῶν τε ἄλλων καταπτόμενος ἱκετεύω καὶ τοῦ ἑρκείου Διὸς τοῦδε φράσαι μοι τὴν ἀληθείην , τίς μευ ἐστὶ πατὴρ ὀρθῷ λόγῳ .
“Mother, appealing to Zeus of the household and to all the other gods, I beseech you to tell me the truth. Who is my father? Tell me truly."


6.68.2
6568
Λευτυχίδης μὲν γὰρ ἔφη ἐν τοῖσι νείκεσι λέγων κυέουσάν σε ἐκ τοῦ προτέρου ἀνδρὸς οὕτω ἐλθεῖν παρὰ Ἀρίστωνα ·
Leotychides said in the disputes that you were already pregnant by your former husband when you came to Ariston.


6.68.2
6569
οἱ δὲ καὶ τὸν ματαιότερον λόγον λέγοντες φασί σε ἐλθεῖν παρὰ τῶν οἰκετέων τὸν ὀνοφορβόν , καὶ ἐμὲ ἐκείνου εἶναι παῖδα .
Others say more foolishly that you approached one of the servants, the ass-keeper, and that I am his son.


6.68.3
6570
ἐγώ σε ὦν μετέρχομαι τῶν θεῶν εἰπεῖν τ- ἀληθές ·
I adjure you by the gods to speak what is true.


6.68.3
6571
οὔτε γάρ , εἴ περ πεποίηκάς τι τῶν λεγομένων , μούνη δὴ πεποίηκας , μετὰ πολλέων δέ ·
If you have done anything of what they say, you are not the only one; you are in company with many women.


6.68.3
6572
ὅ τε λόγος πολλὸς ἐν Σπάρτῃ ὡς Ἀρίστωνι σπέρμα παιδοποιὸν οὐκ ἐνῆν ·
There is much talk at  Sparta that Ariston did not have child-bearing seed in him,


6.68.3
6573
τεκεῖν γὰρ ἄν οἱ καὶ τὰς προτέρας γυναῖκας " .
or his former wives would have given him children.”


6.69.1
6574
ὃ μὲν δὴ τοιαῦτα ἔλεγε , ἣ δὲ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
Thus he spoke. His mother answered, “My son, since you adjure me by entreaties to speak the truth, I will speak out to you all that is true.


6.69.1
6575
" ὦ παῖ , ἐπείτε με λιτῇσι μετέρχεαι εἰπεῖν τὴν ἀληθείην , πᾶν ἐς σὲ κατειρήσεται τ- ἀληθές .
On the third night after Ariston brought me to his house, a phantom resembling him came to me.


6.69.1
6576
ὥς με ἠγάγετο Ἀρίστων ἐς ἑωυτοῦ , νυκτὶ τρίτῃ ἀπὸ τῆς πρώτης ἦλθέ μοι φάσμα εἰδόμενον Ἀρίστωνι , συνευνηθὲν δὲ τοὺς στεφάνους τοὺς εἶχε ἐμοὶ περιετίθεε .
It came and lay with me and then put on me the garlands which it had.


6.69.2
6577
καὶ τὸ μὲν οἰχώκεε , ἧκε δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα Ἀρίστων .
It went away, and when Ariston came in later and saw me with the garlands, he asked who gave them to me.


6.69.2
6578
ὡς δέ με εἶδε ἔχουσαν στεφάνους , εἰρώτα τίς εἴη μοι ὁ δούς ·
I said he did, but he denied it.


6.69.2
6579
ἐγὼ δὲ ἐφάμην ἐκεῖνον , ὁ δὲ οὐκ ὑπεδέκετο .
I swore an oath that just a little while before he had come in and lain with me and given me the garlands,


6.69.2
6580
ἐγὼ δὲ κατωμνύμην φαμένη αὐτὸν οὐ ποιέειν καλῶς ἀπαρνεόμενον ·
and I said it was not good of him to deny it.


6.69.2
6581
ὀλίγῳ γὰρ τι πρότερον ἐλθόντα καὶ συνευνηθέντα δοῦναί μοι τοὺς στεφάνους .
When he saw me swearing, he perceived that this was some divine affair.


6.69.3
6582
ὁρέων δέ με κατομνυμένην ὁ Ἀρίστων ἔμαθε ὡς θεῖον εἴη τὸ πρῆγμα .
For the garlands had clearly come from the hero's precinct which is established at the courtyard doors, which they call the precinct of Astrabacus,


6.69.3
6583
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν οἱ στέφανοι ἐφάνησαν ἐόντες ἐκ τοῦ ἡρωίου τοῦ παρὰ τῇσι θύρῃσι τῇσι αὐλείῃσι ἱδρυμένου , τὸ καλέουσι Ἀστροβάκου , τοῦτο δὲ οἱ μάντιες τὸν αὐτὸν τοῦτον ἥρωα ἀναίρεον εἶναι .
and the seers responded that this was the same hero who had come to me.


6.69.4
6584
οὕτω ὦ παῖ ἔχεις πᾶν , ὅσον τι καὶ βούλεαι πυθέσθαι ·
Thus, my son, you have all you want to know.


6.69.4
6585
ἢ γὰρ ἐκ τοῦ ἥρωος τούτου γέγονας , καί τοι πατήρ ἐστι Ἀστρόβακος ὁ ἥρως , ἢ Ἀρίστων ·
Either you are from this hero and Astrabacus the hero is your father, or Ariston is,


6.69.4
6586
ἐν γάρ σε τῇ νυκτὶ ταύτῃ ἀναιρέομαι .
for I conceived you that night.


6.69.4
6587
τῇ δέ σευ μάλιστα κατάπτονται οἱ ἐχθροί , λέγοντες ὡς αὐτὸς ὁ Ἀρίστων , ὅτε αὐτῷ σὺ ἠγγέλθης γεγενημένος , πολλῶν ἀκουόντων οὐ φήσειέ σε ἑωυτοῦ εἶναι ( τὸν χρόνον γάρ , τοὺς δέκα μῆνας , οὐδέκω ἐξήκειν ) , ἀιδρείῃ τῶν τοιούτων κεῖνος τοῦτο ἀπέρριψε τὸ ἔπος .
As for how your enemies chiefly attack you, saying that Ariston himself, when your birth was announced, denied in front of a large audience that you were his because the ten months had not yet been completed, he spoke an idle word, out of ignorance of such things.


6.69.5
6588
τίκτουσι γὰρ γυναῖκες καὶ ἐννεάμηνα καὶ ἑπτάμηνα , καὶ οὐ πᾶσαι δέκα μῆνας ἐκτελέσασαι ·
Some women give birth after nine months or seven months; not all complete the ten months.


6.69.5
6589
ἐγὼ δὲ σὲ ὦ παῖ ἑπτάμηνον ἔτεκον .
I gave birth to you, my son, after seven months.


6.69.5
6590
ἔγνω δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ Ἀρίστων οὐ μετὰ πολλὸν χρόνον ὡς ἀνοίῃ τὸ ἔπος ἐκβάλοι τοῦτο .
A little later Ariston himself recognized that he had blurted out that speech because of foolishness.


6.69.5
6591
λόγους δὲ ἄλλους περὶ γενέσιος τῆς σεωυτοῦ μὴ δέκεο ·
Do not believe other stories about your manner of birth.


6.69.5
6592
τὰ γὰρ ἀληθέστατα πάντα ἀκήκοας .
You have heard the whole truth.


6.69.5
6593
ἐκ δὲ ὀνοφορβῶν αὐτῷ τε Λευτυχίδῃ καὶ τοῖσι ταῦτα λέγουσι τίκτοιεν αἱ γυναῖκες παῖδας " .
May the wife of Leotychides himself, and the wives of the others who say these things, give birth to children fathered by ass-keepers.”


6.70.1
6594
ἣ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἔλεγε , ὁ δὲ πυθόμενός τε τὰ ἐβούλετο καὶ ἐπόδια λαβὼν ἐπορεύετο ἐς Ἦλιν , τῷ λόγῳ φὰς ὡς ἐς Δελφοὺς χρησόμενος τῷ χρηστηρίῳ πορεύεται .
Thus his mother spoke. After learning what he desired, Demaratus took provisions and travelled to  Elis, pretending that he was going to  Delphi to inquire of the oracle.


6.70.1
6595
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ ὑποτοπηθέντες Δημάρητον δρησμῷ ἐπιχειρέειν ἐδίωκον .
But the Lacedaemonians suspected that he planned to escape and went in pursuit.


6.70.2
6596
καί κως ἔφθη ἐς Ζάκυνθον διαβὰς ὁ Δημάρητος ἐκ τῆς Ἤλιδος ·
Demaratus somehow went across to  Zacynthus from  Elis before them;


6.70.2
6597
ἐπιδιαβάντες δὲ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι αὐτοῦ τε ἅπτοντο καὶ τοὺς θεράποντας αὐτοῦ ἀπαιρέονται .
the Lacedaemonians crossed over after him and laid hands on him, carrying off his servants.


6.70.2
6598
μετὰ δέ , οὐ γὰρ ἐξεδίδοσαν αὐτὸν οἱ Ζακύνθιοι , ἐνθεῦτεν διαβαίνει ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην παρὰ βασιλέα Δαρεῖον .
But the Zacynthians refused to give him up, and later he crossed from there to  Asia and went to king Darius,


6.70.2
6599
ὁ δὲ ὑπεδέξατό τε αὐτὸν μεγαλωστὶ καὶ γῆν τε καὶ πόλιας ἔδωκε .
who received him in grand style and gave him lands and cities.


6.70.3
6600
οὕτω ἀπίκετο ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην Δημάρητος καὶ τοιαύτῃ χρησάμενος τύχῃ , ἄλλα τε Λακεδαιμονίοισι συχνὰ ἔργοισί τε καὶ γνώμῃσι ἀπολαμπρυνθείς , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ Ὀλυμπιάδα σφι ἀνελόμενος τεθρίππῳ προσέβαλε , μοῦνος τοῦτο πάντων δὴ τῶν γενομένων βασιλέων ἐν Σπάρτῃ ποιήσας .
So Demaratus reached  Asia through such chances, a man who had gained much renown in  Lacedaemon by his many achievements and his wisdom, and by conferring on the state the victory in a chariot-race he had won at  Olympia; he was the only king of  Sparta who did this.


6.71.1
6601
Λευτυχίδης δὲ ὁ Μενάρεος Δημαρήτου καταπαυσθέντος διεδέξατο τὴν βασιληίην , καί οἱ γίνεται παῖς Ζευξίδημος , τὸν δὴ Κυνίσκον μετεξέτεροι Σπαρτιητέων ἐκάλεον .
Leotychides son of Menares succeeded to the kingship after Demaratus was deposed.


6.71.1
6602
οὗτος ὁ Ζευξίδημος οὐκ ἐβασίλευσε Σπάρτης ·
A son was born to him, Zeuxidemus, called by some of the Spartans Cyniscus.


6.71.1
6603
πρὸ Λευτυχίδεω γὰρ τελευτᾷ , λιπὼν παῖδα Ἀρχίδημον .
This Zeuxidemus never became king of  Sparta, for he died before Leotychides, leaving his son Archidemus.


6.71.2
6604
Δευτυχίδης δὲ στερηθεὶς Ζευξιδήμου γαμέει δευτέρην γυναῖκα Εὐρυδάμην τὴν ἐοῦσαν Μενίου ἀδελφεὴν Διακτορίδεω δὲ θυγατέρα , ἐκ τῆς οἱ ἔρσεν μὲν γίνεται οὐδέν , θυγάτηρ δὲ Λαμπιτώ , τὴν Ἀρχίδημος ὁ Ζευξιδήμου γαμέει δόντος αὐτῷ Λευτυχίδεω .
After the loss of Zeuxidemus, Leutychides married a second wife, Eurydame, sister of Menius and daughter of Diactorides; by her he had no male offspring, but a daughter, Lampito, to whom Archidemus son of Zeuxidemus was married by Leutychides.


6.72.1
6605
οὐ μὲν οὐδὲ Λευτυχίδης κατεγήρα ἐν Σπάρτῃ , ἀλλὰ τίσιν τοιήνδε τινὰ Δημαρήτῳ ἐξέτισε .
But Leutychides also did not come to old age in Sparta; he was punished for his dealings with Demaratus as I will show.


6.72.1
6606
ἐστρατήγησε Λακεδαιμονίοισι ἐς Θεσσαλίην , παρεὸν δέ οἱ πάντα ὑποχείρια ποιήσασθαι ἐδωροδόκησε ἀργύριον πολλόν ·
He led a Lacedaemonian army to Thessaly, and when he could have subdued all the country he took a great bribe.


6.72.2
6607
ἐπ’ αὐτοφώρῳ δὲ ἁλοὺς αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ , ἐπικατήμενος χειρίδι πλέῃ ἀργυρίου , ἔφυγε ἐκ Σπάρτης ὑπὸ δικαστήριον ὑπαχθείς , καὶ τὰ οἰκία οἱ κατεσκάφη ·
After being caught in the act of hoarding a sleeve full of silver there in the camp, he was brought before a court and banished from Sparta, and his house was destroyed.


6.72.2
6608
ἔφυγε δὲ ἐς Τεγέην καὶ ἐτελεύτησε ἐν ταύτῃ .
He went into exile at Tegea and died in that country.


6.73.1
6609
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ ἐγένετο χρόνῳ ὕστερον ·
This happened long afterwards.


6.73.1
6610
τότε δὲ ὡς τῷ Κλεομένεϊ ὡδώθη τὸ ἐς τὸν Δημάρητον πρῆγμα , αὐτίκα παραλαβὼν Λευτυχίδεα ἤιε ἐπὶ τοὺς Αἰγινήτας , δεινόν τινά σφι ἔγκοτον διὰ τὸν προπηλακισμὸν ἔχων .
When Cleomenes' dealings with Demaratus came off successfully, he immediately took Leutychides with him and went to punish the Aeginetans, with whom he was terribly angry because of their insulting behavior.


6.73.2
6611
οὕτω δὴ οὔτε οἱ Αἰγινῆται , ἀμφοτέρων τῶν βασιλέων ἡκόντων ἐπ’ αὐτούς , ἐδικαίευν ἔτι ἀντιβαίνειν , ἐκεῖνοί τε ἐπιλεξάμενοι ἄνδρας δέκα Αἰγινητέων τοὺς πλείστου ἀξίους καὶ πλούτῳ καὶ γένει ·
When the Aeginetans saw that both kings had come after them, they now deemed it best to offer no further resistance;


6.73.2
6612
ἦγον καὶ ἄλλους καὶ δὴ καὶ Κριόν τε τὸν Πολυκρίτου καὶ Κάσαυβον τὸν Ἀριστοκράτεος , οἵ περ εἶχον μέγιστον κράτος ·
the kings chose ten men of Aegina who were most honored for wealth and lineage, among them Crius son of Polycritus and Casambus son of Aristocrates, the two most powerful men in Aegina;


6.73.2
6613
ἀγαγόντες δὲ σφέας ἐς γῆν τὴν Ἀττικὴν παραθήκην παρατίθενται ἐς τοὺς ἐχθίστους Αἰγινήτῃσι Ἀθηναίους .
they carried them to Attica and gave them into the keeping of the Athenians, the bitterest foes of the Aeginetans.


6.74.1
6614
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Κλεομένεα ἐπάιστον γενόμενον κακοτεχνήσαντα ἐς Δημάρητον δεῖμα ἔλαβε Σπαρτιητέων , καὶ ὑπεξέσχε ἐς Θεσσαλίην .
Later Cleomenes' treacherous plot against Demaratus became known; he was seized with fear of the Spartans and secretly fled to Thessaly.


6.74.1
6615
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ἀπικόμενος ἐς τὴν Ἀρκαδίην νεώτερα ἔπρησσε πρήγματα , συνιστὰς τοὺς Ἀρκάδας ἐπὶ τῆ Σπάρτῃ , ἄλλους τε ὅρκους προσάγων σφι ἦ μὲν ἕψεσθαι σφέας αὐτῷ τῇ ἂν ἐξηγέηται , καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐς Νώνακριν πόλιν πρόθυμος ἦν τῶν Ἀρκάδων τοὺς προεστεῶτας ἀγινέων ἐξορκοῦν τὸ Στυγὸς ὕδωρ .
From there he came to Arcadia and stirred up disorder, uniting the Arcadians against Sparta; among his methods of binding them by oath to follow him wherever he led was his zeal to bring the chief men of Arcadia to the city of Nonacris and make them swear by the water of the Styx.


6.74.2
6616
ἐν δὲ ταύτῃ τῇ πόλι λέγεται εἶναι ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀρκάδων τὸ Στυγὸς ὕδωρ , καὶ δὴ καὶ ἔστι τοιόνδε τι ·
Near this city is said to be the Arcadian water of the Styx, and this is its nature:


6.74.2
6617
ὕδωρ ὀλίγον φαινόμενον ἐκ πέτρης στάζει ἐς ἄγκος , τὸ δὲ ἄγκος αἱμασιῆς τις περιθέει κύκλος .
it is a stream of small appearance, dropping from a cliff into a pool; a wall of stones runs round the pool.


6.74.2
6618
ἡ δὲ Νώνακρις , ἐν τῇ ἡ πηγὴ αὕτη τυγχάνει ἐοῦσα , πόλις ἐστὶ τῆς Ἀρκαδίης πρὸς Φενεῷ .
Nonacris, where this spring rises, is a city of Arcadia near Pheneus.


6.75.1
6619
μαθόντες δὲ Κλεομένεα Λακεδαιμόνιοι ταῦτα πρήσσοντα , κατῆγον αὐτὸν δείσαντες ἐπὶ τοῖσι αὐτοῖσι ἐς Σπάρτην τοῖσι καὶ πρότερον ἦρχε .
When the Lacedaemonians learned that Cleomenes was doing this, they took fright and brought him back to Sparta to rule on the same terms as before.


6.75.1
6620
κατελθόντα δὲ αὐτὸν αὐτίκα ὑπέλαβε μανίη νοῦσος , ἐόντα καὶ πρότερον ὑπομαργότερον ·
Cleomenes had already been not entirely in his right mind, and on his return from exile a mad sickness fell upon him:


6.75.1
6621
ὅκως γὰρ τεῷ ἐντύχοι Σπαρτιητέων , ἐνέχραυε ἐς τὸ πρόσωπον τὸ σκῆπτρον .
any Spartan that he happened to meet he would hit in the face with his staff.


6.75.2
6622
ποιέοντα δὲ αὐτὸν ταῦτα καὶ παραφρονήσαντα ἔδησαν οἱ προσήκοντες ἐν ξύλω ·
For doing this, and because he was out of his mind, his relatives bound him in the stocks.


6.75.2
6623
ὁ δὲ δεθεὶς τὸν φύλακον μουνωθέντα ἰδὼν τῶν ἄλλων αἰτέει μάχαιραν ·
When he was in the stocks and saw that his guard was left alone, he demanded a dagger;


6.75.2
6624
οὐ βουλομένου δὲ τὰ πρῶτα τοῦ φυλάκου διδόναι ἀπείλεε τά μιν αὖτις ποιήσει , ἐς ὁ δείσας τὰς ἀπειλὰς ὁ φύλακος ( ἦν γὰρ τῶν τις εἱλωτέων ) διδοῖ οἱ μάχαιραν .
the guard at first refused to give it, but Cleomenes threatened what he would do to him when he was freed, until the guard, who was a helot, was frightened by the threats and gave him the dagger.


6.75.3
6625
Κλεομένης δὲ παραλαβὼν τὸν σίδηρον ἄρχετο ἐκ τῶν κνημέων ἑωυτὸν λωβώμενος ·
Cleomenes took the weapon and set about slashing himself from his shins upwards;


6.75.3
6626
ἐπιτάμνων γὰρ κατὰ μῆκος τὰς σάρκας προέβαινε ἐκ τῶν κνημέων ἐς τοὺς μηρούς , ἐκ δὲ τῶν μηρῶν ἔς τε τὰ ἰσχία καὶ τὰς λαπάρας , ἐς ὃ ἐς τὴν γαστέρα ἀπίκετο , καὶ ταύτην καταχορδεύων ἀπέθανε τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ , ὡς μὲν οἱ πολλοὶ λέγουσι Ἐλλήνων , ὅτι τὴν Πυθίην ἀνέγνωσε τὰ περὶ Δημαρήτου λέγειν γενόμενα , ὡς δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι μοῦνοι λέγουσι , διότι ἐς Ἐλευσῖνα ἐσβαλὼν ἔκειρε τὸ τέμενος τῶν θεῶν , ὡς δὲ Ἀργεῖοι , ὅτι ἐξ ἱροῦ αὐτῶν τοῦ Ἄργου Ἀργείων τοὺς καταφυγόντας ἐκ τῆς μάχης καταγινέων κατέκοπτε καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ ἄλσος ἐν ἀλογίῃ ἔχων ἐνέπρησε .
from the shin to the thigh he cut his flesh lengthways, then from the thigh to the hip and the sides, until he reached the belly, and cut it into strips; thus he died, as most of the Greeks say, because he persuaded the Pythian priestess to tell the tale of Demaratus.


6.76.1
6627
Κλεομένεϊ γὰρ μαντευομένῳ ἐν Δελφοῖσι ἐχρήσθη Ἄργος αἱρήσειν ·
The Athenians alone say it was because he invaded Eleusis and laid waste the precinct of the gods.


6.76.1
6628
ἐπείτε δὲ Σπαρτιήτας ἄγων ἀπίκετο ἐπὶ ποταμὸν Ἐρασῖνον , ὃς λέγεται ῥέειν ἐκ τῆς Στυμφαλίδος λίμνης ·
The Argives say it was because when Argives had taken refuge after the battle in their temple of Argus he brought them out and cut them down, then paid no heed to the sacred grove and set it on fire.


6.76.1
6629
τὴν γὰρ δὴ λίμνην ταύτην ἐς χάσμα ἀφανὲς ἐκδιδοῦσαν ἀναφαίνεσθαι ἐν Ἄργεϊ , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ τὸ ὕδωρ ἤδη τοῦτο ὑπ’ Ἀργείων Ἐρασῖνον καλέεσθαι ·
As Cleomenes was seeking divination at Delphi, the oracle responded that he would take Argos.


6.76.1
6630
ἀπικόμενος δ’ ὦν ὁ Κλεομένης ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν τοῦτον ἐσφαγιάζετο αὐτῷ ·
When he came with Spartans to the river Erasinus, which is said to flow from the Stymphalian lake (this lake issues into a cleft out of sight and reappears at Argos, and from that place onwards the stream is called by the Argives Erasinus) — when Cleomenes came to this river he offered sacrifices to it.


6.76.2
6631
καὶ οὐ γὰρ ἐκαλλιέρεε οὐδαμῶς διαβαίνειν μιν , ἄγασθαι μὲν ἔφη τοῦ Ἐρασίνου οὐ προδιδόντος τοὺς πολιήτας , Ἀργείους μέντοι οὐδ’ ὣς χαιρήσειν .
The omens were in no way favorable for his crossing, so he said that he honored the Erasinus for not betraying its countrymen, but even so the Argives would not go unscathed.


6.76.2
6632
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐξαναχωρήσας τὴν στρατιὴν κατήγαγε ἐς Θυρέην , σφαγιασάμενος δὲ τῇ θαλάσσῃ ταῦρον πλοίοισι σφέας ἤγαγε ἔς τε τὴν Τιρυνθίην χώρην καὶ Ναυπλίην .
Then he withdrew and led his army seaward to Thyrea, where he sacrificed a bull to the sea and carried his men on shipboard to the region of Tiryns and to Nauplia.


6.77.1
6633
Ἀργεῖοι δὲ ἐβοήθεον πυνθανόμενοι ταῦτα ἐπὶ θάλασσαν ·
The Argives heard of this and came to the coast to do battle with him.


6.77.1
6634
ὡς δὲ ἀγχοῦ μὲν ἐγίνοντο τῆς Τίρυνθος , χώρῳ δὲ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ κεῖται Ἡσίπεια οὔνομα , μεταίχμιον οὐ μέγα ἀπολιπόντες ἵζοντο ἀντίοι τοῖσι Λακεδαιμονίοισι .
When they had come near Tiryns and were at the place called Hesipeia, they encamped opposite the Lacedaemonians, leaving only a little space between the armies.


6.77.1
6635
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι τὴν μὲν ἐκ τοῦ φανεροῦ μάχην οὐκ ἐφοβέοντο , ἀλλὰ μὴ δόλῳ αἱρεθέωσι ·
There the Argives had no fear of fair fighting, but rather of being captured by a trick.


6.77.2
6636
καὶ γὰρ δή σφι ἐς τοῦτο τὸ πρῆγμα εἶχε τὸ χρηστήριον τὸ ἐπίκοινα ἔχρησε ἡ Πυθίη τούτοισί τε καὶ Μιλησίοισι , λέγον ὧδε .
This was the affair referred to by that oracle which the Pythian priestess gave to the Argives and Milesians in common, which ran thus:


6.77.2
6637
ἀλλ’ ὅταν ἡ θήλεια τὸν ἄρσενα νικήσασα ἐξελάσῃ καὶ κῦδος ἐν Ἀργείοισιν ἄρηται , πολλὰς Ἀργείων ἀμφιδρυφέας τότε θήσει .
" When the female defeats the male And drives him away, winning glory in Argos, She will make many Argive women tear their cheeks.


6.77.2
6638
ὧς ποτέ τις ἐρέει καὶ ἐπεσσομένων ἀνθρώπων δεινὸς ὄφις τριέλικτος ἀπώλετο δουρὶ δαμασθείς .
As someday one of men to come will say: The dread thrice-coiled serpent died tamed by the spear."


6.77.3
6639
ταῦτα δὴ πάντα συνελθόντα τοῖσι Ἀργείοισι φόβον παρεῖχε .
All these things coming together spread fear among the Argives.


6.77.3
6640
καὶ δή σφι πρὸς ταῦτα ἔδοξε τῷ κήρυκι τῶν πολεμίων χρᾶσθαι , δόξαν δέ σφι ἐποίεον τοιόνδε ·
Therefore they resolved to defend themselves by making use of the enemies' herald, and they performed their resolve in this way:


6.77.3
6641
ὅκως ὁ Σπαρτιήτης κῆρυξ προσημαίνοι τι Λακεδαιμονίοισι , ἐποίευν καὶ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο .
whenever the Spartan herald signalled anything to the Lacedaemonians, the Argives did the same thing.


6.78.1
6642
μαθὼν δὲ ὁ Κλεομένης ποιεῦντας τοὺς Ἀργείους ὁκοῖόν τι ὁ σφέτερος κῆρυξ σημήνειε , παραγγέλλει σφι , ὅταν σημήνῃ ὁ κῆρυξ ποιέεσθαι ἄριστον , τότε ἀναλαβόντας τὰ ὅπλα χωρέειν ἐς τοὺς Ἀργείους .
When Cleomenes saw that the Argives did whatever was signalled by his herald, he commanded that when the herald cried the signal for breakfast, they should then put on their armor and attack the Argives.


6.78.2
6643
ταῦτα καὶ ἐγένετο ἐπιτελέα ἐκ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ·
The Lacedaemonians performed this command, and when they assaulted the Argives they caught them at breakfast in obedience to the herald's signal;


6.78.2
6644
ἄριστον γὰρ ποιευμένοισι τοῖσι Ἀργείοισι ἐκ τοῦ κηρύγματος ἐπεκέατο , καὶ πολλοὺς μὲν ἐφόνευσαν αὐτῶν , πολλῷ δέ τι πλεῦνας ἐς τὸ ἄλσος τοῦ Ἄργου καταφυγόντας περιιζόμενοι ἐφύλασσον .
they killed many of them, and far more fled for refuge into the grove of Argus, which the Lacedaemonians encamped around and guarded.


6.79.1
6645
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὁ Κλεομένης ἐποίεε τοιόνδε .
Then Cleomenes' plan was this:


6.79.1
6646
ἔχων αὐτομόλους ἄνδρας καὶ πυνθανόμενος τούτων , ἐξεκάλεε πέμπων κήρυκα ὀνομαστὶ λέγων τῶν Ἀργείων τοὺς ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ ἀπεργμένους , ἐξεκάλεε δὲ φὰς αὐτῶν ἔχειν τὰ ἄποινα .
He had with him some deserters from whom he learned the names, then he sent a herald calling by name the Argives that were shut up in the sacred precinct and inviting them to come out, saying that he had their ransom.


6.79.1
6647
ἄποινα δὲ ἐστὶ Πελοποννησίοισι δύο μνέαι τεταγμέναι κατ’ ἄνδρα αἰχμάλωτον ἐκτίνειν .
(Among the Peloponnesians there is a fixed ransom of two minae to be paid for every prisoner.)


6.79.1
6648
κατὰ πεντήκοντα δὴ ὦν τῶν Ἀργείων ὡς ἑκάστους ἐκκαλεύμενος ὁ Κλεομένης ἔκτεινε .
So Cleomenes invited about fifty Argives to come out one after another and murdered them.


6.79.2
6649
ταῦτα δέ κως γινόμενα ἐλελήθεε τοὺς λοιποὺς τοὺς ἐν τῷ τεμένεϊ ·
Somehow the rest of the men in the temple precinct did not know this was happening,


6.79.2
6650
ἅτε γὰρ πυκνοῦ ἐόντος τοῦ ἄλσεος , οὐκ ὥρων οἱ ἐντὸς τοὺς ἐκτὸς ὅ τι ἔπρησσον , πρίν γε δὴ αὐτῶν τις ἀναβὰς ἐπὶ δένδρον κατεῖδε τὸ ποιεύμενον .
for the grove was thick and those inside could not see how those outside were faring, until one of them climbed a tree and saw what was being done.


6.79.2
6651
οὔκων δὴ ἔτι καλεόμενοι ἐξήισαν .
Thereafter they would not come out at the herald's call.


6.80.1
6652
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ ὁ Κλεομένης ἐκέλευε πάντα τινὰ τῶν εἱλωτέων περινέειν ὕλῃ τὸ ἄλσος , τῶν δὲ πειθομένων ἐνέπρησε τὸ ἄλσος .
Then Cleomenes bade all the helots pile wood about the grove; they obeyed, and he burnt the grove.


6.80.1
6653
καιομένου δὲ ἤδη ἐπείρετο τῶν τινα αὐτομόλων τίνος εἴη θεῶν τὸ ἄλσος ·
When the fire was now burning, he asked of one of the deserters to what god the grove belonged;


6.80.1
6654
ὁ δὲ ἔφη Ἄργου εἶναι .
the man said it was of Argos.


6.80.1
6655
ὁ δὲ ὡς ἤκουσε , ἀναστενάξας μέγα εἶπε " ὦ Ἄπολλον χρηστήριε , ἦ μεγάλως με ἠπάτηκας φάμενος Ἄργος αἱρήσειν ·
When he heard that, he groaned aloud, “Apollo, god of oracles, you have gravely deceived me by saying that I would take Argos;


6.80.1
6656
συμβάλλομαι δ’ ἐξήκειν μοι τὸ χρηστήριον " .
this, I guess, is the fulfillment of that prophecy.”


6.81.1
6657
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Κλεομένης τὴν μὲν πλέω στρατιὴν ἀπῆκε ἀπιέναι ἐς Σπάρτην , χιλίους δὲ αὐτὸς λαβὼν τοὺς ἀριστέας ἤιε ἐς τὸ Ἥραιον θύσων ·
Then Cleomenes sent most of his army back to Sparta, while he himself took a thousand of the best warriors and went to the temple of Hera to sacrifice.


6.81.1
6658
βουλόμενον δὲ αὐτὸν θύειν ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ ὁ ἱρεὺς ἀπηγόρευε , φὰς οὐκ ὅσιον εἶναι ξείνῳ αὐτόθι θύειν .
When he wished to sacrifice at the altar the priest forbade him, saying that it was not holy for a stranger to sacrifice there.


6.81.1
6659
ὁ δὲ Κλεομένης τὸν ἱρέα ἐκέλευε τοὺς εἵλωτας ἀπὸ τοῦ βωμοῦ ἀπάγοντας μαστιγῶσαι , καὶ αὐτὸς ἔθυσε ·
Cleomenes ordered the helots to carry the priest away from the altar and whip him, and he performed the sacrifice.


6.81.1
6660
ποιήσας δὲ ταῦτα ἀπήιε ἐς τὴν Σπάρτην .
After doing this, he returned to Sparta.


6.82.1
6661
νοστήσαντα δέ μιν ὑπῆγον οἱ ἐχθροὶ ὑπὸ τοὺς ἐφόρους , φάμενοί μιν δωροδοκήσαντα οὐκ ἑλεῖν τὸ Ἄργος , παρεὸν εὐπετέως μιν ἑλεῖν .
But after his return his enemies brought him before the ephors, saying that he had been bribed not to take Argos when he might have easily taken it.


6.82.1
6662
ὁ δέ σφι ἔλεξε , οὔτε εἰ ψευδόμενος οὔτε εἰ ἀληθέα λέγων , ἔχω σαφηνέως εἶπαι , ἔλεξε δ’ ὦν φάμενος , ἐπείτε δὴ τὸ τοῦ Ἄργου ἱρὸν εἷλον , δοκέειν οἱ ἐξεληλυθέναι τὸν τοῦ θεοῦ χρησμόν ·
Cleomenes alleged (whether falsely or truly, I cannot rightly say; but this he alleged in his speech) that he had supposed the god's oracle to be fulfilled by his taking of the temple of Argus;


6.82.1
6663
πρὸς ὦν ταῦτα οὐ δικαιοῦν πειρᾶν τῆς πόλιος , πρίν γε δὴ ἱροῖσι χρήσηται καὶ μάθῃ εἴτε οἱ ὁ θεὸς παραδιδοῖ εἴτε ἐμποδὼν ἕστηκε ·
therefore he had thought it best not to make any attempt on the city before he had learned from the sacrifices whether the god would deliver it to him or withstand him;


6.82.2
6664
καλλιερευμένῳ δὲ ἐν τῷ Ἡραίῳ ἐκ τοῦ ἀγάλματος τῶν στηθέων φλόγα πυρὸς ἐκλάμψαι , μαθεῖν δὲ αὐτὸς οὕτω τὴν ἀτρεκείην , ὅτι οὐκ αἱρέει τὸ Ἄργος ·
when he was taking omens in Hera's temple a flame of fire had shone forth from the breast of the image, and so he learned the truth of the matter, that he would not take Argos.


6.82.2
6665
εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ τῆς κεφαλῆς τοῦ ἀγάλματος ἐξέλαμψε , αἱρέειν ἂν κατ’ ἄκρης τὴν πόλιν , ἐκ τῶν στηθέων δὲ λάμψαντος πᾶν οἱ πεποιῆσθαι ὅσον ὁ θεὸς ἐβούλετο γενέσθαι .
If the flame had come out of the head of the image, he would have taken the city from head to foot utterly; but its coming from the breast signified that he had done as much as the god willed to happen.


6.82.2
6666
ταῦτα λέγων πιστά τε καὶ οἰκότα ἐδόκεε Σπαρτιήτῃσι λέγειν , καὶ διέφυγε πολλὸν τοὺς διώκοντας .
This plea of his seemed to the Spartans to be credible and reasonable, and he far outdistanced the pursuit of his accusers.


6.83.1
6667
Ἄργος δὲ ἀνδρῶν ἐχηρώθη οὕτω ὥστε οἱ δοῦλοι αὐτῶν ἔσχον πάντα τὰ πρήγματα ἄρχοντές τε καὶ διέποντες , ἐς ὃ ἐπήβησαν οἱ τῶν ἀπολομένων παῖδες ·
But Argos was so wholly deprived of men that their slaves took possession of all affairs, ruling and governing until the sons of the slain men grew up.


6.83.1
6668
ἔπειτα σφέας οὗτοι ἀνακτώμενοι ὀπίσω ἐς ἑωυτοὺς τὸ Ἄργος ἐξέβαλον ·
Then they recovered Argos for themselves and cast out the slaves; when they were driven out,


6.83.1
6669
ἐξωθεύμενοι δὲ οἱ δοῦλοι μάχῃ ἔσχον Τίρυνθα .
the slaves took possession of Tiryns by force.


6.83.2
6670
τέως μὲν δή σφι ἦν ἄρθμια ἐς ἀλλήλους , ἔπειτα δὲ ἐς τοὺς δούλους ἦλθε ἀνὴρ μάντις Κλέανδρος , γένος ἐὼν Φιγαλεὺς ἀπ’ Ἀρκαδίης ·
For a while they were at peace with each other; but then there came to the slaves a prophet, Cleander, a man of Phigalea in Arcadia by birth;


6.83.2
6671
οὗτος τοὺς δούλους ἀνέγνωσε ἐπιθέσθαι τοῖσι δεσπότῃσι .
he persuaded the slaves to attack their masters.


6.83.2
6672
ἐκ τούτου δὴ πόλεμός σφι ἦν ἐπὶ χρόνον συχνόν , ἐς ὃ δὴ μόγις οἱ Ἀργεῖοι ἐπεκράτησαν .
From that time there was a long-lasting war between them, until with difficulty the Argives got the upper hand.


6.84.1
6673
Ἀργεῖοι μέν νυν διὰ ταῦτα Κλεομένεα φασὶ μανέντα ἀπολέσθαι κακῶς ·
The Argives say this was the reason Cleomenes went mad and met an evil end;


6.84.1
6674
αὐτοὶ δὲ Σπαρτιῆται φασὶ ἐκ δαιμονίου μὲν οὐδενὸς μανῆναι Κλεομένεα , Σκύθῃσι δὲ ὁμιλήσαντά μιν ἀκρητοπότην γενέσθαι καὶ ἐκ τούτου μανῆναι .
the Spartans themselves say that Cleomenes' madness arose from no divine agent, but that by consorting with Scythians he became a drinker of strong wine, and the madness came from this.


6.84.2
6675
Σκύθας γὰρ τοὺς νομάδας , ἐπείτε σφι Δαρεῖον ἐμβαλεῖν ἐς τὴν χώρην , μετὰ ταῦτα μεμονέναι μιν τίσασθαι , πέμψαντας δὲ ἐς Σπάρτην συμμαχίην τε ποιέεσθαι καὶ συντίθεσθαι ὡς χρεὸν εἴη αὐτοὺς μὲν τοὺς Σκύθας παρὰ Φᾶσιν ποταμὸν πειρᾶν ἐς τὴν Μηδικὴν ἐσβάλλειν , σφέας δὲ τοὺς Σπαρτιήτας κελεύειν ἐξ Ἐφέσου ὁρμωμένους ἀναβαίνειν καὶ ἔπειτα ἐς τ- αὐτὸ ἀπαντᾶν .
The nomadic Scythians, after Darius had invaded their land, were eager for revenge, so they sent to  Sparta and made an alliance. They agreed that the Scythians would attempt to invade Media by way of the river  Phasis, and they urged the Spartans to set out and march inland from  Ephesus and meet the Scythians.


6.84.3
6676
Κλεομένεα δὲ λέγουσι ἡκόντων τῶν Σκυθέων ἐπὶ ταῦτα ὁμιλέειν σφι μεζόνως , ὁμιλέοντα δὲ μᾶλλον τοῦ ἱκνεομένου μαθεῖν τὴν ἀκρητοποσίην παρ’ αὐτῶν ·
They say that when the Scythians had come for this purpose, Cleomenes kept rather close company with them, and by consorting with them more than was fitting he learned from them to drink strong wine.


6.84.3
6677
ἐκ τούτου δὲ μανῆναί μιν νομίζουσι Σπαρτιῆται .
The Spartans consider him to have gone mad from this.


6.84.3
6678
ἔκ τε τόσου , ὡς αὐτοὶ λέγουσι , ἐπεὰν ζωρότερον βούλωνται πιεῖν , Ἐπισκύθισον λέγουσι .
Ever since, as they themselves say, whenever they desire a strong drink they call for “a Scythian cup.”


6.84.3
6679
οὕτω δὴ Σπαρτιῆται τὰ περὶ Κλεομένεα λέγουσι ·
Such is the Spartan story of Cleomenes;


6.84.3
6680
ἐμοὶ δὲ δοκέει τίσιν ταύτην ὁ Κλεομένης Δημαρήτῳ ἐκτῖσαι .
but to my thinking it was for what he did to Demaratus that he was punished thus.


6.85.1
6681
τελευτήσαντος δὲ Κλεομένεος ὡς ἐπύθοντο Αἰγινῆται , ἔπεμπον ἐς Σπάρτην ἀγγέλους καταβωσομένους Λευτυχίδεω περὶ τῶν ἐν Ἀθήνῃσι ὁμήρων ἐχομένων .
When the Aeginetans heard that Cleomenes was dead, they sent messengers to Sparta to cry out against Leutychides concerning the hostages that were held at Athens.


6.85.1
6682
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ δικαστήριον συναγαγόντες ἔγνωσαν περιυβρίσθαι Αἰγινήτας ὑπὸ Λευτυχίδεω , καί μιν κατέκριναν ἔκδοτον ἄγεσθαι ἐς Αἴγιναν ἀντὶ τῶν ἐν Ἀθήνῃσι ἐχομένων ἀνδρῶν .
The Lacedaemonians then assembled a court and gave judgment that Leutychides had done violence to the Aeginetans; and they condemned him to be given up and carried to Aegina in requital for the men that were held at Athens.


6.85.2
6683
μελλόντων δὲ ἄγειν τῶν Αἰγινητέων τὸν Λευτυχίδεα , εἶπέ σφι Θεασίδης ὁ Λεωπρέπεος , ἐὼν ἐν Σπάρτῃ δόκιμος ἀνήρ , " τί βουλεύεσθε ποιέειν , ἄνδρες Αἰγινῆται ;
But when the Aeginetans were about to carry Leutychides away, a man of repute at Sparta, Theasides son of Leoprepes, said to them, “Men of Aegina, what are you planning to do?


6.85.2
6684
τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Σπαρτιητέων ἔκδοτον γενόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν πολιητέων ἄγειν ;
To have the king of the Spartans given up to you by the citizens and carry him away?


6.85.2
6685
εἰ νῦν ὀργῇ χρεώμενοι ἔγνωσαν οὕτω Σπαρτιῆται , ὅκως ἐξ ὑστέρης μή τι ὑμῖν , ἢν ταῦτα πρήσσητε , πανώλεθρον κακὸν ἐς τὴν χώρην ἐμβάλωσι " .
If the Spartans have now so judged in their anger, see that they do not bring utter destruction upon your country if you do this.”


6.85.3
6686
ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες οἱ Αἰγινῆται ἔσχοντο τῆς ἀγωγῆς , ὁμολογίῃ δὲ ἐχρήσαντο τοιῇδε , ἐπισπόμενον Λευτυχίδεα ἐς Ἀθήνας ἀποδοῦναι Αἰγινήτῃσι τοὺς ἄνδρας .
The Aeginetans heard this and refrained from carrying the king away, and made an agreement that Leutychides should go with them to  Athens and restore the men to the Aeginetans.


6.86.1
6687
ὡς δὲ ἀπικόμενος Λευτυχίδης ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας ἀπαίτεε τὴν παραθήκην , οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι προφάσιας εἷλκον οὐ βουλόμενοι ἀποδοῦναι , φάντες δύο σφέας ἐόντας βασιλέας παραθέσθαι καὶ οὐ δικαιοῦν τῷ ἑτέρῳ ἄνευ τοῦ ἑτέρου ἀποδιδόναι ·
When Leutychides came to  Athens and demanded back the hostages, the Athenians were unwilling to give them back and made excuses, saying that two kings had given them the trust and they deemed it wrong to restore it to one without the other.


6.86A.1
6688
οὐ φαμένων δὲ ἀποδώσειν τῶν Ἀθηναίων , ἔλεξέ σφι Λευτυχίδης τάδε .
When the Athenians refused to give them back, Leutychides said to them:


6.86A.1
6689
" ὦ Ἀθηναῖοι , ποιέετε μὲν ὁκότερα βούλεσθε αὐτοί ·
“Men of Athens, do whichever thing you desire. If you give them back, you do righteously;


6.86A.1
6690
καὶ γὰρ ἀποδιδόντες ποιέετε ὅσια , καὶ μὴ ἀποδιδόντες τὰ ἐναντία τούτων ·
if you do not give them back, you do the opposite.


6.86A.1
6691
ὁκοῖον μέντοι τι ἐν τῇ Σπάρτῃ συνηνείχθη γενέσθαι περὶ παρακαταθήκης , βούλομαι ὑμῖν εἶπαι .
But I want to tell you the story of what happened at Sparta in the matter of a trust.


6.86A.2
6692
λέγομεν ἡμεῖς οἱ Σπαρτιῆται γενέσθαι ἐν τῇ Λακεδαίμονι κατὰ τρίτην γενεὴν τὴν ἀπ’ ἐμέο Γλαῦκον Ἐπικύδεος παῖδα ·
We Spartans say that three generations ago there was at Lacedaemon one Glaucus, the son of Epicydes.


6.86A.2
6693
τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα φαμὲν τά τε ἄλλα πάντα περιήκειν τὰ πρῶτα , καὶ δὴ καὶ ἀκούειν ἄριστα δικαιοσύνης πέρι πάντων ὅσοι τὴν Λακεδαίμονα τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον οἴκεον .
We say that this man added to his other excellences a reputation for justice above all men who at that time dwelt in Lacedaemon.


6.86A.3
6694
συνενειχθῆναι δέ οἱ ἐν χρόνῳ ἱκνευμένῳ τάδε λέγομεν .
But we say that at the fitting time this befell him:


6.86A.3
6695
ἄνδρα Μιλήσιον ἀπικόμενον ἐς Σπάρτην βούλεσθαί οἱ ἐλθεῖν ἐς λόγους προϊσχόμενον τοιάδε .
There came to Sparta a certain man of Miletus, who desired to have a talk with Glaucus and made him this offer:


6.86A.3
6696
" εἰμὶ μὲν Μιλήσιος , ἥκω δὲ τῆς σῆς Γλαῦκε βουλόμενος δικαιοσύνης ἀπολαῦσαι .
‘I am a Milesian, and I have come to have the benefit of your justice, Glaucus.


6.86A.4
6697
ὡς γὰρ δὴ ἀνὰ πᾶσαν μὲν τὴν ἄλλην Ἑλλάδα , ἐν δὲ καὶ περὶ Ἰωνίην τῆς σῆς δικαιοσύνης ἦν λόγος πολλός , ἐμεωυτῷ λόγους ἐδίδουν καὶ ὅτι ἐπικίνδυνος ἐστὶ αἰεί κοτε ἡ Ἰωνίη , ἡ δὲ Πελοπόννησος ἀσφαλέως ἱδρυμένη , καὶ διότι χρήματα οὐδαμὰ τοὺς αὐτούς ἐστι ὁρᾶν ἔχοντας .
Since there is much talk about your justice throughout all the rest of  Hellas, and even in  Ionia, I considered the fact that  Ionia is always in danger while the  Peloponnese is securely established, and nowhere in  Ionia are the same men seen continuing in possession of wealth.


6.86A.5
6698
ταῦτά τε ὦν ἐπιλεγομένῳ καὶ βουλευομένῳ ἔδοξέ μοι τὰ ἡμίσεα πάσης τῆς οὐσίης ἐξαργυρώσαντα θέσθαι παρὰ σέ , εὖ ἐξεπισταμένῳ ὥς μοι κείμενα ἔσται παρὰ σοὶ σόα .
Considering and taking counsel concerning these matters, I resolved to turn half of my property into silver and deposit it with you, being well assured that it will lie safe for me in your keeping.


6.86A.5
6699
σὺ δή μοι καὶ τὰ χρήματα δέξαι καὶ τάδε τὰ σύμβολα σῶζε λαβών ·
Accept the money for me, and take and keep these tokens;


6.86A.5
6700
ὃς δ’ ἂν ἔχων ταῦτα ἀπαιτέῃ , τούτῳ ἀποδοῦναι " .
6.86A.5.6700 restore the money to whoever comes with the same tokens and demands it back.’


6.86A.5
6701
"
6.86A.5.6701 [delete this line]


6.86B.1
6702
" ὁ μὲν δὴ ἀπὸ Μιλήτου ἥκων ξεῖνος τοσαῦτα ἔλεξε , Γλαῦκος δὲ ἐδέξατο τὴν παρακαταθήκην ἐπὶ τῷ εἰρημένῳ λόγῳ .
Thus spoke the stranger who had come from Miletus, and Glaucus received the trust according to the agreement.


6.86B.1
6703
χρόνου δὲ πολλοῦ διελθόντος ἦλθον ἐς Σπάρτην τούτου τοῦ παραθεμένου τὰ χρήματα οἱ παῖδες , ἐλθόντες δὲ ἐς λόγους τῷ Γλαύκῳ καὶ ἀποδεικνύντες τὰ σύμβολα ἀπαίτεον τὰ χρήματα ·
After a long time had passed, the sons of the man who had deposited the money came to Sparta; they spoke with Glaucus, showing him the tokens and demanding the money back.


6.86B.2
6704
ὁ δὲ διωθέετο ἀντυποκρινόμενος τοιάδε .
But Glaucus put them off and answered in turn:


6.86B.2
6705
" οὔτε μέμνημαι τὸ πρῆγμα οὔτε με περιφέρει οὐδὲν εἰδέναι τούτων τῶν ὑμεῖς λέγετε , βούλομαί τε ἀναμνησθεὶς ποιέειν πᾶν τὸ δίκαιον ·
‘I do not remember the matter, and nothing of what you say carries my mind back. Let me think; I wish to do all that is just.


6.86B.2
6706
καὶ γὰρ εἰ ἔλαβον , ὀρθῶς ἀποδοῦναι , καὶ εἴ γε ἀρχὴν μὴ ἔλαβον , νόμοισι τοῖσι Ἑλλήνων χρήσομαι ἐς ὑμέας .
If I took the money, I will duly restore it; if I never took it at all, I will deal with you according to the customs of the Greeks.


6.86B.2
6707
ταῦτα ὦν ὑμῖν ἀναβάλλομαι κυρώσειν ἐς τέταρτον μῆνα ἀπὸ τοῦδε " .
I will put off making my decision for you until the fourth month from this day.’


6.86B.2
6708
"
6.86B.2.6708 [wrongly added line]


6.86C.1
6709
οἱ μὲν δὴ Μιλήσιοι συμφορὴν ποιησάμενοι ἀπαλλάσσοντο ὡς ἀπεστερημένοι τῶν χρημάτων , Γλαῦκος δὲ ἐπορεύετο ἐς Δελφοὺς χρησόμενος τῷ χρηστηρίῳ .
So the Milesians went away in sorrow, as men robbed of their possessions; but Glaucus journeyed to Delphi to question the oracle.


6.86C.1
6710
ἐπειρωτῶντα δὲ αὐτὸν τὸ χρηστήριον εἰ ὅρκῳ τὰ χρήματα ληίσηται , ἡ Πυθίη μετέρχεται τοῖσιδε τοῖσι ἔπεσι .
When he asked the oracle whether he should seize the money under oath, the Pythian priestess threatened him in these verses:


6.86C.2
6711
" γλαῦκ’ Ἐπικυδείδη , τὸ μὲν αὐτίκα κέρδιον οὕτω ὅρκῳ νικῆσαι καὶ χρήματα ληίσσασθαι .
“Glaucus son of Epicydes, it is more profitable now to prevail by your oath and seize the money.


6.86C.2
6712
ὄμνυ , ἐπεὶ θάνατός γε καὶ εὔορκον μένει ἄνδρα .
Swear, for death awaits even the man who swears true.


6.86C.2
6713
ἀλλ’ ὅρκου πάις ἐστίν , ἀνώνυμος , οὐδ’ ἔπι χεῖρες οὐδὲ πόδες ·
But Oath has a son, nameless; he is without hands or feet,


6.86C.2
6714
κραιπνὸς δὲ μετέρχεται , εἰς ὅ κε πᾶσαν συμμάρψας ὀλέσῃ γενεὴν καὶ οἶκον ἅπαντα .
but he pursues swiftly, until he catches and destroys all the family and the entire house.


6.86C.2
6715
ἀνδρὸς δ’ εὐόρκου γενεὴ μετόπισθεν ἀμείνων .
The line of a man who swears true is better later on.”


6.86C.2
6716
ταῦτα ἀκούσας ὁ Γλαῦκος συγγνώμην τὸν θεὸν παραιτέετο αὐτῷ ἴσχειν τῶν ῥηθέντων .
When Glaucus heard this, he entreated the god to pardon him for what he had said.


6.86C.2
6717
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη ἔφη τὸ πειρηθῆναι τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τὸ ποιῆσαι ἴσον δύνασθαι " .
The priestess answered that to tempt the god and to do the deed had the same effect.


6.86D.1
6718
" Γλαῦκος μὲν δὴ μεταπεμψάμενος τοὺς Μιλησίους ξείνους ἀποδιδοῖ σφι τὰ χρήματα .
So Glaucus summoned the Milesian strangers and gave them back their money.


6.86D.1
6719
τοῦ δὲ εἵνεκα ὁ λόγος ὅδε ὦ Ἀθηναῖοι ὁρμήθη λέγεσθαι ἐς ὑμέας , εἰρήσεται ·
But hear now, Athenians, why I began to tell you this story:


6.86D.1
6720
Γλαύκου νῦν οὔτε τι ἀπόγονον ἐστὶ οὐδὲν οὔτ’ ἱστίη οὐδεμία νομιζομένη εἶναι Γλαύκου , ἐκτέτριπταί τε πρόρριζος ἐκ Σπάρτης .
there is today no descendant of Glaucus, nor any household that bears Glaucus' name; he has been utterly rooted out of Sparta.


6.86D.1
6721
οὕτω ἀγαθὸν μηδὲ διανοέεσθαι περὶ παρακαταθήκης ἄλλο γε ἢ ἀπαιτεόντων ἀποδιδόναι " .
So good is it not even to think anything concerning a trust except giving it back on demand!”


6.87.1
6722
Λευτυχίδης μὲν εἴπας ταῦτα , ὥς οἱ οὐδὲ οὕτω ἐσήκουον οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , ἀπαλλάσσετο ·
Thus spoke Leutychides; but even so the Athenians would not listen to him, and he departed.


6.87.1
6723
οἱ δὲ Αἰγινῆται , πρὶν τῶν πρότερον ἀδικημάτων δοῦναι δίκας τῶν ἐς Ἀθηναίους ὕβρισαν Θηβαίοισι χαριζόμενοι , ἐποίησαν τοιόνδε .
The Aeginetans, before paying the penalty for the violence they had done to the Athenians to please the Thebans, acted as follows:


6.87.1
6724
μεμφόμενοι τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι καὶ ἀξιοῦντες ἀδικέεσθαι , ὡς τιμωρησόμενοι τοὺς Ἀθηναίους παρεσκευάζοντο ·
blaming the Athenians and deeming themselves wronged, they prepared to take vengeance on the Athenians, who were now celebrating a quinquennial festival at Sunium.


6.87.1
6725
καὶ ἦν γὰρ δὴ τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι πεντετηρὶς ἐπὶ Σουνίῳ , λοχήσαντες ὦν τὴν θεωρίδα νέα εἷλον πλήρεα ἀνδρῶν τῶν πρώτων Ἀθηναίων , λαβόντες δὲ τοὺς ἄνδρας ἔδησαν .
The Aeginetans set an ambush and captured the sacred ship, with many leading Athenians on board, and put in prison the men they seized.


6.88.1
6726
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ παθόντες ταῦτα πρὸς Αἰγινητέων οὐκέτι ἀνεβάλλοντο μὴ οὐ τὸ πᾶν μηχανήσασθαι ἐπ’ Αἰγινήτῃσι .
Suffering this from the Aeginetans, the Athenians no longer put off devising all mischief against Aegina.


6.88.1
6727
καὶ ἦν γὰρ Νικόδρομος Κνοίθου καλεόμενος ἐν τῇ Αἰγίνῃ ἀνὴρ δόκιμος , οὗτος μεμφόμενος μὲν τοῖσι Αἰγινήτῃσι προτέρην ἑωυτοῦ ἐξέλασιν ἐκ τῆς νήσου , μαθὼν δὲ τότε τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ἀναρτημένους ἔρδειν Αἰγινήτας κακῶς , συντίθεται Ἀθηναίοισι προδοσίην Αἰγίνης , φράσας ἐν τῇ τε ἡμέρῃ ἐπιχειρήσει καὶ ἐκείνους ἐς τὴν ἥκειν δεήσει βοηθέοντας .
There was a notable man in Aegina, Nicodromus son of Cnoethus by name, who held a grudge against the Aeginetans for his former banishment from the island.


6.89.1
6728
μετὰ ταῦτα καταλαμβάνει μὲν κατὰ τὰ συνεθήκατο Ἀθηναίοισι ὁ Νικόδρομος τὴν παλαιὴν καλεομένην πόλιν , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ οὐ παραγίνονται ἐς δέον ·
When he learned that the Athenians were now set upon harming the Aeginetans, he agreed to betray Aegina to the Athenians, naming the day when he would make the attempt and when they must come to aid him.


6.89.1
6729
οὐ γὰρ ἔτυχον ἐοῦσαι νέες σφι ἀξιόμαχοι τῇσι Αἰγινητέων συμβαλεῖν .
Later Nicodromus, according to his agreement with the Athenians, took possession of the Old City, as it was called; but the Athenians were not there at the right time,


6.89.1
6730
ἐν ᾧ ὦν Κορινθίων ἐδέοντο χρῆσαι σφίσι νέας , ἐν τούτῳ διεφθάρη τὰ πρήγματα .
for they did not have ships worthy to fight the Aeginetans.


6.89.1
6731
οἱ δὲ Κορίνθιοι , ἦσαν γάρ σφι τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον φίλοι ἐς τὰ μάλιστα , Ἀθηναίοισι διδοῦσι δεομένοισι εἴκοσι νέας , διδοῦσι δὲ πενταδράχμους ἀποδόμενοι ·
While they were asking the Corinthians to lend them ships, the affair was ruined.


6.89.1
6732
δωρεὴν γὰρ ἐν τῷ νόμῳ οὐκ ἐξῆν δοῦναι .
The Corinthians at that time were their close friends, so they consented to the Athenians' plea and gave them twenty ships, at a price of five drachmas apiece; by their law they could not make a free gift of them.


6.89.1
6733
ταύτας τε δὴ λαβόντες οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ τὰς σφετέρας , πληρώσαντες ἑβδομήκοντα νέας τὰς ἁπάσας , ἔπλεον ἐπὶ τὴν Αἴγιναν καὶ ὑστέρησαν ἡμέρῃ μιῇ τῆς συγκειμένης .
Taking these ships and their own, the Athenians manned seventy in all and sailed for Aegina, but they came a day later than the time agreed.


6.90.1
6734
Νικόδρομος δέ , ὡς οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐς τὸν καιρὸν οὐ παρεγίνοντο , ἐς πλοῖον ἐσβὰς ἐκδιδρήσκει ἐκ τῆς Αἰγίνης ·
When the Athenians did not show up at the right time, Nicodromus took ship and escaped from Aegina.


6.90.1
6735
σὺν δέ οἱ καὶ ἄλλοι ἐκ τῶν Αἰγινητέων εἵποντο , τοῖσι Ἀθηναῖοι Σούνιον οἰκῆσαι ἔδοσαν .
Other Aeginetans followed him, and the Athenians gave them Sunium to dwell in;


6.90.1
6736
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ οὗτοι ὁρμώμενοι ἔφερόν τε καὶ ἦγον τοὺς ἐν τῇ νήσῳ Αἰγινήτας .
setting out from there they harried the Aeginetans of the island.


6.91.1
6737
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ ὕστερον ἐγίνετο .
But this happened later.


6.91.1
6738
Αἰγινητέων δὲ οἱ παχέες ἐπαναστάντος τοῦ δήμου σφι ἅμα Νικοδρόμῳ ἐπεκράτησαν , καὶ ἔπειτα σφέας χειρωσάμενοι ἐξῆγον ἀπολέοντες .
The rich men of Aegina gained mastery over the people, who had risen against them with Nicodromus, then made them captive and led them out to be killed.


6.91.1
6739
ἀπὸ τούτου δὲ καὶ ἄγος σφι ἐγένετο , τὸ ἐκθύσασθαι οὐκ οἶοί τε ἐγένοντο ἐπιμηχανώμενοι , ἀλλ’ ἔφθησαν ἐκπεσόντες πρότερον ἐκ τῆς νήσου ἤ σφι ἵλεον γενέσθαι τὴν θεόν .
Because of this a curse fell upon them, which despite all their efforts they could not get rid of by sacrifice, and they were driven out of their island before the goddess would be merciful to them.


6.91.2
6740
ἑπτακοσίους γὰρ δὴ τοῦ δήμου ζωγρήσαντες ἐξῆγον ὡς ἀπολέοντες , εἷς δέ τις τούτων ἐκφυγὼν τὰ δεσμὰ καταφεύγει πρὸς πρόθυρα Δήμητρος θεσμοφόρου , ἐπιλαμβανόμενος δὲ τῶν ἐπισπαστήρων εἴχετο ·
They had taken seven hundred of the people alive; as they led these out for slaughter one of them escaped from his bonds and fled to the temple gate of Demeter the Lawgiver, where he laid hold of the door-handles and clung to them.


6.91.2
6741
οἳ δὲ ἐπείτε μιν ἀποσπάσαι οὐκ οἷοί τε ἀπέλκοντες ἐγίνοντο , ἀποκόψαντες αὐτοῦ τὰς χεῖρας ἦγον οὕτω , αἱ χεῖρες δὲ ἐκεῖναι ἐμπεφυκυῖαι ἦσαν τοῖσι ἐπισπαστῆρσι .
They could not tear him away by force, so they cut off his hands and carried him off, and those hands were left clinging fast to the door-handles.


6.92.1
6742
ταῦτα μέν νυν σφέας αὐτοὺς οἱ Αἰγινῆται ἐργάσαντο , Ἀθηναίοισι δὲ ἥκουσι ἐναυμάχησαν νηυσὶ ἑβδομήκοντα , ἑσσωθέντες δὲ τῇ ναυμαχίῃ ἐπεκαλέοντο τοὺς αὐτοὺς καὶ πρότερον , Ἀργείους .
Thus the Aeginetans dealt with each other. When the Athenians came, they fought them at sea with seventy ships; the Aeginetans were defeated in the sea-fight and asked for help from the Argives, as they had done before.


6.92.1
6743
καὶ δή σφι οὗτοι μὲν οὐκέτι βοηθέουσι , μεμφόμενοι ὅτι Αἰγιναῖαι νέες ἀνάγκῃ λαμφθεῖσαι ὑπὸ Κλεομένεος ἔσχον τε ἐς τὴν Ἀργολίδα χώρην καὶ συναπέβησαν Λακεδαιμονίοισι , συναπέβησαν δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ Σικυωνιέων νεῶν ἄνδρες τῇ αὐτῇ ταύτῃ ἐσβολῇ ·
But this time the Argives would not aid them, holding a grudge because ships of Aegina had been taken by force by Cleomenes and put in on the Argolid coast, where their crews landed with the Lacedaemonians; men from ships of Sicyon also took part in the same invasion.


6.92.2
6744
καί σφι ὑπ’ Ἀργείων ἐπεβλήθη ζημίη χίλια τάλαντα ἐκτῖσαι , πεντακόσια ἑκατέρους .
The Argives laid on them the payment of a fine of a thousand talents, five hundred each.


6.92.2
6745
Σικυώνιοι μέν νυν συγγνόντες ἀδικῆσαι ὡμολόγησαν ἑκατὸν τάλαντα ἐκτίσαντες ἀζήμιοι εἶναι , Αἰγινῆται δὲ οὔτε συνεγινώσκοντο ἦσάν τε αὐθαδέστεροι .
The Sicyonians confessed that they had done wrong and agreed to go free with a payment of a hundred talents, but the Aeginetans made no such confession and remained stubborn.


6.92.2
6746
διὰ δὴ ὦν σφι ταῦτα δεομένοισι ἀπὸ μὲν τοῦ δημοσίου οὐδεὶς Ἀργείων ἔτι ἐβοήθεε , ἐθελονταὶ δὲ ἐς χιλίους ·
For this cause the Argive state sent no one to aid them at their request, but about a thousand came voluntarily.


6.92.2
6747
ἦγε δὲ αὐτοὺς στρατηγὸς ἀνὴρ ᾧ οὔνομα Εὐρυβάτης , ἀνὴρ πεντάεθλον ἐπασκήσας .
A captain whose name was Eurybates, a man who practiced the pentathlon led them.


6.92.3
6748
τούτων οἱ πλεῦνες οὐκ ἀπενόστησαν ὀπίσω , ἀλλ’ ἐτελεύτησαν ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίων ἐν Αἰγίνῃ ·
Most of these never returned, meeting their death at the hands of the Athenians in Aegina;


6.92.3
6749
αὐτὸς δὲ ὁ στρατηγὸς Εὐρυβάτης μουνομαχίην ἐπασκέων τρεῖς μὲν ἄνδρας τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ κτείνει , ὑπὸ δὲ τοῦ τετάρτου Σωφάνεος τοῦ Δεκελέος ἀποθνήσκει .
Eurybates himself, their captain, fought in single combat and thus killed three men, but was slain by the fourth, Sophanes the son of Deceles.


6.93.1
6750
Αἰγινῆται δὲ ἐοῦσι ἀτάκτοισι τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι συμβαλόντες τῇσι νηυσὶ ἐνίκησαν , καί σφεων νέας τέσσερας αὐτοῖσι τοῖσι ἀνδράσι εἷλον .
The Aeginetan ships found the Athenians in disarray and attacked and overcame them, taking four Athenian ships and their crews.


6.94.1
6751
Ἀθηναίοισι μὲν δὴ πόλεμος συνῆπτο πρὸς Αἰγινήτας .
Thus Athens and Aegina grappled together in war.


6.94.1
6752
ὁ δὲ Πέρσης τὸ ἑωυτοῦ ἐποίεε , ὥστε ἀναμιμνήσκοντός τε αἰεὶ τοῦ θεράποντος μεμνῆσθαί μιν τῶν Ἀθηναίων , καὶ Πεισιστρατιδέων προσκατημένων καὶ διαβαλλόντων Ἀθηναίους , ἅμα δὲ βουλόμενος ὁ Δαρεῖος ταύτης ἐχόμενος τῆς προφάσιος καταστρέφεσθαι τῆς Ἑλλάδος τοὺς μὴ δόντας αὐτῷ γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ .
The Persian was going about his own business, for his servant was constantly reminding him to remember the Athenians, and the Pisistratidae were at his elbow maligning the Athenians; moreover, Darius desired to take this pretext for subduing all the men of Hellas who had not given him earth and water.


6.94.2
6753
Μαρδόνιον μὲν δὴ φλαύρως πρήξαντα τῷ στόλῳ παραλύει τῆς στρατηγίης , ἄλλους δὲ στρατηγοὺς ἀποδέξας ἀπέστειλε ἐπὶ τε Ἐρέτριαν καὶ Ἀθήνας , Δᾶτίν τε ἐόντα Μῆδον γένος καὶ Ἀρταφρένεα τὸν Ἀρταφρένεος παῖδα , ἀδελφιδέον ἑωυτοῦ ·
He dismissed from command Mardonius, who had fared so badly on his expedition, and appointed other generals to lead his armies against Athens and Eretria, Datis, a Mede by birth, and his own nephew Artaphrenes son of Artaphrenes;


6.94.2
6754
ἐντειλάμενος δὲ ἀπέπεμπε ἐξανδραποδίσαντας Ἀθήνας καὶ Ἐρέτριαν ἀνάγειν ἑωυτῷ ἐς ὄψιν τὰ ἀνδράποδα .
the order he gave them at their departure was to enslave Athens and Eretria and bring the slaves into his presence.


6.95.1
6755
ὡς δὲ οἱ στρατηγοὶ οὗτοι οἱ ἀποδεχθέντες πορευόμενοι παρὰ βασιλέος ἀπίκοντο τῆς Κιλικίης ἐς τὸ Ἀλήιον πεδίον , ἅμα ἀγόμενοι πεζὸν στρατὸν πολλόν τε καὶ εὖ ἐσκευασμένον , ἐνθαῦτα στρατοπεδευομένοισι ἐπῆλθε μὲν ὁ ναυτικὸς πᾶς στρατὸς ὁ ἐπιταχθεὶς ἑκάστοισι , παρεγένοντο δὲ καὶ αἱ ἱππαγωγοὶ νέες , τὰς τῷ προτέρῳ ἔτεϊ προεῖπε τοῖσι ἑωυτοῦ δασμοφόροισι Δαρεῖος ἑτοιμάζειν .
When these appointed generals on their way from the king reached the Aleian plain in  Cilicia, bringing with them a great and well-furnished army, they camped there and were overtaken by all the fleet that was assigned to each; there also arrived the transports for horses, which in the previous year Darius had bidden his tributary subjects to make ready.


6.95.2
6756
ἐσβαλόμενοι δὲ τοὺς ἵππους ἐς ταύτας καὶ τὸν πεζὸν στρατὸν ἐσβιβάσαντες ἐς τὰς νέας , ἔπλεον ἑξακοσίῃσι τριήρεσι ἐς τὴν Ἰωνίην .
Having loaded the horses into these, and embarked the land army in the ships, they sailed to Ionia with six hundred triremes.


6.95.2
6757
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ οὐ παρὰ τὴν ἤπειρον εἶχον τὰς νέας ἰθὺ τοῦ τε Ἑλλησπόντου καὶ τῆς Θρηίκης , ἀλλ’ ἐκ Σάμου ὁρμώμενοι παρά τε Ἰκάριον καὶ διὰ νήσων τὸν πλόον ἐποιεῦντο , ὡς μὲν ἐμοὶ δοκέειν , δείσαντες μάλιστα τὸν περίπλοον τοῦ Ἄθω , ὅτι τῷ προτέρῳ ἔτεϊ ποιεύμενοι ταύτῃ τὴν κομιδὴν μεγάλως προσέπταισαν ·
From there they held their course not by the mainland and straight towards the Hellespont and Thrace, but setting forth from Samos they sailed by the Icarian sea and from island to island; this, to my thinking, was because they feared above all the voyage around Athos, seeing that in the previous year they had come to great disaster by holding their course that way; moreover, Naxos was still unconquered and constrained them.


6.95.2
6758
πρὸς δὲ καὶ ἡ Νάξος σφέας ἠνάγκαζε πρότερον οὐκ ἁλοῦσα .
Having loaded the horses into these, and embarked the land army in the ships, they sailed to Ionia with six hundred triremes.


6.96.1
6759
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐκ τοῦ Ἰκαρίου πελάγεος προσφερόμενοι προσέμιξαν τῇ Νάξῳ , ἐπὶ ταύτην γὰρ δὴ πρώτην ἐπεῖχον στρατεύεσθαι οἱ Πέρσαι μεμνημένοι τῶν πρότερον οἱ Νάξιοι πρὸς τὰ ὄρεα οἴχοντο φεύγοντες οὐδὲ ὑπέμειναν , οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ἀνδραποδισάμενοι τοὺς κατέλαβον αὐτῶν , ἐνέπρησαν καὶ τὰ ἱρὰ καὶ τὴν πόλιν .
When they approached Naxos from the Icarian sea and came to land (for it was Naxos which the Persians intended to attack first), the Naxians, remembering what had happened before, fled away to the mountains instead of waiting for them.


6.96.1
6760
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσαντες ἐπὶ τὰς ἄλλας νήσους ἀνήγοντο .
The Persians enslaved all of them that they caught, and burnt their temples and their city. After doing this, they set sail for the other islands.


6.97.1
6761
ἐν ᾧ δὲ οὗτοι ταῦτα ἐποίευν , οἱ Δήλιοι ἐκλιπόντες καὶ αὐτοὶ τὴν Δῆλον οἴχοντο φεύγοντες ἐς Τῆνον .
While they did this, the Delians also left Delos and fled away to Tenos.


6.97.1
6762
τῆς δὲ στρατιῆς καταπλεούσης ὁ Δᾶτις προπλώσας οὐκ ἔα τὰς νέας πρὸς τὴν Δῆλον προσορμίζεσθαι , ἀλλὰ πέρην ἐν τῇ Ῥηναίῃ ·
As his expedition was sailing landwards, Datis went on ahead and bade his fleet anchor not off Delos, but across the water off Rhenaea.


6.97.1
6763
αὐτὸς δὲ πυθόμενος ἵνα ἦσαν οἱ Δήλιοι , πέμπων κήρυκα ἠγόρευέ σφι τάδε .
Learning where the Delians were, he sent a herald to them with this proclamation:


6.97.2
6764
" ἄνδρες ἱροί , τί φεύγοντες οἴχεσθε , οὐκ ἐπιτήδεα καταγνόντες κατ’ ἐμεῦ ;
“Holy men, why have you fled away, and so misjudged my intent?


6.97.2
6765
ἐγὼ γὰρ καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπὶ τοσοῦτό γε φρονέω καὶ μοι ἐκ βασιλέος ὧδε ἐπέσταλται , ἐν τῇ χώρῃ οἱ δύο θεοὶ ἐγένοντο , ταύτην μηδὲν σίνεσθαι , μήτε αὐτὴν τὴν χώρην μήτε τοὺς οἰκήτορας αὐτῆς .
It is my own desire, and the king's command to me, to do no harm to the land where the two gods were born, neither to the land itself nor to its inhabitants.


6.97.2
6766
νῦν ὦν καὶ ἄπιτε ἐπὶ τὰ ὑμέτερα αὐτῶν καὶ τὴν νῆσον νέμεσθε " .
So return now to your homes and dwell on your island.”


6.97.2
6767
ταῦτα μὲν ἐπεκηρυκεύσατο τοῖσι Δηλίοισι , μετὰ δὲ λιβανωτοῦ τριηκόσια τάλαντα κατανήσας ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ ἐθυμίησε .
He made this proclamation to the Delians, and then piled up three hundred talents of frankincense on the altar and burnt it.


6.98.1
6768
Δᾶτις μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ποιήσας ἔπλεε ἅμα τῷ στρατῷ ἐπὶ τὴν Ἐρέτριαν πρῶτα , ἅμα ἀγόμενος καὶ Ἴωνας καὶ Αἰολέας .
After doing this, Datis sailed with his army against Eretria first, taking with him Ionians and Aeolians.


6.98.1
6769
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον ἐνθεῦτεν ἐξαναχθέντα Δῆλος ἐκινήθη , ὡς ἔλεγον Δήλιοι , καὶ πρῶτα καὶ ὕστατα μέχρι ἐμεῦ σεισθεῖσα .
And after he had put out from there, Delos was shaken by an earthquake, the first and last, as the Delians say, before my time.


6.98.1
6770
καὶ τοῦτο μέν κου τέρας ἀνθρώποισι τῶν μελλόντων ἔσεσθαι κακῶν ἔφαινε ὁ θεός .
This portent was sent by heaven, as I suppose, to be an omen of the ills that were coming on the world.


6.98.2
6771
ἐπὶ γὰρ Δαρείου τοῦ Ὑστάσπεος καὶ Ξέρξεω τοῦ Δαρείου καὶ Ἀρτοξέρξεω τοῦ Ξέρξεω , τριῶν τουτέων ἐπεξῆς γενεέων , ἐγένετο πλέω κακὰ τῇ Ἑλλάδι ἢ ἐπὶ εἴκοσι ἄλλας γενεὰς τὰς πρὸ Δαρείου γενομένας , τὰ μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν Περσέων αὐτῇ γενόμενα , τὰ δὲ ἀπ’ αὐτῶν τῶν κορυφαίων περὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς πολεμεόντων .
For in three generations, that is, in the time of Darius son of Hystaspes and Xerxes son of Darius and Artaxerxes son of Xerxes, more ills happened to  Hellas than in twenty generations before Darius; some coming from the Persians, some from the wars for preeminence among the chief of the nations themselves.


6.98.3
6772
οὕτω οὐδὲν ἦν ἀεικὲς κινηθῆναι Δῆλον τὸ πρὶν ἐοῦσαν ἀκίνητον .
Thus it was no marvel that there should be an earthquake in Delos when there had been none before.


6.98.3
6773
καὶ ἐν χρησμῷ ἦν γεγραμμένον περὶ αὐτῆς ὧδε .
Also there was an oracle concerning Delos, where it was written:


6.98.3
6774
κινήσω καὶ Δῆλον ἀκίνητόν περ ἐοῦσαν .
"I will shake Delos, though unshaken before."


6.98.3
6775
δύναται δὲ κατὰ Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν ταῦτα τὰ οὐνόματα , Δαρεῖος ἐρξίης , Ξέρξης ἀρήιος , Ἀρτοξέρξης μέγας ἀρήιος .
In the Greek language these names have the following meanings: Darius is the Doer, Xerxes the Warrior, Artaxerxes the Great Warrior.


6.98.3
6776
τούτους μὲν δὴ τοὺς βασιλέας ὧδε ἂν ὀρθῶς κατὰ γλῶσσαν τὴν σφετέρην Ἕλληνες καλέοιεν .
The Greeks would rightly call the kings thus in their language.


6.99.1
6777
οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι ὡς ἀπήειραν ἐκ τῆς Δήλου , προσῖσχον πρὸς τὰς νήσους , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ στρατιήν τε παρελάμβανον καὶ ὁμήρους τῶν νησιωτέων παῖδας ἐλάμβανον .
Launching out to sea from  Delos, the foreigners put in at the islands and gathered an army from there, taking the sons of the islanders for hostages.


6.99.2
6778
ὡς δὲ περιπλέοντες τὰς νήσους προσέσχον καὶ ἐς Κάρυστον , οὐ γὰρ δή σφι οἱ Καρύστιοι οὔτε ὁμήρους ἐδίδοσαν οὔτε ἔφασαν ἐπὶ πόλιας ἀστυγείτονας στρατεύεσθαι , λέγοντες Ἐρέτριάν τε καὶ Ἀθήνας , ἐνθαῦτα τούτους ἐπολιόρκεόν τε καὶ τὴν γῆν σφεων ἔκειρον , ἐς ὃ καὶ οἱ Καρύστιοι παρέστησαν ἐς τῶν Περσέων τὴν γνώμην .
When in their voyage about the islands they put in at Carystos, the Carystians gave them no hostages and refused to join them against neighboring cities, meaning  Eretria and  Athens; the Persians besieged them and laid waste their land, until the Carystians too came over to their side.


6.100.1
6779
Ἐρετριέες δὲ πυνθανόμενοι τὴν στρατιὴν τὴν Περσικὴν ἐπὶ σφέας ἐπιπλέουσαν Ἀθηναίων ἐδεήθησαν σφίσι βοηθοὺς γενέσθαι .
When the Eretrians learned that the Persian expedition was sailing to attack them, they asked for help from the Athenians.


6.100.1
6780
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ οὐκ ἀπείπαντο τὴν ἐπικουρίην , ἀλλὰ τοὺς τετρακισχιλίους τοὺς κληρουχέοντας τῶν ἱπποβοτέων Χαλκιδέων τὴν χώρην , τούτους σφι διδοῦσι τιμωρούς .
The Athenians did not refuse the aid, but gave them for defenders the four thousand tenant farmers who held the land of the Chalcidian horse-breeders.


6.100.1
6781
τῶν δὲ Ἐρετριέων ἦν ἄρα οὐδὲν ὑγιὲς βούλευμα , οἳ μετεπέμποντο μὲν Ἀθηναίους , ἐφρόνεον δὲ διφασίας ἰδέας .
But it seems that all the plans of the Eretrians were unsound; they sent to the Athenians for aid, but their counsels were divided.


6.100.2
6782
οἳ μὲν γὰρ αὐτῶν ἐβουλεύοντο ἐκλιπεῖν τὴν πόλιν ἐς τὰ ἄκρα τῆς Εὐβοίης , ἄλλοι δὲ αὐτῶν ἴδια κέρδεα προσδεκόμενοι παρὰ τοῦ Πέρσεω οἴσεσθαι προδοσίην ἐσκευάζοντο .
Some of them planned to leave the city and make for the heights of  Euboea; others plotted treason in hope of winning advantages from the Persians.


6.100.3
6783
μαθὼν δὲ τούτων ἑκάτερα ὡς εἶχε Αἰσχίνης ὁ Νόθωνος , ἐὼν τῶν Ἐρετριέων τὰ πρῶτα , φράξει τοῖσι ἥκουσι Ἀθηναίων πάντα τὰ παρεόντα σφι πρήγματα , προσεδέετό τε ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι σφέας ἐς τὴν σφετέρην , ἵνα μὴ προσαπόλωνται .
When Aeschines son of Nothon, a leading man in Eretria, learned of both designs, he told the Athenians who had come how matters stood, and asked them to depart to their own country so they would not perish like the rest.


6.100.3
6784
οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι ταῦτα Αἰσχίνῃ συμβουλεύσαντι πείθονται .
The Athenians followed Aeschines' advice.


6.101.1
6785
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν διαβάντες ἐς Ὠρωπὸν ἔσωζον σφέας αὐτούς ·
So they saved themselves by crossing over to Oropus;


6.101.1
6786
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι πλέοντες κατέσχον τὰς νέας τῆς Ἐρετρικῆς χώρης κατὰ Τέμενος καὶ Χοιρέας καὶ Αἰγίλεα , κατασχόντες δὲ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία αὐτίκα ἵππους τε ἐξεβάλλοντο καὶ παρεσκευάζοντο ὡς προσοισόμενοι τοῖσι ἐχθροῖσι .
The Persians sailed holding their course for Temenos and Choereae and Aegilea, all in Eretrian territory. Landing at these places, they immediately unloaded their horses and made preparation to attack their enemies.


6.101.2
6787
οἱ δὲ Ἐρετριέες ἐπεξελθεῖν μὲν καὶ μαχέσασθαι οὐκ ἐποιεῦντο βουλήν , εἴ κως δὲ διαφυλάξαιεν τὰ τείχεα , τούτου σφι πέρι ἔμελε , ἐπείτε ἐνίκα μὴ ἐκλιπεῖν τὴν πόλιν .
The Eretrians had no intention of coming out and fighting; all their care was to guard their walls if they could, since it was the prevailing counsel not to leave the city.


6.101.2
6788
προσβολῆς δὲ γινομένης καρτερῆς πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος ἔπιπτον ἐπὶ ἓξ ἡμέρας πολλοὶ μὲν ἀμφοτέρων ·
The walls were strongly attacked, and for six days many fell on both sides;


6.101.2
6789
τῇ δὲ ἑβδόμῃ Εὔφορβός τε ὁ Ἀλκιμάχου καὶ Φίλαγρος ὁ Κυνέου ἄνδρες τῶν ἀστῶν δόκιμοι προδιδοῦσι τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι .
but on the seventh two Eretrians of repute, Euphorbus son of Alcimachus and Philagrus son of Cineas, betrayed the city to the Persians.


6.101.3
6790
οἳ δὲ ἐσελθόντες ἐς τὴν πόλιν τοῦτο μὲν τὰ ἱρὰ συλήσαντες ἐνέπρησαν , ἀποτινύμενοι τῶν ἐν Σάρδισι κατακαυθέντων ἱρῶν , τοῦτο δὲ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἠνδραποδίσαντο κατὰ τὰς Δαρείου ἐντολάς .
They entered the city and plundered and burnt the temples, in revenge for the temples that were burnt at  Sardis; moreover, they enslaved the townspeople, according to Darius' command.


6.102.1
6791
χειρωσάμενοι δὲ τὴν Ἐρέτριαν καὶ ἐπισχόντες ὀλίγας ἡμέρας ἔπλεον ἐς γῆν τὴν Ἀττικήν , κατέργοντές τε πολλὸν καὶ δοκέοντες τ- αὐτὰ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ποιήσειν τὰ καὶ τοὺς Ἐρετριέας ἐποίησαν .
After subduing Eretria, the Persians waited a few days and then sailed away to the land of Attica, pressing ahead in expectation of doing to the Athenians exactly what they had done to the Eretrians.


6.102.1
6792
καὶ ἦν γὰρ ὁ Μαραθὼν ἐπιτηδεότατον χωρίον τῆς Ἀττικῆς ἐνιππεῦσαι καὶ ἀγχοτάτω τῆς Ἐρετρίης , ἐς τοῦτό σφι κατηγέετο Ἱππίης ὁ Πεισιστράτου .
Marathon was the place in Attica most suitable for riding horses and closest to Eretria, so Hippias son of Pisistratus led them there.


6.103.1
6793
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ὡς ἐπύθοντο ταῦτα , ἐβοήθεον καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐς τὸν Μαραθῶνα .
When the Athenians learned this, they too marched out to Marathon, with ten generals leading them.


6.103.1
6794
ἦγον δὲ σφέας στρατηγοὶ δέκα , τῶν ὁ δέκατος ἦν Μιλτιάδης ·
The tenth was Miltiades.


6.103.1
6795
τοῦ τὸν πατέρα Κίμωνα τὸν Στησαγόρεω κατέλαβε φυγεῖν ἐξ Ἀθηνέων Πεισίστρατον τὸν Ἱπποκράτεος .
It had befallen his father Cimon son of Stesagoras to be banished from Athens by Pisistratus son of Hippocrates.


6.103.2
6796
καὶ αὐτῷ φεύγοντι Ὀλυμπιάδα ἀνελέσθαι τεθρίππῳ συνέβη , καὶ ταύτην μὲν τὴν νίκην ἀνελόμενόν μιν τ- αὐτὸ ἐξενείκασθαι τῷ ὁμομητρίῳ ἀδελφεῷ Μιλτιάδῃ ·
While in exile he happened to take the Olympic prize in the four-horse chariot, and by taking this victory he won the same prize as his half-brother Miltiades.


6.103.2
6797
μετὰ δὲ τῇ ὑστέρῃ Ὀλυμπιάδι τῇσι αὐτῇσι ἵπποισι νικῶν παραδιδοῖ Πεισιστράτῳ ἀνακηρυχθῆναι , καὶ τὴν νίκην παρεὶς τούτῳ κατῆλθε ἐπὶ τὰ ἑωυτοῦ ὑπόσπονδος .
At the next Olympic games he won with the same horses but permitted Pisistratus to be proclaimed victor, and by resigning the victory to him he came back from exile to his own property under truce.


6.103.3
6798
καί μιν ἀνελόμενον τῇσι αὐτῇσι ἵπποισι ἄλλην Ὀλυμπιάδα κατέλαβε ἀποθανεῖν ὑπὸ τῶν Πεισιστράτου παίδων , οὐκέτι περιεόντος αὐτοῦ Πεισιστράτου ·
After taking yet another Olympic prize with the same horses, he happened to be murdered by Pisistratus' sons, since Pisistratus was no longer living.


6.103.3
6799
κτείνουσι δὲ οὗτοί μιν κατὰ τὸ πρυτανήιον νυκτὸς ὑπείσαντες ἄνδρας .
They murdered him by placing men in ambush at night near the town-hall.


6.103.3
6800
τέθαπται δὲ Κίμων πρὸ τοῦ ἄστεος , πέρην τῆς διὰ Κοίλης καλεομένης ὁδοῦ ·
Cimon was buried in front of the city, across the road called “Through the Hollow”,


6.103.3
6801
καταντίον δ’ αὐτοῦ αἱ ἵπποι τεθάφαται αὗται αἱ τρεῖς Ὀλυμπιάδας ἀνελόμεναι .
and buried opposite him are the mares who won the three Olympic prizes.


6.103.4
6802
ἐποίησαν δὲ καὶ ἄλλαι ἵπποι ἤδη τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο Εὐαγόρεω Λάκωνος , πλέω δὲ τουτέων οὐδαμαί .
The mares of Evagoras the Laconian did the same as these, but none others.


6.103.4
6803
ὁ μὲν δὴ πρεσβύτερος τῶν παίδων τῷ Κίμωνι Στησαγόρης ἦν τηνικαῦτα παρὰ τῷ πάτρῳ Μιλτιάδῃ τρεφόμενος ἐν τῇ Χερσονήσῳ , ὁ δὲ νεώτερος παρ’ αὐτῷ Κίμωνι ἐν Ἀθήνῃσι , οὔνομα ἔχων ἀπὸ τοῦ οἰκιστέω τῆς Χερσονήσου Μιλτιάδεω Μιλτιάδης .
Stesagoras, the elder of Cimon's sons, was then being brought up with his uncle Miltiades in the Chersonese. The younger was with Cimon at Athens, and he took the name Miltiades from Miltiades the founder of the Chersonese.


6.104.1
6804
οὗτος δὴ ὦν τότε ὁ Μιλτιάδης ἥκων ἐκ τῆς Χερσονήσου καὶ ἐκπεφευγὼς διπλόον θάνατον ἐστρατήγεε Ἀθηναίων .
It was this Miltiades who was now the Athenian general, after coming from the Chersonese and escaping a two-fold death.


6.104.1
6805
ἅμα μὲν γὰρ οἱ Φοίνικες αὐτὸν οἱ ἐπιδιώξαντες μέχρι Ἴμβρου περὶ πολλοῦ ἐποιεῦντο λαβεῖν τε καὶ ἀναγαγεῖν παρὰ βασιλέα ·
The Phoenicians pursued him as far as Imbros, considering it of great importance to catch him and bring him to the king.


6.104.2
6806
ἅμα δὲ ἐκφυγόντα τε τούτους καὶ ἀπικόμενον ἐς τὴν ἑωυτοῦ δοκέοντά τε εἶναι ἐν σωτηρίῃ ἤδη , τὸ ἐνθεῦτέν μιν οἱ ἐχθροὶ ὑποδεξάμενοι ὑπὸ δικαστήριον αὐτὸν ἀγαγόντες ἐδίωξαν τυραννίδος τῆς ἐν Χερσονήσῳ .
He escaped from them, but when he reached his own country and thought he was safe, then his enemies met him.


6.104.2
6807
ἀποφυγὼν δὲ καὶ τούτους στρατηγὸς οὕτω Ἀθηναίων ἀπεδέχθη , αἱρεθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου .
They brought him to court and prosecuted him for tyranny in the Chersonese, but he was acquitted and appointed Athenian general, chosen by the people.


6.105.1
6808
καὶ πρῶτα μὲν ἐόντες ἔτι ἐν τῷ ἄστεϊ οἱ στρατηγοὶ ἀποπέμπουσι ἐς Σπάρτην κήρυκα Φειδιππίδην Ἀθηναῖον μὲν ἄνδρα , ἄλλως δὲ ἡμεροδρόμην τε καὶ τοῦτο μελετῶντα ·
While still in the city, the generals first sent to Sparta the herald Philippides, an Athenian and a long-distance runner who made that his calling.


6.105.1
6809
τῷ δή , ὡς αὐτός τε ἔλεγε Φειδιππίδης καὶ Ἀθηναίοισι ἀπήγγελλε , περὶ τὸ Παρθένιον ὄρος τὸ ὑπὲρ Τεγέης ὁ Πὰν περιπίπτει ·
As Philippides himself said when he brought the message to the Athenians, when he was in the Parthenian mountain above Tegea he encountered Pan.


6.105.2
6810
βώσαντα δὲ τὸ οὔνομα τοῦ Φειδιππίδεω τὸν Πᾶνα Ἀθηναίοισι κελεῦσαι ἀπαγγεῖλαι , δι’ ὅ τι ἑωυτοῦ οὐδεμίαν ἐπιμελείην ποιεῦνται ἐόντος εὐνόου Ἀθηναίοισι καὶ πολλαχῇ γενομένου σφι ἤδη χρησίμου , τὰ δ’ ἔτι καὶ ἐσομένου .
Pan called out Philippides' name and bade him ask the Athenians why they paid him no attention, though he was of goodwill to the Athenians, had often been of service to them, and would be in the future.


6.105.3
6811
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν Ἀθηναῖοι , καταστάντων σφι εὖ ἤδη τῶν πρηγμάτων , πιστεύσαντες εἶναι ἀληθέα ἱδρύσαντο ὑπὸ τῇ ἀκροπόλι Πανὸς ἱρόν , καὶ αὐτὸν ἀπὸ ταύτης τῆς ἀγγελίης θυσίῃσι ἐπετείοισι καὶ λαμπάδι ἱλάσκονται .
The Athenians believed that these things were true, and when they became prosperous they established a sacred precinct of Pan beneath the Acropolis. Ever since that message they propitiate him with annual sacrifices and a torch-race.


6.106.1
6812
τότε δὲ πεμφθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν στρατηγῶν ὁ Φειδιππίδης οὗτος , ὅτε πέρ οἱ ἔφη καὶ τὸν Πᾶνα φανῆναι , δευτεραῖος ἐκ τοῦ Ἀθηναίων ἄστεος ἦν ἐν Σπάρτῃ , ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄρχοντας ἔλεγε " ὦ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , Ἀθηναῖοι ὑμέων δέονται σφίσι βοηθῆσαι καὶ μὴ περιιδεῖν πόλιν ἀρχαιοτάτην ἐν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι δουλοσύνῃ περιπεσοῦσαν πρὸς ἀνδρῶν βαρβάρων ·
This Philippides was in  Sparta on the day after leaving the city of  Athens, that time when he was sent by the generals and said that Pan had appeared to him. He came to the magistrates and said,


6.106.2
6813
καὶ γὰρ νῦν Ἐρέτριά τε ἠνδραπόδισται καὶ πόλι λογίμῳ ἡ Ἑλλὰς γέγονε ἀσθενεστέρη " .
“Lacedaemonians, the Athenians ask you to come to their aid and not allow the most ancient city among the Hellenes to fall into slavery at the hands of the foreigners. Even now  Eretria has been enslaved, and  Hellas has become weaker by an important city.”


6.106.3
6814
ὃ μὲν δή σφι τὰ ἐντεταλμένα ἀπήγγελλε , τοῖσι δὲ ἕαδε μὲν βοηθέειν Ἀθηναίοισι , ἀδύνατα δέ σφι ἦν τὸ παραυτίκα ποιέειν ταῦτα , οὐ βουλομένοισι λύειν τὸν νόμον ·
He told them what he had been ordered to say, and they resolved to send help to the Athenians, but they could not do this immediately, for they were unwilling to break the law.


6.106.3
6815
ἦν γὰρ ἱσταμένου τοῦ μηνὸς εἰνάτη , εἰνάτῃ δὲ οὐκ ἐξελεύσεσθαι ἔφασαν μὴ οὐ πλήρεος ἐόντος τοῦ κύκλου .
It was the ninth day of the rising month, and they said that on the ninth they could not go out to war until the moon's circle was full.


6.107.1
6816
οὗτοι μέν νυν τὴν πανσέληνον ἔμενον .
So they waited for the full moon,


6.107.1
6817
τοῖσι δὲ βαρβάροισι κατηγέετο Ἱππίης ὁ Πεισιστράτου ἐς τὸν Μαραθῶνα , τῆς παροιχομένης νυκτὸς ὄψιν ἰδὼν τοιήνδε ·
while the foreigners were guided to Marathon by Hippias son of Pisistratus.


6.107.1
6818
ἐδόκεε ὁ Ἱππίης τῇ μητρὶ τῇ ἑωυτοῦ συνευνηθῆναι .
The previous night Hippias had a dream in which he slept with his mother.


6.107.2
6819
συνεβάλετο ὦν ἐκ τοῦ ὀνείρου κατελθὼν ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας καὶ ἀνασωσάμενος τὴν ἀρχὴν τελευτήσειν ἐν τῇ ἑωυτοῦ γηραιός .
He supposed from the dream that he would return from exile to Athens, recover his rule, and end his days an old man in his own country.


6.107.2
6820
ἐκ μὲν δὴ τῆς ὄψιος συνεβάλετο ταῦτα , τότε δὲ κατηγεόμενος τοῦτο μὲν τὰ ἀνδράποδα τὰ ἐξ Ἐρετρίης ἀπέβησε ἐς τὴν νῆσον τὴν Στυρέων , καλεομένην δὲ Αἰγλείην , τοῦτο δὲ καταγομένας ἐς τὸν Μαραθῶνα τὰς νέας ὅρμιζε οὗτος , ἐκβάντας τε ἐς γῆν τοὺς βαρβάρους διέτασσε .
Thus he reckoned from the dream. Then as guide he unloaded the slaves from Eretria onto the island of the Styrians called Aegilia, and brought to anchor the ships that had put ashore at Marathon, then marshalled the foreigners who had disembarked onto land.


6.107.3
6821
καί οἱ ταῦτα διέποντι ἐπῆλθε πταρεῖν τε καὶ βῆξαι μεζόνως ἢ ὡς ἐώθεε ·
As he was tending to this, he happened to sneeze and cough more violently than usual.


6.107.3
6822
οἷα δέ οἱ πρεσβυτέρῳ ἐόντι τῶν ὀδόντων οἱ πλεῦνες ἐσείοντο ·
Since he was an elderly man, most of his teeth were loose,


6.107.3
6823
τούτων ὦν ἕνα τῶν ὀδόντων ἐκβάλλει ὑπὸ βίης βήξας ·
and he lost one of them by the force of his cough.


6.107.3
6824
ἐκπεσόντος δὲ ἐς τὴν ψάμμον αὐτοῦ ἐποιέετο σπουδὴν πολλὴν ἐξευρεῖν .
It fell into the sand and he expended much effort in looking for it, but the tooth could not be found.


6.107.4
6825
ὡς δὲ οὐκ ἐφαίνετό οἱ ὁ ὀδών , ἀναστενάξας εἶπε πρὸς τοὺς παραστάτας " ἡ γῆ ἥδε οὐκ ἡμετέρη ἐστί , οὐδέ μιν δυνησόμεθα ὑποχειρίην ποιήσασθαι ·
He groaned aloud and said to those standing by him:


6.107.4
6826
ὁκόσον δέ τι μοι μέρος μετῆν , ὁ ὀδὼν μετέχει " .
“This land is not ours and we will not be able to subdue it. My tooth holds whatever share of it was mine.”


6.108.1
6827
Ἱππίης μὲν δὴ ταύτῃ τὴν ὄψιν συνεβάλετο ἐξεληλυθέναι .
Hippias supposed that the dream had in this way come true.


6.108.1
6828
Ἀθηναίοισι δὲ τεταγμένοισι ἐν τεμένεϊ Ἡρακλέος ἐπῆλθον βοηθέοντες Πλαταιέες πανδημεί .
As the Athenians were marshalled in the precinct of Heracles, the Plataeans came to help them in full force.


6.108.1
6829
καὶ γὰρ καὶ ἐδεδώκεσαν σφέας αὐτοὺς τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι οἱ Πλαταιέες , καὶ πόνους ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι συχνοὺς ἤδη ἀναραιρέατο ·
The Plataeans had put themselves under the protection of the Athenians, and the Athenians had undergone many labors on their behalf.


6.108.1
6830
ἔδοσαν δὲ ὧδε .
This is how they did it:


6.108.2
6831
πιεζεύμενοι ὑπὸ Θηβαίων οἱ Πλαταιέες ἐδίδοσαν πρῶτα παρατυχοῦσι Κλεομένεΐ τε τῷ Ἀναξανδρίδεω καὶ Λακεδαιμονίοισι σφέας αὐτούς .
when the Plataeans were pressed by the Thebans, they first tried to put themselves under the protection of Cleomenes son of Anaxandrides and the Lacedaemonians, who happened to be there.


6.108.2
6832
οἳ δὲ οὐ δεκόμενοι ἔλεγόν σφι τάδε .
But they did not accept them, saying,


6.108.2
6833
" ἡμεῖς μὲν ἑκαστέρω τε οἰκέομεν , καὶ ὑμῖν τοιήδε τις γίνοιτ’ ἂν ἐπικουρίη ψυχρή ·
“We live too far away, and our help would be cold comfort to you.


6.108.2
6834
φθαίητε γὰρ ἂν πολλάκις ἐξανδραποδισθέντες ἤ τινα πυθέσθαι ἡμέων .
You could be enslaved many times over before any of us heard about it.


6.108.3
6835
συμβουλεύομεν δὲ ὑμῖν δοῦναι ὑμέας αὐτοὺς Ἀθηναίοισι , πλησιοχώροισι τε ἀνδράσι καὶ τιμωρέειν ἐοῦσι οὐ κακοῖσι " .
We advise you to put yourselves under the protection of the Athenians, since they are your neighbors and not bad men at giving help.”


6.108.3
6836
ταῦτα συνεβούλευον οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὐ κατὰ τὴν εὐνοίην οὕτω τῶν Πλαταιέων ὡς βουλόμενοι τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ἔχειν πόνους συνεστεῶτας Βοιωτοῖσι .
The Lacedaemonians gave this advice not so much out of goodwill toward the Plataeans as wishing to cause trouble for the Athenians with the Boeotians.


6.108.4
6837
Λακεδαιμόνιοι μέν νυν Πλαταιεῦσι ταῦτα συνεβούλευον , οἳ δὲ οὐκ ἠπίστησαν , ἀλλ’ Ἀθηναίων ἱρὰ ποιεύντων τοῖσι δυώδεκα θεοῖσι ἱκέται ἱζόμενοι ἐπὶ τὸν βωμὸν ἐδίδοσαν σφέας αὐτούς .
So the Lacedaemonians gave this advice to the Plataeans, who did not disobey it.


6.108.4
6838
Θηβαῖοι δὲ πυθόμενοι ταῦτα ἐστρατεύοντο ἐπὶ τοὺς Πλαταιέας , Ἀθηναῖοι δέ σφι ἐβοήθεον .
When the Athenians were making sacrifices to the twelve gods, they sat at the altar as suppliants and put themselves under protection. When the Thebans heard this, they marched against the Plataeans, but the Athenians came to their aid.


6.108.5
6839
μελλόντων δὲ συνάπτειν μάχην Κορίνθιοι οὐ περιεῖδον , παρατυχόντες δὲ καὶ καταλλάξαντες ἐπιτρεψάντων ἀμφοτέρων οὔρισαν τὴν χώρην ἐπὶ τοῖσιδε , ἐᾶν Θηβαίους Βοιωτῶν τοὺς μὴ βουλομένους ἐς Βοιωτοὺς τελέειν .
As they were about to join battle, the Corinthians, who happened to be there, prevented them and brought about a reconciliation.


6.108.5
6840
Κορίνθιοι μὲν δὴ ταῦτα γνόντες ἀπαλλάσσοντο , Ἀθηναίοισι δὲ ἀπιοῦσι ἐπεθήκαντο Βοιωτοί , ἐπιθέμενοι δὲ ἑσσώθησαν τῇ μάχῃ .
Since both sides desired them to arbitrate, they fixed the boundaries of the country on condition that the Thebans leave alone those Boeotians who were unwilling to be enrolled as Boeotian. After rendering this decision, the Corinthians departed. The Boeotians attacked the Athenians as they were leaving but were defeated in battle.


6.108.6
6841
ὑπερβάντες δὲ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι τοὺς οἱ Κορίνθιοι ἔθηκαν Πλαταιεῦσι εἶναι οὔρους , τούτους ὑπερβάντες τὸν Ἀσωπὸν αὐτὸν ἐποιήσαντο οὖρον Θηβαίοισι πρὸς Πλαταιέας εἶναι καὶ Ὑσιάς .
The Athenians went beyond the boundaries the Corinthians had made for the Plataeans, fixing the Asopus river as the boundary for the Thebans in the direction of Plataea and Hysiae.


6.108.6
6842
ἔδοσαν μὲν δὴ οἱ Πλαταιέες σφέας αὐτοὺς Ἀθηναίοισι τρόπῳ τῷ εἰρημένῳ , ἧκον δὲ τότε ἐς Μαραθῶνα βοηθέοντες .
So the Plataeans had put themselves under the protection of the Athenians in the aforesaid manner, and now came to help at Marathon.


6.109.1
6843
τοῖσι δὲ Ἀθηναίων στρατηγοῖσι ἐγίνοντο δίχα αἱ γνῶμαι , τῶν μὲν οὐκ ἐώντων συμβαλεῖν ( ὀλίγους γὰρ εἶναι στρατιῇ τῇ Μήδων συμβάλλειν ) τῶν δὲ καὶ Μιλτιάδεω κελευόντων .
The Athenian generals were of divided opinion, some advocating not fighting because they were too few to attack the army of the Medes; others, including Miltiades, advocating fighting.


6.109.2
6844
ὡς δὲ δίχα τε ἐγίνοντο καὶ ἐνίκα ἡ χείρων τῶν γνωμέων , ἐνθαῦτα , ἦν γὰρ ἑνδέκατος ψηφιδοφόρος ὁ τῷ κυάμῳ λαχὼν Ἀθηναίων πολεμαρχέειν ( τὸ Παλαιὸν γὰρ Ἀθηναῖοι ὁμόψηφον τὸν πολέμαρχον ἐποιεῦντο τοῖσι στρατηγοῖσι ) , ἦν δὲ τότε πολέμαρχος Καλλίμαχος Ἀφιδναῖος ·
Thus they were at odds, and the inferior plan prevailed.


6.109.2
6845
πρὸς τοῦτον ἐλθὼν Μιλτιάδης ἔλεγε τάδε .
An eleventh man had a vote, chosen by lot to be polemarch of Athens, and by ancient custom the Athenians had made his vote of equal weight with the generals. Callimachus of Aphidnae was polemarch at this time. Miltiades approached him and said,


6.109.3
6846
" ἐν σοὶ νῦν Καλλίμαχε ἐστὶ ἢ καταδουλῶσαι Ἀθήνας ἢ ἐλευθέρας ποιήσαντα μνημόσυνα λιπέσθαι ἐς τὸν ἅπαντα ἀνθρώπων βίον οἷα οὐδὲ Ἁρμόδιός τε καὶ Ἀριστογείτων λείπουσι .
“Callimachus, it is now in your hands to enslave Athens or make her free, and thereby leave behind for all posterity a memorial such as not even Harmodius and Aristogeiton left.


6.109.3
6847
νῦν γὰρ δὴ ἐξ οὗ ἐγένοντο Ἀθηναῖοι ἐς κίνδυνον ἥκουσι μέγιστον , καὶ ἢν μέν γε ὑποκύψωσι τοῖσι Μήδοισι , δέδοκται τὰ πείσονται παραδεδομένοι Ἱππίῃ , ἢν δὲ περιγένηται αὕτη ἡ πόλις , οἵη τε ἐστὶ πρώτη τῶν Ἑλληνίδων πολίων γενέσθαι .
Now the Athenians have come to their greatest danger since they first came into being, and, if we surrender, it is clear what we will suffer when handed over to Hippias. But if the city prevails, it will take first place among Hellenic cities.


6.109.4
6848
κῶς ὦν δὴ ταῦτα οἷά τε ἐστὶ γενέσθαι , καὶ κῶς ἐς σέ τοι τούτων ἀνήκει τῶν πρηγμάτων τὸ κῦρος ἔχειν , νῦν ἔρχομαι φράσων .
I will tell you how this can happen, and how the deciding voice on these matters has devolved upon you.


6.109.4
6849
ἡμέων τῶν στρατηγῶν ἐόντων δέκα δίχα γίνονται αἱ γνῶμαι , τῶν μὲν κελευόντων τῶν δὲ οὒ συμβάλλειν .
The ten generals are of divided opinion, some urging to attack, others urging not to.


6.109.5
6850
ἢν μέν νυν μὴ συμβάλωμεν , ἔλπομαι τινὰ στάσιν μεγάλην διασείσειν ἐμπεσοῦσαν τὰ Ἀθηναίων φρονήματα ὥστε μηδίσαι ·
If we do not attack now, I expect that great strife will fall upon and shake the spirit of the Athenians, leading them to medize.


6.109.5
6851
ἢν δὲ συμβάλωμεν πρίν τι καὶ σαθρὸν Ἀθηναίων μετεξετέροισι ἐγγενέσθαι , θεῶν τὰ ἴσα νεμόντων οἷοί τε εἰμὲν περιγενέσθαι τῇ συμβολῇ .
But if we attack now, before anything unsound corrupts the Athenians, we can win the battle, if the gods are fair.


6.109.6
6852
ταῦτα ὦν πάντα ἐς σὲ νῦν τείνει καὶ ἐκ σέο ἤρτηται .
All this concerns and depends on you in this way:


6.109.6
6853
ἢν γὰρ σὺ γνώμῃ τῇ ἐμῇ προσθῇ , ἔστι τοι πατρίς τε ἐλευθέρη καὶ πόλις πρώτη τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι ·
if you vote with me, your country will be free and your city the first in Hellas.


6.109.6
6854
ἢν δὲ τὴν τῶν ἀποσπευδόντων τὴν συμβολὴν ἕλῃ , ὑπάρξει τοι τῶν ἐγὼ κατέλεξα ἀγαθῶν τὰ ἐναντία " .
But if you side with those eager to avoid battle, you will have the opposite to all the good things I enumerated.”


6.110.1
6855
ταῦτα λέγων ὁ Μιλτιάδης προσκτᾶται τὸν Καλλίμαχον ·
By saying this Miltiades won over Callimachus.


6.110.1
6856
προσγενομένης δὲ τοῦ πολεμάρχου τῆς γνώμης ἐκεκύρωτο συμβάλλειν .
The polemarch's vote was counted in, and the decision to attack was resolved upon.


6.110.1
6857
μετὰ δὲ οἱ στρατηγοὶ τῶν ἡ γνώμη ἔφερε συμβάλλειν , ὡς ἑκάστου αὐτῶν ἐγίνετο πρυτανηίη τῆς ἡμέρης , Μιλτιάδῃ παρεδίδοσαν ·
Thereafter the generals who had voted to fight turned the presidency over to Miltiades as each one's day came in turn.


6.110.1
6858
ὁ δὲ δεκόμενος οὔτι κω συμβολὴν ἐποιέετο , πρίν γε δὴ αὐτοῦ πρυτανηίη ἐγένετο .
He accepted the office but did not make an attack until it was his own day to preside.


6.111.1
6859
ὡς δὲ ἐς ἐκεῖνον περιῆλθε , ἐνθαῦτα δὴ ἐτάσσοντο ὧδε οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ὡς συμβαλέοντες ·
When the presidency came round to him, he arrayed the Athenians for battle.


6.111.1
6860
τοῦ μὲν δεξιοῦ κέρεος ἡγέετο ὁ πολέμαρχος Καλλίμαχος ·
the polemarch Callimachus commanded the right wing,


6.111.1
6861
ὁ γὰρ νόμος τότε εἶχε οὕτω τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι , τὸν πολέμαρχον ἔχειν κέρας τὸ δεξιόν ·
since it was then the Athenian custom for the polemarch to hold the right wing.


6.111.1
6862
ἡγεομένου δὲ τούτου ἐξεδέκοντο ὡς ἀριθμέοντο αἱ φυλαὶ ἐχόμεναι ἀλληλέων , τελευταῖοι δὲ ἐτάσσοντο ἔχοντες τὸ εὐώνυμον κέρας Πλαταιέες .
He led, and the other tribes were numbered out in succession next to each other. The Plataeans were marshalled last, holding the left wing.


6.111.2
6863
ἀπὸ ταύτης γάρ σφι τῆς μάχης , Ἀθηναίων θυσίας ἀναγόντων ἐς τὰς πανηγύριας τὰς ἐν τῇσι πεντετηρίσι γινομένας , κατεύχεται ὁ κῆρυξ ὁ Ἀθηναῖος ἅμα τε Ἀθηναίοισι λέγων γίνεσθαι τὰ ἀγαθὰ καὶ Πλαταιεῦσι .
Ever since that battle, when the Athenians are conducting sacrifices at the festivals every fourth year, the Athenian herald prays for good things for the Athenians and Plataeans together.


6.111.3
6864
τότε δὲ τασσομένων τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἐν τῷ Μαραθῶνι ἐγίνετο τοιόνδε τι ·
As the Athenians were marshalled at Marathon, it happened that their line of battle was as long as the line of the Medes.


6.111.3
6865
τὸ στρατόπεδον ἐξισούμενον τῷ Μηδικῷ στρατοπέδῳ , τὸ μὲν αὐτοῦ μέσον ἐγίνετο ἐπὶ τάξιας ὀλίγας , καὶ ταύτῃ ἦν ἀσθενέστατον τὸ στρατόπεδον , τὸ δὲ κέρας ἑκάτερον ἔρρωτο πλήθεϊ .
The center, where the line was weakest, was only a few ranks deep, but each wing was strong in numbers.


6.112.1
6866
ὡς δέ σφι διετέτακτο καὶ τὰ σφάγια ἐγίνετο καλά , ἐνθαῦτα ὡς ἀπείθησαν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι δρόμῳ ἵεντο ἐς τοὺς βαρβάρους .
When they had been set in order and the sacrifices were favorable, the Athenians were sent forth and charged the foreigners at a run.


6.112.1
6867
ἦσαν δὲ στάδιοι οὐκ ἐλάσσονες τὸ μεταίχμιον αὐτῶν ἢ ὀκτώ .
The space between the armies was no less than eight stadia.


6.112.2
6868
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ὁρέοντες δρόμῳ ἐπιόντας παρεσκευάζοντο ὡς δεξόμενοι , μανίην τε τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι ἐπέφερον καὶ πάγχυ ὀλεθρίην , ὁρέοντες αὐτοὺς ὀλίγους καὶ τούτους δρόμῳ ἐπειγομένους , οὔτε ἵππου ὑπαρχούσης σφι οὔτε τοξευμάτων .
The Persians saw them running to attack and prepared to receive them, thinking the Athenians absolutely crazy, since they saw how few of them there were and that they ran up so fast without either cavalry or archers.


6.112.3
6869
ταῦτα μέν νυν οἱ βάρβαροι κατείκαζον ·
So the foreigners imagined,


6.112.3
6870
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ἐπείτε ἀθρόοι προσέμιξαν τοῖσι βαρβάροισι , ἐμάχοντο ἀξίως λόγου .
but when the Athenians all together fell upon the foreigners they fought in a way worthy of record.


6.112.3
6871
πρῶτοι μὲν γὰρ Ἑλλήνων πάντων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν δρόμῳ ἐς πολεμίους ἐχρήσαντο , πρῶτοι δὲ ἀνέσχοντο ἐσθῆτά τε Μηδικὴν ὁρέοντες καὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας ταύτην ἐσθημένους ·
These are the first Hellenes whom we know of to use running against the enemy.


6.112.3
6872
τέως δὲ ἦν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι καὶ τὸ οὔνομα τὸ Μήδων φόβος ἀκοῦσαι .
They are also the first to endure looking at Median dress and men wearing it, for up until then just hearing the name of the Medes caused the Hellenes to panic.


6.113.1
6873
μαχομένων δὲ ἐν τῷ Μαραθῶνι χρόνος ἐγίνετο πολλός , καὶ τὸ μὲν μέσον τοῦ στρατοπέδου ἐνίκων οἱ βάρβαροι , τῇ Πέρσαι τε αὐτοὶ καὶ Σάκαι ἐτετάχατο ·
They fought a long time at Marathon.


6.113.1
6874
κατὰ τοῦτο μὲν δὴ ἐνίκων οἱ βάρβαροι καὶ ῥήξαντες ἐδίωκον ἐς τὴν μεσόγαιαν , τὸ δὲ κέρας ἑκάτερον ἐνίκων Ἀθηναῖοί τε καὶ Πλαταιέες ·
In the center of the line the foreigners prevailed, where the Persians and Sacae were arrayed. The foreigners prevailed there and broke through in pursuit inland, but on each wing the Athenians and Plataeans prevailed.


6.113.2
6875
νικῶντες δὲ τὸ μὲν τετραμμένον τῶν βαρβάρων φεύγειν ἔων , τοῖσι δὲ τὸ μέσον ῥήξασι αὐτῶν συναγαγόντες τὰ κέρεα ἀμφότερα ἐμάχοντο , καὶ ἐνίκων Ἀθηναῖοι .
In victory they let the routed foreigners flee, and brought the wings together to fight those who had broken through the center.


6.113.2
6876
φεύγουσι δὲ τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι εἵποντο κόπτοντες , ἐς ὃ ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν ἀπικόμενοι πῦρ τε αἴτεον καὶ ἐπελαμβάνοντο τῶν νεῶν .
The Athenians prevailed, then followed the fleeing Persians and struck them down. When they reached the sea they demanded fire and laid hold of the Persian ships.


6.114.1
6877
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ἐν τούτῳ τῷ πόνῳ ὁ πολέμαρχος διαφθείρεται , ἀνὴρ γενόμενος ἀγαθός , ἀπὸ δ’ ἔθανε τῶν στρατηγῶν Στησίλεως ὁ Θρασύλεω ·
In this labor Callimachus the polemarch was slain, a brave man, and of the generals Stesilaus son of Thrasylaus died.


6.114.1
6878
τοῦτο δὲ Κυνέγειρος ὁ Εὐφορίωνος ἐνθαῦτα ἐπιλαμβανόμενος τῶν ἀφλάστων νεός , τὴν χεῖρα ἀποκοπεὶς πελέκεϊ πίπτει , τοῦτο δὲ ἄλλοι Ἀθηναίων πολλοί τε καὶ ὀνομαστοί .
Cynegirus son of Euphorion fell there, his hand cut off with an ax as he grabbed a ship's figurehead. Many other famous Athenians also fell there.


6.115.1
6879
ἑπτὰ μὲν δὴ τῶν νεῶν ἐπεκράτησαν τρόπῳ τοιῷδε Ἀθηναῖοι ·
In this way the Athenians overpowered seven ships.


6.115.1
6880
τῇσι δὲ λοιπῇσι οἱ βάρβαροι ἐξανακρουσάμενοι , καὶ ἀναλαβόντες ἐκ τῆς νήσου ἐν τῇ ἔλιπον τὰ ἐξ Ἐρετρίης ἀνδράποδα , περιέπλεον Σούνιον βουλόμενοι φθῆναι τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ἀπικόμενοι ἐς τὸ ἄστυ .
The foreigners pushed off with the rest, picked up the Eretrian slaves from the island where they had left them, and sailed around Sunium hoping to reach the city before the Athenians.


6.115.1
6881
αἰτίην δὲ ἔσχε ἐν Ἀθηναίοισι ἐξ Ἀλκμεωνιδέων μηχανῆς αὐτοὺς ταῦτα ἐπινοηθῆναι ·
There was an accusation at Athens that they devised this by a plan of the Alcmaeonidae.


6.115.1
6882
τούτους γὰρ συνθεμένους τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι ἀναδέξαι ἀσπίδα ἐοῦσι ἤδη ἐν τῇσι νηυσί .
These were said to have arranged to hold up a shield as a signal once the Persians were in their ships.


6.116.1
6883
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ περιέπλεον Σούνιον ·
They sailed around Sunium,


6.116.1
6884
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ὡς ποδῶν εἶχον τάχιστα ἐβοήθεον ἐς τὸ ἄστυ , καὶ ἔφθησάν τε ἀπικόμενοι πρὶν ἢ τοὺς βαρβάρους ἥκειν , καὶ ἐστρατοπεδεύσαντο ἀπιγμένοι ἐξ Ἡρακλείου τοῦ ἐν Μαραθῶνι ἐν ἄλλῳ Ἡρακλείῳ τῷ ἐν Κυνοσάργεϊ .
but the Athenians marched back to defend the city as fast as their feet could carry them and got there ahead of the foreigners. Coming from the sacred precinct of Heracles in Marathon, they pitched camp in the sacred precinct of Heracles in Cynosarges.


6.116.1
6885
οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι τῇσι νηυσὶ ὑπεραιωρηθέντες Φαλήρου , τοῦτο γὰρ ἦν ἐπίνειον τότε τῶν Ἀθηναίων , ὑπὲρ τούτου ἀνακωχεύσαντες τὰς νέας ἀπέπλεον ὀπίσω ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην .
The foreigners lay at anchor off Phalerum, the Athenian naval port at that time. After riding anchor there, they sailed their ships back to Asia.


6.117.1
6886
ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ἐν Μαραθῶνι μάχῃ ἀπέθανον τῶν βαρβάρων κατὰ ἑξακισχιλίους καὶ τετρακοσίους ἄνδρας , Ἀθηναίων δὲ ἑκατὸν καὶ ἐνενήκοντα καὶ δύο .
In the battle at Marathon about six thousand four hundred men of the foreigners were killed, and one hundred and ninety-two Athenians; 6.6.


6.117.1
6887
ἔπεσον μὲν ἀμφοτέρων τοσοῦτοι .
that many fell on each side.


6.117.2
6888
συνήνεικε δὲ αὐτόθι θῶμα γενέσθαι τοιόνδε , Ἀθηναῖον ἄνδρα Ἐπίζηλον τὸν Κουφαγόρεω ἐν τῇ συστάσι μαχόμενόν τε καὶ ἄνδρα γινόμενον ἀγαθὸν τῶν ὀμμάτων στερηθῆναι οὔτε πληγέντα οὐδὲν τοῦ σώματος οὔτε βληθέντα , καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν τῆς ζόης διατελέειν ἀπὸ τούτου τοῦ χρόνου ἐόντα τυφλόν .
The following marvel happened there: an Athenian, Epizelus son of Couphagoras, was fighting as a brave man in the battle when he was deprived of his sight, though struck or hit nowhere on his body, and from that time on he spent the rest of his life in blindness.


6.117.3
6889
λέγειν δὲ αὐτὸν περὶ τοῦ πάθεος ἤκουσα τοιόνδε τινὰ λόγον , ἄνδρα οἱ δοκέειν ὁπλίτην ἀντιστῆναι μέγαν , τοῦ τὸ γένειον τὴν ἀσπίδα πᾶσαν σκιάζειν ·
I have heard that he tells this story about his misfortune: he saw opposing him a tall armed man, whose beard overshadowed his shield,


6.117.3
6890
τὸ δὲ φάσμα τοῦτο ἑωυτὸν μὲν παρεξελθεῖν , τὸν δὲ ἑωυτοῦ παραστάτην ἀποκτεῖναι .
but the phantom passed him by and killed the man next to him.


6.117.3
6891
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ Ἐπίζηλον ἐπυθόμην λέγειν .
I learned by inquiry that this is the story Epizelus tells.


6.118.1
6892
Δᾶτις δὲ πορευόμενος ἅμα τῷ στρατῷ ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην , ἐπείτε ἐγένετο ἐν Μυκόνῳ , εἶδε ὄψιν ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ .
Datis journeyed with his army to Asia, and when he arrived at Myconos he saw a vision in his sleep.


6.118.1
6893
καὶ ἥτις μὲν ἦν ἡ ὄψις , οὐ λέγεται ·
What that vision was is not told,


6.118.1
6894
ὁ δέ , ὡς ἡμέρη τάχιστα ἐπέλαμψε , ζήτησιν ἐποιέετο τῶν νεῶν , εὑρὼν δὲ ἐν νηὶ Φοινίσσῃ ἄγαλμα Ἀπόλλωνος κεχρυσωμένον ἐπυνθάνετο ὁκόθεν σεσυλημένον εἴη , πυθόμενος δὲ ἐξ οὗ ἦν ἱροῦ , ἔπλεε τῇ ἑωυτοῦ νηὶ ἐς Δῆλον ·
but as soon as day broke Datis made a search of his ships. He found in a Phoenician ship a gilded image of Apollo, and asked where this plunder had been taken. Learning from what temple it had come, he sailed in his own ship to Delos.


6.118.2
6895
καὶ ἀπίκατο γὰρ τηνικαῦτα οἱ Δήλιοι ὀπίσω ἐς τὴν νῆσον , κατατίθεταί τε ἐς τὸ ἱρὸν τὸ ἄγαλμα καὶ ἐντέλλεται τοῖσι Δηλίοισι ἀπαγαγεῖν τὸ ἄγαλμα ἐς Δήλιον τὸ Θηβαίων ·
The Delians had now returned to their island, and Datis set the image in the temple, instructing the Delians to carry it away to Theban Delium.


6.118.2
6896
τὸ δ’ ἔστι ἐπὶ θαλάσσῃ Χαλκίδος καταντίον .
This is on the coast opposite Chalcis.


6.118.3
6897
Δᾶτις μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἐντειλάμενος ἀπέπλεε , τὸν δὲ ἀνδριάντα τοῦτον Δήλιοι οὐκ ἀπήγαγον , ἀλλά μιν δι’ ἐτέων εἴκοσι Θηβαῖοι αὐτοὶ ἐκ θεοπροπίου ἐκομίσαντο ἐπὶ Δήλιον .
Datis gave this order and sailed away, but the Delians never carried that statue away; twenty years later the Thebans brought it to  Delium by command of an oracle.


6.119.1
6898
τοὺς δὲ τῶν Ἐρετριέων ἀνδραποδισμένους Δᾶτίς τε καὶ Ἀρταφρένης , ὡς προσέσχον πρὸς τὴν Ἀσίην πλέοντες , ἀνήγαγον ἐς Σοῦσα .
When Datis and Artaphrenes reached Asia in their voyage, they carried the enslaved Eretrians inland to Susa.


6.119.1
6899
βασιλεὺς δὲ Δαρεῖος , πρὶν μὲν αἰχμαλώτους γενέσθαι τοὺς Ἐρετριέας , ἐνεῖχέ σφι δεινὸν χόλον , οἷα ἀρξάντων ἀδικίης προτέρων τῶν Ἐρετριέων ·
King Darius, before the Eretrians had been made captives, was very angry with them because they had begun the wrongdoing.


6.119.2
6900
ἐπείτε δὲ εἶδε σφέας ἀπαχθέντας παρ’ ἑωυτὸν καὶ ἑωυτῷ ὑποχειρίους ἐόντας , ἐποίησε κακὸν ἄλλο οὐδέν , ἀλλὰ σφέας τῆς Κισσίης χώρης κατοίκισε ἐν σταθμῷ ἑωυτοῦ τῷ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Ἀρδέρικκα , ἀπὸ μὲν Σούσων δέκα καὶ διηκοσίους σταδίους ἀπέχοντι , τεσσεράκοντα δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ φρέατος τὸ παρέχεται τριφασίας ἰδέας ·
Before the Eretrians were taken captive, king Darius had been terribly angry with them for doing him unprovoked wrong; but when he saw them brought before him and subject to him, he did them no harm, but settled them in a domain of his own called Ardericca in the Cissian land; this place is two hundred and ten stadia distant from Susa, and forty from the well that is of three kinds.


6.119.2
6901
καὶ γὰρ ἄσφαλτον καὶ ἅλας καὶ ἔλαιον ἀρύσσονται ἐξ αὐτοῦ τρόπῳ τοιῷδε ·
Asphalt and salt and oil they draw for themselves from it in the following way:


6.119.3
6902
ἀντλέεται μὲν κηλωνηίῳ , ἀντὶ δὲ γαυλοῦ ἥμισυ ἀσκοῦ οἱ προσδέδεται ·
a windlass is used in the drawing, with half a skin tied to it in place of a bucket;


6.119.3
6903
ὑποτύψας δὲ τούτῳ ἀντλέει καὶ ἔπειτα ἐγχέει ἐς δεξαμενήν ·
this is dipped into the well and then poured into a tank;


6.119.3
6904
ἐκ δὲ ταύτης ἐς ἄλλο διαχεόμενον τρέπεται τριφασίας ὁδούς .
then what is drawn is poured into another tank and goes three ways:


6.119.3
6905
καὶ ἡ μὲν ἄσφαλτος καὶ οἱ ἅλες πήγνυνται παραυτίκα ·
the asphalt and the salt congeal immediately;


6.119.3
6906
τὸ δὲ ἔλαιον οἱ Πέρσαι καλέουσι τοῦτο ῥαδινάκην , ἔστι δὲ μέλαν καὶ ὀδμὴν παρεχόμενον βαρέαν .
the oil, which the Persians call rhadinace, is dark and evil-smelling.


6.119.4
6907
ἐνθαῦτα τοὺς Ἐρετριέας κατοίκισε βασιλεὺς Δαρεῖος , οἳ καὶ μέχρι ἐμέο εἶχον τὴν χώρην ταύτην , φυλάσοντες τὴν ἀρχαίην γλῶσσαν .
There king Darius settled the Eretrians, and they dwelt in that place until my time, keeping their ancient language.


6.119.4
6908
τὰ μὲν δὴ περὶ Ἐρετριέας ἔσχε οὕτω .
Such was the fate of the Eretrians.


6.120.1
6909
Λακεδαιμονίων δὲ ἧκον ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας δισχίλιοι μετὰ τὴν πανσέληνον , ἔχοντες σπουδὴν πολλὴν καταλαβεῖν , οὕτω ὥστε τριταῖοι ἐκ Σπάρτης ἐγένοντο ἐν τῇ Ἀττικῇ .
After the full moon two thousand Lacedaemonians came to Athens, making such great haste to reach it that they were in Attica on the third day after leaving Sparta.


6.120.1
6910
ὕστεροι δὲ ἀπικόμενοι τῆς συμβολῆς ἱμείροντο ὅμως θεήσασθαι τοὺς Μήδους ·
Although they came too late for the battle, they desired to see the Medes,


6.120.1
6911
ἐλθόντες δὲ ἐς τὸν Μαραθῶνα ἐθεήσαντο .
so they went to Marathon and saw them.


6.120.1
6912
μετὰ δὲ αἰνέοντες Ἀθηναίους καὶ τὸ ἔργον αὐτῶν ἀπαλλάσσοντο ὀπίσω .
Then they departed again, praising the Athenians and their achievement.


6.121.1
6913
θῶμα δέ μοι καὶ οὐκ ἐνδέκομαι τὸν λόγον Ἀλκμεωνίδας ἄν κοτε ἀναδέξαι Πέρσῃσι ἐκ συνθήματος ἀσπίδα , βουλομένους ὑπὸ βαρβάροισί τε εἶναι Ἀθηναίους καὶ ὑπὸ Ἱππίῃ ·
It is a wonder to me, and I do not believe the story, that the Alcmeonidae would ever have agreed to hold up a shield as a sign for the Persians out of a desire to make Athens subject to foreigners and to Hippias;


6.121.1
6914
οἵτινες μᾶλλον ἢ ὁμοίως Καλλίῃ τῷ Φαινίππου , Ἱππονίκου δὲ πατρί , φαίνονται μισοτύραννοι ἐόντες .
for it is plain to see that they were tyrant-haters as much as Callias (son of Phaenippus and father of Hipponicus), or even more so.


6.121.2
6915
Καλλίης τε γὰρ μοῦνος Ἀθηναίων ἁπάντων ἐτόλμα , ὅκως Πεισίστρατος ἐκπέσοι ἐκ τῶν Ἀθηνέων , τὰ χρήματα αὐτοῦ κηρυσσόμενα ὑπὸ τοῦ δημοσίου ὠνέεσθαι , καὶ τ- ἄλλα τὰ ἔχθιστα ἐς αὐτὸν πάντα ἐμηχανᾶτο .
Callias was the only Athenian who dared to buy Pisistratus' possessions when they were put up for sale by the state after Pisistratus' banishment from  Athens; and he devised other acts of bitter hatred against him.


6.122.1
6916
Καλλίεω δὲ τούτου ἄξιον πολλαχοῦ μνήμην ἐστὶ πάντα τινὰ ἔχειν .
This Callias is worthy of all men's remembrance for many reasons:


6.122.1
6917
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ τὰ προλελεγμένα , ὡς ἀνὴρ ἄκρος ἐλευθερῶν τὴν πατρίδα ·
first, because he so excellently freed his country, as I have said;


6.122.1
6918
τοῦτο δὲ τὰ ἐν Ὀλυμπίῃ ἐποίησε ·
second, for what he did at Olympia,


6.122.1
6919
ἵππῳ νικήσας , τεθρίππῳ δὲ δεύτερος γενόμενος , Πύθια δὲ πρότερον ἀνελόμενος , ἐφανερώθη ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας πάντας δαπάνῃσι μεγίστῃσι .
where he won a horserace, and was second in a four-horse chariot, after already winning a Pythian prize, and was the cynosure of all Hellas for the lavishness of his spending;


6.122.2
6920
τοῦτο δὲ κατὰ τὰς ἑωυτοῦ θυγατέρας ἐούσας τρεῖς οἷός τις ἀνὴρ ἐγένετο ·
and third, for his behavior regarding his three daughters.


6.122.2
6921
ἐπειδὴ γὰρ ἐγίνοντο γάμου ὡραῖαι , ἔδωκέ σφι δωρεὴν μεγαλοπρεπεστάτην ἐκείνῃσί τε ἐχαρίσατο ·
When they were of marriageable age, he gave them a most splendid gift and one very pleasant to them,


6.122.2
6922
ἐκ γὰρ πάντων τῶν Ἀθηναίων τὸν ἑκάστη ἐθέλοι ἄνδρα ἑωυτῇ ἐκλέξασθαι , ἔδωκε τούτῳ τῷ ἀνδρί .
promising that each would wed that man whom she chose for herself from all the Athenians.]


6.123.1
6923
καὶ οἱ Ἀλκμεωνίδαι ὁμοίως ἢ οὐδὲν ἧσσον τούτου ἦσαν μισοτύραννοι .
The Alcmeonidae were tyrant-haters as much as Callias, or not less so.


6.123.1
6924
θῶμα ὦν μοι καὶ οὐ προσίεμαι τὴν διαβολὴν τούτους γε ἀναδέξαι ἀσπίδα , οἵτινες ἔφευγόν τε τὸν πάντα χρόνον τοὺς τυράννους , ἐκ μηχανῆς τε τῆς τούτων ἐξέλιπον Πεισιστρατίδαι τὴν τυραννίδα , καὶ οὕτω τὰς Ἀθήνας οὗτοι ἦσαν οἱ ἐλευθερώσαντες πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἤ περ Ἁρμόδιός τε καὶ Ἀριστογείτων , ὡς ἐγὼ κρίνω .
Therefore I find it a strange and unbelievable accusation that they of all men should have held up a shield; at all times they shunned tyrants, and it was by their contrivance that the sons of Pisistratus were deposed from their tyranny.


6.123.2
6925
οἳ μὲν γὰρ ἐξηγρίωσαν τοὺς ὑπολοίπους Πεισιστρατιδέων Ἵππαρχον ἀποκτείναντες , οὐδέ τι μᾶλλον ἔπαυσαν τοὺς λοιποὺς τυραννεύοντας ·
These only enraged the remaining sons of Pisistratus by killing Hipparchus,


6.123.2
6926
Ἀλκμεωνίδαι δὲ ἐμφανέως ἠλευθέρωσαν , εἰ δὴ οὗτοί γε ἀληθέως ἦσαν οἱ τὴν Πυθίην ἀναπείσαντες προσημαίνειν Λακεδαιμονίοισι ἐλευθεροῦν τὰς Ἀθήνας , ὥς μοι πρότερον δεδήλωται .
and did nothing to end the tyranny of the rest of them; but the Alcmeonidae plainly liberated their country, if they truly were the ones who persuaded the Pythian priestess to signify to the Lacedaemonians that they should free Athens, as I have previously shown.


6.124.1
6927
ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἴσως τι ἐπιμεμφόμενοι Ἀθηναίων τῷ δήμῳ προεδίδοσαν τὴν πατρίδα .
Perhaps out of some grudge against the Athenian people they betrayed their country.


6.124.1
6928
οὐ μὲν ὦν ἦσαν σφέων ἄλλοι δοκιμώτεροι ἔν γε Ἀθηναίοισι ἄνδρες οὐδ’ οἳ μᾶλλον ἐτετιμέατο .
But there were no others at Athens more esteemed or more honored than they;


6.124.2
6929
οὕτω οὐδὲ λόγος αἱρέει ἀναδεχθῆναι ἔκ γε ἂν τούτων ἀσπίδα ἐπὶ τοιούτῳ λόγῳ .
therefore plain reason forbids believing that they of all men could have held up the shield for any such cause.


6.124.2
6930
ἀνεδέχθη μὲν γὰρ ἀσπίς , καὶ τοῦτο οὐκ ἔστι ἄλλως εἰπεῖν ·
A shield was held up; this cannot be denied,


6.124.2
6931
ἐγένετο γάρ ·
for it happened;


6.124.2
6932
ὃς μέντοι ἦν ὁ ἀναδέξας , οὐκ ἔχω προσωτέρω εἰπεῖν τούτων .
but who did it I do not know, and I can say no further.


6.125.1
6933
οἱ δὲ Ἀλκμεωνίδαι ἦσαν μὲν καὶ τὰ ἀνέκαθεν λαμπροὶ ἐν τῇσι Ἀθήνῃσι , ἀπὸ δὲ Ἀλκμέωνος καὶ αὖτις Μεγακλέος ἐγένοντο καὶ κάρτα λαμπροί .
The Alcmeonidae had been men of renown at  Athens even in the old days, and from the time of Alcmeon and then Megacles their renown increased.


6.125.2
6934
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ Ἀλκμέων ὁ Μεγακλέος τοῖσι ἐκ Σαρδίων Λυδοῖσι παρὰ Κροίσου ἀπικνεομένοισι ἐπὶ τὸ χρηστήριον τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖσι συμπρήκτωρ τε ἐγίνετο καὶ συνελάμβανε προθύμως , καί μιν Κροῖσος πυθόμενος τῶν Λυδῶν τῶν ἐς τὰ χρηστήρια φοιτεόντων ἑωυτὸν εὖ ποιέειν μεταπέμπεται ἐς Σάρδις , ἀπικόμενον δὲ δωρέεται χρυσῷ τὸν ἂν δύνηται τῷ ἑωυτοῦ σώματι ἐξενείκασθαι ἐσάπαξ .
When the Lydians from  Sardis came from Croesus to the Delphic oracle, Alcmeon son of Megacles worked with them and zealously aided them; when Croesus heard from the Lydians who visited the oracle of Alcmeon's benefits to him, he summoned Alcmeon to  Sardis, and there made him a gift of as much gold as he could carry away at one time on his person.


6.125.3
6935
ὁ δὲ Ἀλκμέων πρὸς τὴν δωρεὴν ἐοῦσαν τοιαύτην τοιάδε ἐπιτηδεύσας προσέφερε ·
Considering the nature of the gift, Alcmeon planned and employed this device:


6.125.3
6936
ἐνδὺς κιθῶνα μέγαν καὶ κόλπον βαθὺν καταλιπόμενος τοῦ κιθῶνος , κοθόρνους τε τοὺς εὕρισκε εὐρυτάτους ἐόντας ὑποδησάμενος , ἤιε ἐς τὸν θησαυρὸν ἐς τόν οἱ κατηγέοντο .
he donned a wide tunic, leaving a deep fold in it, and put on the most spacious boots that he could find, then went into the treasury to which they led him.


6.125.4
6937
ἐσπεσὼν δὲ ἐς σωρὸν ψήγματος πρῶτα μὲν παρέσαξε παρὰ τὰς κνήμας τοῦ χρυσοῦ ὅσον ἐχώρεον οἱ κόθορνοι , μετὰ δὲ τὸν κόλπον πάντα πλησάμενος τοῦ χρυσοῦ καὶ ἐς τὰς τρίχας τῆς κεφαλῆς διαπάσας τοῦ ψήγματος καὶ ἄλλο λαβὼν ἐς τὸ στόμα , ἐξήιε ἐκ τοῦ θησαυροῦ ἕλκων μὲν μόγις τοὺς κοθόρνους , παντὶ δὲ τεῷ οἰκὼς μᾶλλον ἢ ἀνθρώπῳ ·
Falling upon a heap of gold-dust, first he packed next to his legs as much gold as his boots would contain; then he filled all the fold of his tunic with gold and strewed the dust among the hair of his head, and took more of it into his mouth; when he came out of the treasury, hardly dragging the weight of his boots, he was like anything rather than a human being,


6.125.4
6938
τοῦ τό τε στόμα ἐβέβυστο καὶ πάντα ἐξώγκωτο .
with his mouth crammed full and all his body swollen.


6.125.5
6939
ἰδόντα δὲ τὸν Κροῖσον γέλως ἐσῆλθε , καί οἱ πάντα τε ἐκεῖνα διδοῖ καὶ πρὸς ἕτερα δωρέεται οὐκ ἐλάσσω ἐκείνων .
Croesus burst out laughing at the sight and gave him all the gold he already had and that much more again.


6.125.5
6940
οὕτω μὲν ἐπλούτησε ἡ οἰκίη αὕτη μεγάλως , καὶ ὁ Ἀλκμέων οὗτος οὕτω τεθριπποτροφήσας Ὀλυμπιάδα ἀναιρέεται .
Thus the family grew very rich; Alcmeon came to keep four-horse chariots and won with them at Olympia.


6.126.1
6941
μετὰ δὲ γενεῇ δευτέρῃ ὕστερον Κλεισθένης αὐτὴν ὁ Σικυώνιος τύραννος ἐξήειρε , ὥστε πολλῷ ὀνομαστοτέρην γενέσθαι ἐν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι ἢ πρότερον ἦν .
In the next generation Cleisthenes the tyrant of Sicyon raised that house still higher, so that it grew much more famous in Hellas than it had formerly been.


6.126.1
6942
Κλεισθένεϊ γὰρ τῷ Ἀριστωνύμου τοῦ Μύρωνος τοῦ Ἀνδρέω γίνεται θυγάτηρ τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Ἀγαρίστη .
Cleisthenes son of Aristonymus son of Myron son of Andreas had one daughter, whose name was Agariste.


6.126.1
6943
ταύτην ἠθέλησε , Ἑλλήνων ἁπάντων ἐξευρὼν τὸν ἄριστον , τούτῳ γυναῖκα προσθεῖναι .
He desired to wed her to the best man he could find in Hellas.


6.126.2
6944
Ὀλυμπίων ὦν ἐόντων καὶ νικῶν ἐν αὐτοῖσι τεθρίππῳ ὁ Κλεισθένης κήρυγμα ἐποιήσατο , ὅστις Ἑλλήνων ἑωυτὸν ἀξιοῖ Κλεισθένεος γαμβρὸν γενέσθαι , ἥκειν ἐς ἑξηκοστὴν ἡμέρην ἢ καὶ πρότερον ἐς Σικυῶνα , ὡς κυρώσοντος Κλεισθένεος τὸν γάμον ἐν ἐνιαυτῷ , ἀπὸ τῆς ἑξηκοστῆς ἀρξαμένου ἡμέρης .
It was the time of the Olympian games, and when he was victor there with a four-horse chariot, Cleisthenes made a proclamation that whichever Greek thought himself worthy to be his son-in-law should come on the sixtieth day from then or earlier to  Sicyon, and Cleisthenes would make good his promise of marriage in a year from that sixtieth day.


6.126.3
6945
ἐνθαῦτα Ἑλλήνων ὅσοι σφίσι τε αὐτοῖσι ἦσαν καὶ πάτρῃ ἐξωγκωμένοι , ἐφοίτεον μνηστῆρες ·
Then all the Greeks who were proud of themselves and their country came as suitors,


6.126.3
6946
τοῖσι Κλεισθένης καὶ δρόμον καὶ παλαίστρην ποιησάμενος ἐπ’ αὐτῷ τούτῳ εἶχε .
and to that end Cleisthenes had them compete in running and wrestling contests.


6.127.1
6947
ἀπὸ μὲν δὴ Ἰταλίης ἦλθε Σμινδυρίδης ὁ Ἱπποκράτεος Συβαρίτης , ὃς ἐπὶ πλεῖστον δὴ χλιδῆς εἷς ἀνὴρ ἀπίκετο ( ἡ δὲ Σύβαρις ἤκμαζε τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον μάλιστα ) , καὶ Σιρίτης Δάμασος Ἀμύριος τοῦ σοφοῦ λεγομένου παῖς .
From  Italy came Smindyrides of  Sybaris, son of Hippocrates, the most luxurious liver of his day (and  Sybaris was then at the height of its prosperity), and Damasus of  Siris, son of that Amyris who was called the Wise.


6.127.2
6948
οὗτοι μὲν ἀπὸ Ἰταλίης ἦλθον , ἐκ δὲ τοῦ κόλπου τοῦ Ἰονίου Ἀμφίμνηστος Ἐπιστρόφου Ἐπιδάμνιος ·
These came from Italy; from the Ionian Gulf, Amphimnestus son of Epistrophus, an Epidamnian;


6.127.2
6949
οὗτος δὲ ἐκ τοῦ Ἰονίου κόλπου .
he was from the Ionian Gulf.


6.127.2
6950
Αἰτωλὸς δὲ ἦλθε Τιτόρμου τοῦ ὑπερφύντος τε Ἕλληνας ἰσχύι καὶ φυγόντος ἀνθρώπους ἐς τὰς ἐσχατιὰς τῆς Αἰτωλίδος χώρης , τούτου τοῦ Τιτόρμου ἀδελφεὸς Μάλης .
From Aetolia came Males, the brother of that Titormus who surpassed all the Greeks in strength, and fled from the sight of men to the farthest parts of the Aetolian land.


6.127.3
6951
ἀπὸ δὲ Πελοποννήσου Φείδωνος τοῦ Ἀργείων τυράννου παῖς Λεωκήδης , Φείδωνος δὲ τοῦ τὰ μέτρα ποιήσαντος Πελοποννησίοισι καὶ ὑβρίσαντος μέγιστα δὴ Ἑλλήνων πάντων , ὃς ἐξαναστήσας τοὺς Ἠλείων ἀγωνοθέτας αὐτὸς τὸν ἐν Ὀλυμπίῃ ἀγῶνα ἔθηκε ·
From the Peloponnese came Leocedes, son of Phidon the tyrant of Argos, that Phidon who made weights and measures for the Peloponnesians and acted more arrogantly than any other Greek; he drove out the Elean contest-directors and held the contests at Olympia himself.


6.127.3
6952
τούτου τε δὴ παῖς καὶ Ἀμίαντος Λυκούργου Ἀρκὰς ἐκ Τραπεζοῦντος , καὶ Ἀζὴν ἐκ Παίου πόλιος Λαφάνης Εὐφορίωνος τοῦ δεξαμένου τε , ὡς λόγος ἐν Ἀρκαδίῃ λέγεται , τοὺς Διοσκούρους οἰκίοισι καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου ξεινοδοκέοντος πάντας ἀνθρώπους , καὶ Ἠλεῖος Ὀνόμαστος Ἀγαίου .
This man's son now came, and Amiantus, an Arcadian from Trapezus, son of Lycurgus; and an Azenian from the town of Paeus, Laphanes, son of that Euphorion who, as the Arcadian tale relates, gave lodging to the Dioscuri, and ever since kept open house for all men; and Onomastus from Elis, son of Agaeus.


6.127.4
6953
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ ἐξ αὐτῆς Πελοποννήσου ἦλθον , ἐκ δὲ Ἀθηνέων ἀπίκοντο Μεγακλέης τε ὁ Ἀλκμέωνος τούτου τοῦ παρὰ Κροῖσον ἀπικομένου , καὶ ἄλλος Ἱπποκλείδης Τισάνδρου , πλούτῳ καὶ εἴδεϊ προφέρων Ἀθηναίων .
These came from the Peloponnese itself; from Athens Megacles, son of that Alcmeon who visited Croesus, and also Hippocleides son of Tisandrus, who surpassed the Athenians in wealth and looks.


6.127.4
6954
ἀπὸ δὲ Ἐρετρίης ἀνθεύσης τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον Λυσανίης ·
From Eretria, which at that time was prosperous, came Lysanias;


6.127.4
6955
οὗτος δὲ ἀπ’ Εὐβοίης μοῦνος .
he was the only man from Euboea.


6.127.4
6956
ἐκ δὲ Θεσσαλίης ἦλθε τῶν Σκοπαδέων Διακτορίδης Κραννώνιος , ἐκ δὲ Μολοσσῶν Ἄλκων .
From Thessaly came a Scopad, Diactorides of Crannon; and from the Molossians, Alcon.


6.128.1
6957
τοσοῦτοι μὲν ἐγένοντο οἱ μνηστῆρες .
These were the suitors.


6.128.1
6958
ἀπικομένων δὲ τούτων ἐς τὴν προειρημένην ἡμέρην , ὁ Κλεισθένης πρῶτα μὲν τὰς πάτρας τε αὐτῶν ἀνεπύθετο καὶ γένος ἑκάστου , μετὰ δὲ κατέχων ἐνιαυτὸν διεπειρᾶτο αὐτῶν τῆς τε ἀνδραγαθίης καὶ τῆς ὀργῆς καὶ παιδεύσιός τε καὶ τρόπου , καὶ ἑνὶ ἑκάστῳ ἰὼν ἐς συνουσίην καὶ συνάπασι , καὶ ἐς γυμνάσιά τε ἐξαγινέων ὅσοι ἦσαν αὐτῶν νεώτεροι , καὶ τό γε μέγιστον , ἐν τῇ συνεστίῃ διεπειρᾶτο ·
When they arrived on the appointed day, Cleisthenes first inquired the country and lineage of each; then he kept them with him for a year, testing their manliness and temper and upbringing and manner of life; this he did by consorting with them alone and in company, putting the younger of them to contests of strength, but especially watching their demeanor at the common meal;


6.128.1
6959
ὅσον γὰρ κατεῖχε χρόνον αὐτούς , τοῦτον πάντα ἐποίεε καὶ ἅμα ἐξείνιζε μεγαλοπρεπέως .
for as long as he kept them with him, he did everything for them and entertained them with magnificence.


6.128.2
6960
καὶ δή κου μάλιστα τῶν μνηστήρων ἠρέσκοντο οἱ ἀπ’ Ἀθηνέων ἀπιγμένοι , καὶ τούτων μᾶλλον Ἱπποκλείδης ὁ Τισάνδρου καὶ κατ’ ἀνδραγαθίην ἐκρίνετο καὶ ὅτι τὸ ἀνέκαθεν τοῖσι ἐν Κορίνθῳ Κυψελίδῃσι ἦν προσήκων .
The suitors that most pleased him were the ones who had come from  Athens, and of these Hippocleides son of Tisandrus was judged foremost, both for his manliness and because in ancestry he was related to the Cypselids of  Corinth.


6.129.1
6961
ὡς δὲ ἡ κυρίη ἐγένετο τῶν ἡμερέων τῆς τε κατακλίσιος τοῦ γάμου καὶ ἐκφάσιος αὐτοῦ Κλεισθένεος τὸν κρίνοι ἐκ πάντων , θύσας βοῦς ἑκατὸν ὁ Κλεισθένης εὐώχεε αὐτούς τε τοὺς μνηστῆρας καὶ Σικυωνίους πάντας .
When the appointed day came for the marriage feast and for Cleisthenes' declaration of whom he had chosen out of them all, Cleisthenes sacrificed a hundred oxen and gave a feast to the suitors and to the whole of  Sicyon.


6.129.2
6962
ὡς δὲ ἀπὸ δείπνου ἐγίνοντο , οἱ μνηστῆρες ἔριν εἶχον ἀμφί τε μουσικῇ καὶ τῷ λεγομένῳ ἐς τὸ μέσον .
After dinner the suitors vied with each other in music and in anecdotes for all to hear.


6.129.2
6963
προϊούσης δὲ τῆς πόσιος κατέχων πολλὸν τοὺς ἄλλους ὁ Ἱπποκλείδης ἐκέλευσέ οἱ τὸν αὐλητὴν αὐλῆσαι ἐμμελείην , πειθομένου δὲ τοῦ αὐλητέω ὀρχήσατο .
As they sat late drinking, Hippocleides, now far outdoing the rest, ordered the flute-player to play him a dance-tune; the flute-player obeyed and he began to dance.


6.129.2
6964
καί κως ἑωυτῷ μὲν ἀρεστῶς ὀρχέετο , ὁ Κλεισθένης δὲ ὁρέων ὅλον τὸ πρῆγμα ὑπώπτευε .
I suppose he pleased himself with his dancing, but Cleisthenes saw the whole business with much disfavor.


6.129.3
6965
μετὰ δὲ ἐπισχὼν ὁ Ἱπποκλείδης χρόνον ἐκέλευσε τινὰ τράπεζαν ἐσενεῖκαι , ἐσελθούσης δὲ τῆς τραπέζης πρῶτα μὲν ἐπ’ αὐτῆς ὀρχήσατο Λακωνικὰ σχημάτια , μετὰ δὲ ἄλλα Ἀττικά , τὸ τρίτον δὲ τὴν κεφαλὴν ἐρείσας ἐπὶ τὴν τράπεζαν τοῖσι σκέλεσι ἐχειρονόμησε .
Hippocleides then stopped for a while and ordered a table to be brought in; when the table arrived, he danced Laconian figures on it first, and then Attic; last of all he rested his head on the table and made gestures with his legs in the air.


6.129.4
6966
Κλεισθένης δὲ τὰ μὲν πρῶτα καὶ τὰ δεύτερα ὀρχεομένου , ἀποστυγέων γαμβρὸν ἄν οἱ ἔτι γενέσθαι Ἱπποκλείδεα διὰ τήν τε ὄρχησιν καὶ τὴν ἀναιδείην , κατεῖχε ἑωυτόν , οὐ βουλόμενος ἐκραγῆναι ἐς αὐτόν ·
Now Cleisthenes at the first and the second bout of dancing could no more bear to think of Hippocleides as his son-in-law, because of his dancing and his shamelessness, but he had held himself in check, not wanting to explode at Hippocleides;


6.129.4
6967
ὡς δὲ εἶδε τοῖσι σκέλεσι χειρονομήσαντα , οὐκέτι κατέχειν δυνάμενος εἶπε " ὦ παῖ Τισάνδρου , ἀπορχήσαό γε μὲν τὸν γάμον " .
but when he saw him making gestures with his legs, he could no longer keep silence and said, “son of Tisandrus, you have danced away your marriage.”


6.129.4
6968
ὁ δὲ Ἱπποκλείδης ὑπολαβὼν εἶπε " οὐ φροντὶς Ἱπποκλείδῃ " .
Hippocleides said in answer, “It does not matter to Hippocleides!”


6.129.4
6969
ἀπὸ τούτου μὲν τοῦτο ὀνομάζεται .
Since then this is proverbial.


6.130.1
6970
Κλεισθένης δὲ σιγὴν ποιησάμενος ἔλεξε ἐς μέσον τάδε .
Then Cleisthenes bade them all be silent and spoke to the company at large:


6.130.1
6971
" ἄνδρες παιδὸς τῆς ἐμῆς μνηστῆρες , ἐγὼ καὶ πάντας ὑμέας ἐπαινέω καὶ πᾶσι ὑμῖν , εἰ οἷόν τε εἴη , χαριζοίμην ἄν , μήτ’ ἕνα ὑμέων ἐξαίρετον ἀποκρίνων μήτε τοὺς λοιποὺς ἀποδοκιμάζων .
“Suitors for my daughter's hand, I thank you one and all; if it were possible I would grant each of you his wish, neither choosing out one to set him above another nor disparaging the rest.


6.130.2
6972
ἀλλ’ οὐ γὰρ οἷά τε ἐστὶ μιῆς πέρι παρθένου βουλεύοντα πᾶσι κατὰ νόον ποιέειν , τοῖσι μὲν ὑμέων ἀπελαυνομένοισι τοῦδε τοῦ γάμου τάλαντον ἀργυρίου ἑκάστῳ δωρεὴν δίδωμι τῆς ἀξιώσιος εἵνεκα τῆς ἐξ ἐμεῦ γῆμαι καὶ τῆς ἐξ οἴκου ἀποδημίης , τῷ δὲ Ἀλκμέωνος Μεγακλέι ἐγγυῶ παῖδα τὴν ἐμὴν Ἀγαρίστην νόμοισι τοῖσι Ἀθηναίων " .
But since I have but one maiden to plan for and so cannot please all of you, to those of you whose suit is rejected I make a gift of a talent of silver to each, for his desire to take a wife from my house and for his sojourn away from his home;


6.130.2
6973
φαμένου δὲ ἐγγυᾶσθαι Μεγακλέος ἐκεκύρωτο ὁ γάμος Κλεισθένεϊ .
and to Megacles son of Alcmeon do I betroth my daughter Agariste, by the laws of the Athenians.” Megacles accepted the betrothal, and Cleisthenes brought the marriage to pass.


6.131.1
6974
ἀμφὶ μὲν κρίσιος τῶν μνηστήρων τοσαῦτα ἐγένετο καὶ οὕτω Ἀλκμεωνίδαι ἐβώσθησαν ἀνὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
Such is the tale of the choice among the suitors; and thus the fame of the Alcmeonidae resounded throughout Hellas.


6.131.1
6975
τούτων δὲ συνοικησάντων γίνεται Κλεισθένης τε ὁ τὰς φυλὰς καὶ τὴν δημοκρατίην Ἀθηναίοισι καταστήσας , ἔχων τὸ οὔνομα ἀπὸ τοῦ μητροπάτορος τοῦ Σικυωνίου ·
From this marriage was born that Cleisthenes, named after his mother's father from Sicyon, who gave the Athenians their tribes and their democracy;


6.131.2
6976
οὗτός τε δὴ γίνεται Μεγακλέϊ καὶ Ἱπποκράτης , ἐκ δὲ Ἱπποκράτεος Μεγακλέης τε ἄλλος καὶ Ἀγαρίστη ἄλλη ἀπὸ τῆς Κλεισθένεος Ἀγαρίστης ἔχουσα τὸ οὔνομα ·
he and Hippocrates were born to Megacles; Hippocrates was father of another Megacles and another Agariste, called after Agariste who was Cleisthenes' daughter.


6.131.2
6977
ἣ συνοικήσασά τε Ξανθίππῳ τῷ Ἀρίφρονος καὶ ἔγκυος ἐοῦσα εἶδε ὄψιν ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ , ἐδόκεε δὲ λέοντα τεκεῖν , καὶ μετ’ ὀλίγας ἡμέρας τίκτει Περικλέα Ξανθίππῳ .
She was married to Xanthippus son of Ariphron, and when she was pregnant she saw in her sleep a vision in which she thought she gave birth to a lion. In a few days she bore Xanthippus a son, Pericles.


6.132.1
6978
μετὰ δὲ τὸ ἐν Μαραθῶνι τρῶμα γενόμενον Μιλτιάδης , καὶ πρότερον εὐδοκιμέων παρὰ Ἀθηναίοισι , τότε μᾶλλον αὔξετο .
After the Persian disaster at Marathon, the reputation of Miltiades, already great at Athens, very much increased.


6.132.1
6979
αἰτήσας δὲ νέας ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ στρατιήν τε καὶ χρήματα Ἀθηναίους , οὐ φράσας σφι ἐπ’ ἣν ἐπιστρατεύσεται χώρην , ἀλλὰ φὰς αὐτοὺς καταπλουτιεῖν ἤν οἱ ἕπωνται ·
He asked the Athenians for seventy ships, an army, and money, not revealing against what country he would lead them, but saying that he would make them rich if they followed him;


6.132.1
6980
ἐπὶ γὰρ χώρην τοιαύτην δή τινα ἄξειν ὅθεν χρυσὸν εὐπετέως ἄφθονον οἴσονται ·
he would bring them to a country from which they could easily carry away an abundance of gold;


6.132.1
6981
λέγων τοιαῦτα αἴτεε τὰς νέας .
so he said when he asked for the ships.


6.132.1
6982
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ τούτοισι ἐπαερθέντες παρέδοσαν .
The Athenians were induced by these promises and granted his request.


6.133.1
6983
παραλαβὼν δὲ ὁ Μιλτιάδης τὴν στρατιὴν ἔπλεε ἐπὶ Πάρον , πρόφασιν ἔχων ὡς οἱ Πάριοι ὑπῆρξαν πρότεροι στρατευόμενοι τριήρεσι ἐς Μαραθῶνα ἅμα τῷ Πέρσῃ .
Miltiades took his army and sailed for Paros, on the pretext that the Parians had brought this on themselves by first sending triremes with the Persian fleet to Marathon.


6.133.1
6984
τοῦτο μὲν δὴ πρόσχημα λόγων ἦν , ἀτάρ τινα καὶ ἔγκοτον εἶχε τοῖσι Παρίοισι διὰ Λυσαγόρεα τὸν Τισίεω , ἐόντα γένος Πάριον , διαβαλόντα μιν πρὸς Ὑδάρνεα τὸν Πέρσην .
Such was the pretext of his argument, but he had a grudge against the Parians because Lysagoras son of Tisias, a man of Parian descent, had slandered him to Hydarnes the Persian.


6.133.2
6985
ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐπ’ ἣν ἔπλεε ὁ Μιλτιάδης τῇ στρατιῇ ἐπολιόρκεε Παρίους κατειλημένους ἐντὸς τείχεος , καὶ ἐσπέμπων κήρυκα αἴτεε ἑκατὸν τάλαντα , φάς , ἢν μιν οὐ δῶσι , οὐκ ἀπονοστήσειν τὴν στρατιὴν πρὶν ἢ ἐξέλῃ σφέας .
When he reached his voyage's destination, Miltiades with his army drove the Parians inside their walls and besieged them; he sent in a herald and demanded a hundred talents, saying that if they did not give it to him, his army would not return home before it had stormed their city.


6.133.3
6986
οἱ δὲ Πάριοι ὅκως μέν τι δώσουσι Μιλτιάδῃ ἀργύριον οὐδὲ διενοεῦντο , οἳ δὲ ὅκως διαφυλάξουσι τὴν πόλιν τοῦτο ἐμηχανῶντο , ἄλλα τε ἐπιφραζόμενοι καὶ τῇ μάλιστα ἔσκε ἑκάστοτε ἐπίμαχον τοῦ τείχεος , τοῦτο ἅμα νυκτὶ ἐξηείρετο διπλήσιον τοῦ ἀρχαίου .
The Parians had no intention of giving Miltiades any money at all, and they contrived how to defend their city. They did this by building their wall at night to double its former height where it was most assailable, and also by other devices.


6.134.1
6987
ἐς μὲν δὴ τοσοῦτο τοῦ λόγου οἱ πάντες Ἕλληνες λέγουσι , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ αὐτοὶ Πάριοι γενέσθαι ὧδε λέγουσι .
All the Greeks tell the same story up to this point; after this the Parians themselves say that the following happened:


6.134.1
6988
Μιλτιάδῃ ἀπορέοντι ἐλθεῖν ἐς λόγους αἰχμάλωτον γυναῖκα , ἐοῦσαν μὲν Παρίην γένος , οὔνομα δέ οἱ εἶναι Τιμοῦν , εἶναι δὲ ὑποζάκορον τῶν χθονίων θεῶν ·
as Miltiades was in a quandary, a captive woman named Timo, Parian by birth and an under-priestess of the goddesses of the dead, came to talk with him.


6.134.1
6989
ταύτην ἐλθοῦσαν ἐς ὄψιν Μιλτιάδεω συμβουλεῦσαι , εἰ περὶ πολλοῦ ποιέεται Πάρον ἑλεῖν , τὰ ἂν αὐτὴ ὑποθῆται , ταῦτα ποιέειν .
Coming before Miltiades, she advised him, if taking Paros was very important to him, to do whatever she suggested.


6.134.2
6990
μετὰ δὲ τὴν μὲν ὑποθέσθαι , τὸν δὲ διερχόμενον ἐπὶ τὸν κολωνὸν τὸν πρὸ τῆς πόλιος ἐόντα ἕρκος θεσμοφόρου Δήμητρος ὑπερθορεῖν , οὐ δυνάμενον τὰς θύρας ἀνοῖξαι , ὑπερθορόντα δὲ ἰέναι ἐπὶ τὸ μέγαρον ὅ τι δὴ ποιήσοντα ἐντός , εἴτε κινήσοντά τι τῶν ἀκινήτων εἴτε ὅ τι δή κοτε πρήξοντα ·
Then, following her advice, he passed through to the hill in front of the city and jumped over the fence of the precinct of Demeter the Lawgiver, since he was unable to open the door. After leaping over, he went to the shrine, whether to move something that should not be moved, or with some other intention.


6.134.2
6991
πρὸς τῇσι θύρῃσί τε γενέσθαι καὶ πρόκατε φρίκης αὐτὸν ὑπελθούσης ὀπίσω τὴν αὐτὴν ὁδὸν ἵεσθαι , καταθρώσκοντα δὲ τὴν αἱμασιὴν τὸν μηρὸν σπασθῆναι ·
When he was right at the doors, he was immediately seized with panic and hurried back by the same route;


6.134.2
6992
οἳ δὲ αὐτὸν τὸ γόνυ προσπταῖσαι λέγουσι .
leaping down from the wall he twisted his thigh, but some say he hit his knee.


6.135.1
6993
Μιλτιάδης μέν νυν φλαύρως ἔχων ἀπέπλεε ὀπίσω , οὔτε χρήματα Ἀθηναίοισι ἄγων οὔτε Πάρον προσκτησάμενος , ἀλλὰ πολιορκήσας τε ἓξ καὶ εἴκοσι ἡμέρας καὶ δηιώσας τὴν νῆσον .
So Miltiades sailed back home in a sorry condition, neither bringing money for the Athenians nor having won  Paros; he had besieged the town for twenty-six days and ravaged the island.


6.135.2
6994
Πάριοι δὲ πυθόμενοι ὡς ἡ ὑποζάκορος τῶν θεῶν Τιμὼ Μιλτιάδῃ κατηγήσατο , βουλόμενοί μιν ἀντὶ τούτων τιμωρήσασθαι , θεοπρόπους πέμπουσι ἐς Δελφούς ὥς σφεας ἡσυχίη τῆς πολιορκίης ἔσχε ·
The Parians learned that Timo the under-priestess of the goddesses had been Miltiades' guide and desired to punish her for this.


6.135.2
6995
ἔπεμπον δὲ ἐπειρησομένους εἰ καταχρήσωνται τὴν ὑποζάκορον τῶν θεῶν τὴν ἐξηγησαμένην τοῖσι ἐχθροῖσι τῆς πατρίδος ἅλωσιν καὶ τὰ ἐς ἔρσενα γόνον ἄρρητα ἱρὰ ἐκφήνασαν Μιλτιάδῃ .
Since they now had respite from the siege, they sent messengers to Delphi to ask if they should put the under-priestess to death for guiding their enemies to the capture of her native country, and for revealing to Miltiades the rites that no male should know.


6.135.3
6996
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη οὐκ ἔα , φᾶσα οὐ Τιμοῦν εἶναι τὴν αἰτίην τούτων , ἀλλὰ δεῖν γὰρ Μιλτιάδεα τελευτᾶν μὴ εὖ , φανῆναί οἱ τῶν κακῶν κατηγεμόνα .
But the Pythian priestess forbade them, saying that Timo was not responsible: Miltiades was doomed to make a bad end, and an apparition had led him in these evils.


6.136.1
6997
παρίοισι μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἡ Πυθίη ἔχρησε ·
Such was the priestess' reply to the Parians.


6.136.1
6998
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ἐκ Πάρου Μιλτιάδεα ἀπονοστήσαντα ἔσχον ἐν στόμασι οἵ τε ἄλλοι καὶ μάλιστα Ξάνθιππος ὁ Ἀρίφρονος , ὃς θανάτου ὑπαγαγὼν ὑπὸ τὸν δῆμον Μιλτιάδεα ἐδίωκε τῆς Ἀθηναίων ἀπάτης εἵνεκεν .
The Athenians had much to say about Miltiades on his return from Paros, especially Xanthippus son of Ariphron, who prosecuted Miltiades before the people for deceiving the Athenians and called for the death penalty.


6.136.2
6999
Μιλτιάδης δὲ αὐτὸς μὲν παρεὼν οὐκ ἀπελογέετο ·
Miltiades was present but could not speak in his own defense, since his thigh was festering;


6.136.2
7000
ἦν γὰρ ἀδύνατος ὥστε σηπομένου τοῦ μηροῦ ·
he was laid before the court on a couch, and his friends spoke for him, often mentioning the fight at Marathon and the conquest of Lemnos:


6.136.2
7001
προκειμένου δὲ αὐτοῦ ἐν κλίνῃ ὑπεραπελογέοντο οἱ φίλοι , τῆς μάχης τε τῆς ἐν Μαραθῶνι γενομένης πολλὰ ἐπιμεμνημένοι καὶ τὴν Λήμνου αἵρεσιν , ὡς ἑλὼν Λῆμνόν τε καὶ τισάμενος τοὺς Πελασγοὺς παρέδωκε Ἀθηναίοισι .
how Miltiades had punished the Pelasgians and taken Lemnos, delivering it to the Athenians.


6.136.3
7002
προσγενομένου δὲ τοῦ δήμου αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν ἀπόλυσιν τοῦ θανάτου , ζημιώσαντος δὲ κατὰ τὴν ἀδικίην πεντήκοντα ταλάντοισι , Μιλτιάδης μὲν μετὰ ταῦτα σφακελίσαντός τε τοῦ μηροῦ καὶ σαπέντος τελευτᾷ , τὰ δὲ πεντήκοντα τάλαντα ἐξέτισε ὁ παῖς αὐτοῦ Κίμων .
The people took his side as far as not condemning him to death, but they fined him fifty talents for his wrongdoing. Miltiades later died of gangrene and rot in his thigh, and the fifty talents were paid by his son Cimon.


6.137.1
7003
Λῆμνον δὲ Μιλτιάδης ὁ Κίμωνος ὧδε ἔσχε .
Miltiades son of Cimon took possession of Lemnos in this way:


6.137.1
7004
Πελασγοὶ ἐπείτε ἐκ τῆς Ἀττικῆς ὑπὸ Ἀθηναίων ἐξεβλήθησαν , εἴτε ὦν δὴ δικαίως εἴτε ἀδίκως ·
When the Pelasgians were driven out of Attica by the Athenians, whether justly or unjustly I cannot say, beyond what is told;


6.137.1
7005
τοῦτο γὰρ οὐκ ἔχω φράσαι , πλὴν τὰ λεγόμενα , ὅτι Ἑκαταῖος μὲν ὁ Ἡγησάνδρου ἔφησε ἐν τοῖσι λόγοισι λέγων ἀδίκως ·
namely, that Hecataeus the son of Hegesandrus declares in his history that the act was unjust;


6.137.2
7006
ἐπείτε γὰρ ἰδεῖν τοὺς Ἀθηναίους τὴν χώρην , τὴν σφίσι αὐτοῖσι ὑπὸ τὸν Ὑμησσὸν ἐοῦσαν ἔδοσαν Πελασγοῖσι οἰκῆσαι μισθὸν τοῦ τείχεος τοῦ περὶ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν κοτὲ ἐληλαμένου , ταύτην ὡς ἰδεῖν τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ἐξεργασμένην εὖ , τὴν πρότερον εἶναι κακήν τε καὶ τοῦ μηδενὸς ἀξίην , λαβεῖν φθόνον τε καὶ ἵμερον τῆς γῆς , καὶ οὕτω ἐξελαύνειν αὐτοὺς οὐδεμίαν ἄλλην πρόφασιν προϊσχομένους τοὺς Ἀθηναίους .
for when the Athenians saw the land under  Hymettus, formerly theirs, which they had given to the Pelasgians as a dwelling-place in reward for the wall that had once been built around the acropolis — when the Athenians saw how well this place was tilled which previously had been bad and worthless, they were envious and coveted the land, and so drove the Pelasgians out on this and no other pretext.


6.137.2
7007
ὡς δὲ αὐτοὶ Ἀθηναῖοι λέγουσι , δικαίως ἐξελάσαι .
But the Athenians themselves say that their reason for expelling the Pelasgians was just.


6.137.3
7008
κατοικημένους γὰρ τοὺς Πελασγοὺς ὑπὸ τῷ Ὑμησσῷ , ἐνθεῦτεν ὁρμωμένους ἀδικέειν τάδε .
The Pelasgians set out from their settlement at the foot of Hymettus and wronged the Athenians in this way:


6.137.3
7009
φοιτᾶν γὰρ αἰεὶ τὰς σφετέρας θυγατέρας τε καὶ τοὺς παῖδας ἐπ’ ὕδωρ ἐπὶ τὴν Ἐννεάκρουνον ·
For their sons and daughters used to go to the Nine Wells for water;


6.137.3
7010
οὐ γὰρ εἶναι τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον σφίσι κω οὐδὲ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι Ἕλλησι οἰκέτας ·
For neither the Athenians nor any other Hellenes had servants yet at that time,


6.137.3
7011
ὅκως δὲ ἔλθοιεν αὗται , τοὺς Πελασγοὺς ὑπὸ ὕβριός τε καὶ ὀλιγωρίης βιᾶσθαι σφέας .
and whenever they came, the Pelasgians maltreated them out of mere arrogance and pride.


6.137.3
7012
καὶ ταῦτα μέντοι σφι οὐκ ἀποχρᾶν ποιέειν , ἀλλὰ τέλος καὶ ἐπιβουλεύοντας ἐπιχείρησιν φανῆναι ἐπ’ αὐτοφώρῳ .
And this was not enough for them; finally they were caught in the act of planning to attack Athens.


6.137.4
7013
ἑωυτοὺς δὲ γενέσθαι τοσούτῳ ἐκείνων ἄνδρας ἀμείνονας , ὅσῳ , παρεὸν ἑωυτοῖσι ἀποκτεῖναι τοὺς Πελασγούς , ἐπεί σφεας ἔλαβον ἐπιβουλεύοντας , οὐκ ἐθελῆσαι , ἀλλά σφι προειπεῖν ἐκ τῆς γῆς ἐξιέναι .
The Athenians were much better men than the Pelasgians, since when they could have killed them, caught plotting as they were, they would not so do, but ordered them out of the country.


6.137.4
7014
τοὺς δὲ οὕτω δὴ ἐκχωρήσαντας ἄλλα τε σχεῖν χωρία καὶ δὴ καὶ Λῆμνον .
The Pelasgians departed and took possession of Lemnos, besides other places.


6.137.4
7015
ἐκεῖνα μὲν δὴ Ἑκαταῖος ἔλεξε , ταῦτα δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι λέγουσι .
This is the Athenian story; the other is told by Hecataeus.


6.138.1
7016
οἱ δὲ Πελασγοὶ οὗτοι Λῆμνον τότε νεμόμενοι καὶ βουλόμενοι τοὺς Ἀθηναίους τιμωρήσασθαι , εὖ τε ἐξεπιστάμενοι τὰς Ἀθηναίων ὁρτάς , πεντηκοντέρους κτησάμενοι ἐλόχησαν Ἀρτέμιδι ἐν Βραυρῶνι ἀγούσας ὁρτὴν τὰς τῶν Ἀθηναίων γυναῖκας , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ἁρπάσαντες τουτέων πολλὰς οἴχοντο ἀποπλέοντες , καί σφεας ἐς Λῆμνον ἀγαγόντες παλλακὰς εἶχον .
These Pelasgians dwelt at that time in  Lemnos and desired vengeance on the Athenians. Since they well knew the time of the Athenian festivals, they acquired fifty-oared ships and set an ambush for the Athenian women celebrating the festival of Artemis at  Brauron. They seized many of the women, then sailed away with them and brought them to  Lemnos to be their concubines.


6.138.2
7017
ὡς δὲ τέκνων αὗται αἱ γυναῖκες ὑπεπλήσθησαν , γλῶσσάν τε τὴν Ἀττικὴν καὶ τρόπους τοὺς Ἀθηναίων ἐδίδασκον τοὺς παῖδας .
These women bore more and more children, and they taught their sons the speech of Attica and Athenian manners.


6.138.2
7018
οἳ δὲ οὔτε συμμίσγεσθαι τοῖσι ἐκ τῶν Πελασγίδων γυναικῶν παισὶ ἤθελον , εἴ τε τύπτοιτό τις αὐτῶν τινός , ἐβοήθεόν τε πάντες καὶ ἐτιμώρεον ἀλλήλοισι ·
These boys would not mix with the sons of the Pelasgian women; if one of them was beaten by one of the others, they would all run to his aid and help each other;


6.138.2
7019
καὶ δὴ καὶ ἄρχειν τε τῶν παίδων οἱ παῖδες ἐδικαίευν καὶ πολλῷ ἐπεκράτεον .
these boys even claimed to rule the others, and were much stronger.


6.138.3
7020
μαθόντες δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Πελασγοὶ ἑωυτοῖσι λόγους ἐδίδοσαν ·
When the Pelasgians perceived this, they took counsel together;


6.138.3
7021
καί σφι βουλευομένοισι δεινόν τι ἐσέδυνε , εἰ δὴ διαγινώσκοιεν σφίσι τε βοηθέειν οἱ παῖδες πρὸς τῶν κουριδιέων γυναικῶν τοὺς παῖδας καὶ τούτων αὐτίκα ἄρχειν πειρῴατο , τί δὴ ἀνδρωθέντες δῆθεν ποιήσουσι .
it troubled them much in their deliberations to think what the boys would do when they grew to manhood, if they were resolved to help each other against the sons of the lawful wives and attempted to rule them already.


6.138.4
7022
ἐνθαῦτα ἔδοξέ σφι κτείνειν τοὺς παῖδας τοὺς ἐκ τῶν Ἀττικέων γυναικῶν .
Thereupon the Pelasgians resolved to kill the sons of the Attic women;


6.138.4
7023
ποιεῦσι δὴ ταῦτα , προσαπολλύουσι δὲ σφέων καὶ τὰς μητέρας .
they did this, and then killed the boys' mothers also.


6.138.4
7024
ἀπὸ τούτου δὲ τοῦ ἔργου καὶ τοῦ προτέρου τούτων , τὸ ἐργάσαντο αἱ γυναῖκες τοὺς ἅμα Θόαντι ἄνδρας σφετέρους ἀποκτείνασαι , νενόμισται ἀνὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα τὰ σχέτλια ἔργα πάντα Λήμνια καλέεσθαι .
From this deed and the earlier one which was done by the women when they killed their own husbands who were Thoas' companions, a “Lemnian crime” has been a proverb in Hellas for any deed of cruelty.


6.139.1
7025
ἀποκτείνασι δὲ τοῖσι Πελασγοῖσι τοὺς σφετέρους παῖδάς τε καὶ γυναῖκας οὔτε γῆ καρπὸν ἔφερε οὔτε γυναῖκές τε καὶ ποῖμναι ὁμοίως ἔτικτον καὶ πρὸ τοῦ .
But when the Pelasgians had murdered their own sons and women, their land brought forth no fruit, nor did their wives and their flocks and herds bear offspring as before.


6.139.1
7026
πιεζόμενοι δὲ λιμῷ καὶ ἀπαιδίῃ ἐς Δελφοὺς ἔπεμπον λύσιν τινὰ αἰτησόμενοι τῶν παρεόντων κακῶν .
Crushed by hunger and childlessness, they sent to Delphi to ask for some release from their present ills.


6.139.2
7027
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη σφέας ἐκέλευε Ἀθηναίοισι δίκας διδόναι ταύτας τὰς ἂν αὐτοὶ Ἀθηναῖοι δικάσωσι .
The Pythian priestess ordered them to pay the Athenians whatever penalty the Athenians themselves judged.


6.139.2
7028
ἦλθόν τε δὴ ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας οἱ Πελασγοὶ καὶ δίκας ἐπαγγέλλοντο βουλόμενοι διδόναι παντὸς τοῦ ἀδικήματος .
The Pelasgians went to Athens and offered to pay the penalty for all their wrongdoing.


6.139.3
7029
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ἐν τῷ πρυτανηίῳ κλίνην στρώσαντες ὡς εἶχον κάλλιστα καὶ τράπεζαν ἐπιπλέην ἀγαθῶν πάντων παραθέντες , ἐκέλευον τοὺς Πελασγοὺς τὴν χώρην σφίσι παραδιδόναι οὕτω ἔχουσαν .
The Athenians set in their town-hall a couch adorned as finely as possible, and placed beside it a table covered with all manner of good things, then ordered the Pelasgians to deliver their land to them in the same condition.


6.139.4
7030
οἱ δὲ Πελασγοὶ ὑπολαβόντες εἶπαν " ἐπεὰν βορέῃ ἀνέμῳ αὐτημερὸν ἐξανύσῃ νηῦς ἐκ τῆς ὑμετέρης ἐς τὴν ἡμετέρην , τότε παραδώσομεν , " ἐπιστάμενοι τοῦτο εἶναι ἀδύνατον γενέσθαι .
The Pelasgians answered, “We will deliver it when a ship with a north wind accomplishes the voyage from your country to ours in one day”;


6.139.4
7031
ἡ γὰρ Ἀττικὴ πρὸς νότον κεῖται πολλὸν τῆς Λήμνου .
they supposed that this was impossible, since Attica is far to the south of Lemnos.


6.140.1
7032
τότε μὲν τοιαῦτα ·
At the time that was all.


6.140.1
7033
ἔτεσι δὲ κάρτα πολλοῖσι ὕστερον τούτων , ὡς ἡ Χερσόνησος ἡ ἐπ’ Ἑλλησπόντῳ ἐγένετο ὑπὸ Ἀθηναίοισι , Μιλτιάδης ὁ Κίμωνος ἐτησιέων ἀνέμων κατεστηκότων νηὶ κατανύσας ἐξ Ἐλαιοῦντος τοῦ ἐν Χερσονήσῳ ἐς Λῆμνον προηγόρευε ἐξιέναι ἐκ τῆς νήσου τοῖσι Πελασγοῖσι , ἀναμιμνήσκων σφέας τὸ χρηστήριον , τὸ οὐδαμὰ ἤλπισαν σφίσι οἱ Πελασγοὶ ἐπιτελέεσθαι .
But a great many years later, when the Chersonese on the Hellespont was made subject to Athens, Miltiades son of Cimon accomplished the voyage from Elaeus on the Chersonese to Lemnos with the Etesian winds then constantly blowing; he proclaimed that the Pelasgians must leave their island, reminding them of the oracle which the Pelasgians thought would never be fulfilled.


6.140.2
7034
Ἡφαιστιέες μέν νυν ἐπείθοντο , Μυριναῖοι δὲ οὐ συγγινωσκόμενοι εἶναι τὴν Χερσόνησον Ἀττικὴν ἐπολιορκέοντο , ἐς ὃ καὶ οὗτοι παρέστησαν .
The Hephaestians obeyed, but the Myrinaeans would not agree that the Chersonese was Attica and were besieged, until they too submitted.


6.140.2
7035
οὕτω δὴ τὴν Λῆμνον ἔσχον Ἀθηναῖοί τε καὶ Μιλτιάδης .
Thus did Miltiades and the Athenians take possession of Lemnos.




7.1.1
7036
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀγγελίη ἀπίκετο περὶ τῆς μάχης τῆς ἐν Μαραθῶνι γενομένης παρὰ βασιλέα Δαρεῖον τὸν Ὑστάσπεος , καὶ πρὶν μεγάλως κεχαραγμένον τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι διὰ τὴν ἐς Σάρδις ἐσβολήν , καὶ δὴ καὶ τότε πολλῷ τε δεινότερα ἐποίεε καὶ μᾶλλον ὅρμητο στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
When the message concerning the fight at Marathon came to Darius son of Hystaspes, already greatly angry against the Athenians for their attack upon  Sardis, he was now much more angry and eager to send an expedition against  Hellas.


7.1.2
7037
καὶ αὐτίκα μὲν ἐπηγγέλλετο πέμπων ἀγγέλους κατὰ πόλις ἑτοιμάζειν στρατιήν , πολλῷ πλέω ἐπιτάσσων ἑκάστοισι ἢ πρότερον παρέχειν , καὶ νέας τε καὶ ἵππους καὶ σῖτον καὶ πλοῖα .
Immediately he sent messengers to all the cities and commanded them to equip an army, instructing each to provide many more ships and horses and provisions and transport vessels than they had before.


7.1.2
7038
τούτων δὲ περιαγγελλομένων ἡ Ἀσίη ἐδονέετο ἐπὶ τρία ἔτεα , καταλεγομένων τε τῶν ἀρίστων ὡς ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα στρατευομένων καὶ παρασκευαζομένων .
Asia was in commotion with these messages for three years, as the best men were enrolled for service against Hellas and made preparations.


7.1.3
7039
τετάρτῳ δὲ ἔτεϊ Αἰγύπτιοι ὑπὸ Καμβύσεω δουλωθέντες ἀπέστησαν ἀπὸ Περσέων .
In the fourth year the Egyptians, whom Cambyses had enslaved, revolted from the Persians;


7.1.3
7040
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ καὶ μᾶλλον ὅρμητο καὶ ἐπ’ ἀμφοτέρους στρατεύεσθαι .
thereupon Darius was even more eager to send expeditions against both.


7.2.1
7041
στελλομένου δὲ Δαρείου ἐπ’ Αἴγυπτον καὶ Ἀθήνας , τῶν παίδων αὐτοῦ στάσις ἐγένετο μεγάλη περὶ τῆς ἡγεμονίης , ὡς δεῖ μιν ἀποδέξαντα βασιλέα κατὰ τὸν Περσέων νόμον οὕτω στρατεύεσθαι .
But while Darius was making preparations against  Egypt and  Athens, a great quarrel arose among his sons concerning the chief power in the land. They held that before his army marched he must declare an heir to the kingship according to Persian law.


7.2.2
7042
ἦσαν γὰρ Δαρείῳ καὶ πρότερον ἢ βασιλεῦσαι γεγονότες τρεῖς παῖδες ἐκ τῆς προτέρης γυναικός , Γοβρύεω θυγατρός , καὶ βασιλεύσαντι ἐξ Ἀτόσσης τῆς Κύρου ἕτεροι τέσσερες .
Three sons had been born to Darius before he became king by his first wife, the daughter of Gobryas, and four more after he became king by Atossa daughter of Cyrus.


7.2.2
7043
τῶν μὲν δὴ προτέρων ἐπρέσβευε Ἀρτοβαζάνης , τῶν δὲ ἐπιγενομένων Ξέρξης .
Artobazanes was the oldest of the earlier sons, Xerxes of the later;


7.2.2
7044
ἐόντες δὲ μητρὸς οὐ τῆς αὐτῆς ἐστασίαζον , ὁ μὲν Ἀρτοβαζάνης κατότι πρεσβύτατός τε εἴη παντὸς τοῦ γόνου καὶ ὅτι νομιζόμενον εἴη πρὸς πάντων ἀνθρώπων τὸν πρεσβύτατον τὴν ἀρχὴν ἔχειν , Ξέρξης δὲ ὡς Ἀτόσσης τε παῖς εἴη τῆς Κύρου θυγατρὸς καὶ ὅτι Κῦρος εἴη ὁ κτησάμενος τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι τὴν ἐλευθερίην .
therefore it was neither reasonable nor just that anyone should have the royal privilege before him. At Sparta too (advised Demaratus) it was customary that if sons were born before their father became king, and another son born later when the father was king, the succession to the kingship belongs to the later-born.


7.3.1
7045
Δαρείου δὲ οὐκ ἀποδεικνυμένου κω γνώμην , ἐτύγχανε κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ τούτοισι καὶ Δημάρητος ὁ Ἀρίστωνος ἀναβεβηκὼς ἐς Σοῦσα , ἐστερημένος τε τῆς ἐν Σπάρτῃ βασιληίης καὶ φυγὴν ἐπιβαλὼν ἑωυτῷ ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος .
While Darius delayed making his decision, it chanced that at this time Demaratus son of Ariston had come up to  Susa, in voluntary exile from Lacedaemonia after he had lost the kingship of  Sparta.


7.3.2
7046
οὗτος ὡνὴρ πυθόμενος τῶν Δαρείου παίδων τὴν διαφορήν , ἐλθών , ὡς ἡ φάτις μιν ἔχει , Ξέρξῃ συνεβούλευε λέγειν πρὸς τοῖσι ἔλεγε ἔπεσι , ὡς αὐτὸς μὲν γένοιτο Δαρείῳ ἤδη βασιλεύοντι καὶ ἔχοντι τὸ Περσέων κράτος , Ἀρτοβαζάνης δὲ ἔτι ἰδιώτῃ ἐόντι Δαρείῳ ·
Learning of the contention between the sons of Darius, this man, as the story goes, came and advised Xerxes to add this to what he said: that he had been born when Darius was already king and ruler of  Persia, but Artobazanes when Darius was yet a subject;


7.3.3
7047
οὔκων οὔτε οἰκὸς εἴη οὔτε δίκαιον ἄλλον τινὰ τὸ γέρας ἔχειν πρὸ ἑωυτοῦ ·
therefore it was neither reasonable nor just that anyone should have the royal privilege before him.


7.3.3
7048
ἐπεί γε καὶ ἐν Σπάρτῃ ἔφη ὁ Δημάρητος ὑποτιθέμενος οὕτω νομίζεσθαι , ἢν οἳ μὲν προγεγονότες ἔωσι πρὶν ἢ τὸν πατέρα σφέων βασιλεῦσαι , ὁ δὲ βασιλεύοντι ὀψίγονος ἐπιγένηται , τοῦ ἐπιγενομένου τὴν ἔκδεξιν τῆς βασιληίης γίνεσθαι .
At Sparta too (advised Demaratus) it was customary that if sons were born before their father became king, and another son born later when the father was king, the succession to the kingship belongs to the later-born.


7.3.4
7049
χρησαμένου δὲ Ξέρξεω τῇ Δημαρήτου ὑποθήκῃ , γνοὺς ὁ Δαρεῖος ὡς λέγοι δίκαια βασιλέα μιν ἀπέδεξε .
Xerxes followed Demaratus' advice, and Darius judged his plea to be just and declared him king.


7.3.4
7050
δοκέειν δέ μοι , καὶ ἄνευ ταύτης τῆς ὑποθήκης βασιλεῦσαι ἂν Ξέρξης ·
But to my thinking Xerxes would have been made king even without this advice,


7.3.4
7051
ἡ γὰρ Ἄτοσσα εἶχε τὸ πᾶν κράτος .
for Atossa held complete sway.


7.4.1
7052
ἀποδέξας δὲ βασιλέα Πέρσῃσι Ξέρξεα Δαρεῖος ὁρμᾶτο στρατεύεσθαι .
After declaring Xerxes king, Darius was intent on his expedition.


7.4.1
7053
ἀλλὰ γὰρ μετὰ ταῦτά τε καὶ Αἰγύπτου ἀπόστασιν τῷ ὑστέρῳ ἔτεϊ παρασκευαζόμενον συνήνεικε αὐτὸν Δαρεῖον , βασιλεύσαντα τὰ πάντα ἕξ τε καὶ τριήκοντα ἔτεα , ἀποθανεῖν , οὐδέ οἱ ἐξεγένετο οὔτε τοὺς ἀπεστεῶτας Αἰγυπτίους οὔτε Ἀθηναίους τιμωρήσασθαι .
But in the year after this and the revolt of Egypt,  death came upon him in the midst of his preparations, after a reign of six and thirty years in all,  and it was not granted to him to punish either the revolted Egyptians or the Athenians.


7.5.1
7054
ἀποθανόντος δὲ Δαρείου ἡ βασιληίη ἀνεχώρησε ἐς τὸν παῖδα τὸν ἐκείνου Ξέρξην .
After Darius' death, the royal power descended to his son Xerxes.


7.5.1
7055
ὁ τοίνυν Ξέρξης ἐπὶ μὲν τὴν Ἑλλάδα οὐδαμῶς πρόθυμος ἦν κατ’ ἀρχὰς στρατεύεσθαι , ἐπὶ δὲ Αἴγυπτον ἐποιέετο στρατιῆς ἄγερσιν .
Now Xerxes was at first by no means eager to march against Hellas; it was against Egypt that he mustered his army.


7.5.1
7056
παρεὼν δὲ καὶ δυνάμενος παρ’ αὐτῷ μέγιστον Περσέων Μαρδόνιος ὁ Γοβρύεω , ὃς ἦν Ξέρξῃ μὲν ἀνεψιὸς Δαρείου δὲ ἀδελφεῆς παῖς , τοιούτου λόγου εἴχετο , λέγων " δέσποτα , οὐκ οἰκός ἐστι Ἀθηναίους ἐργασαμένους πολλὰ δὴ κακὰ Πέρσας μὴ οὐ δοῦναι δίκην τῶν ἐποίησαν .
But Mardonius son of Gobryas, Xerxes' cousin and the son of Darius' sister, was with the king and had more influence with him than any Persian. He argued as follows:


7.5.2
7057
ἀλλ’ εἰ τὸ μὲν νῦν ταῦτα πρήσσοις τά περ ἐν χερσὶ ἔχεις ·
“Master, it is not fitting that the Athenians should go unpunished for their deeds, after all the evil they have done to the Persians.


7.5.2
7058
ἡμερώσας δὲ Αἴγυπτον τὴν ἐξυβρίσασαν στρατηλάτεε ἐπὶ τὰς Ἀθήνας , ἵνα λόγος τέ σε ἔχῃ πρὸς ἀνθρώπων ἀγαθός , καί τις ὕστερον φυλάσσηται ἐπὶ γῆν τὴν σὴν στρατεύεσθαι " .
For now you should do what you have in hand; then, when you have tamed the insolence of Egypt, lead your armies against Athens, so that you may have fair fame among men, and others may beware of invading your realm in the future.”


7.5.3
7059
οὗτος μέν οἱ ὁ λόγος ἦν τιμωρός ·
This argument was for vengeance,


7.5.3
7060
τοῦδε δὲ τοῦ λόγου παρενθήκην ποιεέσκετο τήνδε , ὡς ἡ Εὐρώπη περικαλλὴς εἴη χώρη , καὶ δένδρεα παντοῖα φέρει τὰ ἥμερα , ἀρετήν τε ἄκρη , βασιλέι τε μούνῳ θνητῶν ἀξίη ἐκτῆσθαι .
but he kept adding that Europe was an extremely beautiful land, one that bore all kinds of orchard trees, a land of highest excellence, worthy of no mortal master but the king.


7.6.1
7061
ταῦτα ἔλεγε οἷα νεωτέρων ἔργων ἐπιθυμητὴς ἐὼν καὶ θέλων αὐτὸς τῆς Ἑλλάδος ὕπαρχος εἶναι .
He said this because he desired adventures and wanted to be governor of Hellas.


7.6.1
7062
χρόνῳ δὲ κατεργάσατό τε καὶ ἀνέπεισε ὥστε ποιέειν ταῦτα Ξέρξην ·
Finally he worked on Xerxes and persuaded him to do this.


7.6.1
7063
συνέλαβε γὰρ καὶ ἄλλα οἱ σύμμαχα γενόμενα ἐς τὸ πείθεσθαι Ξέρξην .
Other things happened that helped him to persuade Xerxes.


7.6.2
7064
τοῦτο μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς Θεσσαλίης παρὰ τῶν Ἀλευαδέων ἀπιγμένοι ἄγγελοι ἐπεκαλέοντο βασιλέα πᾶσαν προθυμίην παρεχόμενοι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ·
Messengers came from Thessaly from the Aleuadae (who were princes of Thessaly) and invited the king into Hellas with all earnestness;


7.6.2
7065
οἱ δὲ Ἀλευάδαι οὗτοι ἦσαν Θεσσαλίης βασιλέες .
the Pisistratidae who had come up to Susa used the same pleas as the Aleuadae,


7.6.2
7066
τοῦτο δὲ Πεισιστρατιδέων οἱ ἀναβεβηκότες ἐς Σοῦσα , τῶν τε αὐτῶν λόγων ἐχόμενοι τῶν καὶ οἱ Ἀλευάδαι , καὶ δή τι πρὸς τούτοισι ἔτι πλέον προσωρέγοντό οἱ ·
offering Xerxes even more than they did.


7.6.3
7067
ἔχοντες Ὀνομάκριτον ἄνδρα Ἀθηναῖον , χρησμολόγον τε καὶ διαθέτην χρησμῶν τῶν Μουσαίου , ἀναβεβήκεσαν , τὴν ἔχθρην προκαταλυσάμενοι .
They had come up to Sardis with Onomacritus, an Athenian diviner who had set in order the oracles of Musaeus. They had reconciled their previous hostility with him;


7.6.3
7068
ἐξηλάσθη γὰρ ὑπὸ Ἱππάρχου τοῦ Πεισιστράτου ὁ Ὀνομάκριτος ἐξ Ἀθηνέων , ἐπ’ αὐτοφώρῳ ἁλοὺς ὑπὸ Λάσου τοῦ Ἑρμιονέος ἐμποιέων ἐς τὰ Μουσαίου χρησμόν , ὡς αἱ ἐπὶ Λήμνῳ ἐπικείμεναι νῆσοι ἀφανιζοίατο κατὰ τῆς θαλάσσης .
Onomacritus had been banished from Athens by Pisistratus' son Hipparchus, when he was caught by Lasus of Hermione in the act of interpolating into the writings of Musaeus an oracle showing that the islands off Lemnos would disappear into the sea.


7.6.4
7069
διὸ ἐξήλασέ μιν ὁ Ἵππαρχος , πρότερον χρεώμενος τὰ μάλιστα .
Because of this Hipparchus banished him, though they had previously been close friends.


7.6.4
7070
τότε δὲ συναναβὰς ὅκως ἀπίκοιτο ἐς ὄψιν τὴν βασιλέος , λεγόντων τῶν Πεισιστρατιδέων περὶ αὐτοῦ σεμνοὺς λόγους , κατέλεγε τῶν χρησμῶν ·
Now he had arrived at Susa with the Pisistratidae, and whenever he came into the king's presence they used lofty words concerning him


7.6.4
7071
εἰ μέν τι ἐνέοι σφάλμα φέρον τῷ βαρβάρῳ , τῶν μὲν ἔλεγε οὐδέν , ὁ δὲ τὰ εὐτυχέστατα ἐκλεγόμενος ἔλεγε τόν τε Ἑλλήσποντον ὡς ζευχθῆναι χρεὸν εἴη ὑπ’ ἀνδρὸς Πέρσεω , τήν τε ἔλασιν ἐξηγεόμενος .
and he recited from his oracles; all that portended disaster to the Persian he left unspoken, choosing and reciting such prophecies as were most favorable, telling how the Hellespont must be bridged by a man of Persia and describing the expedition.


7.6.5
7072
οὗτός τε δὴ χρησμῳδέων προσεφέρετο καὶ οἵ τε Πεισιστρατίδαι καὶ οἱ Ἀλευάδαι γνώμας ἀποδεικνύμενοι .
So he brought his oracles to bear, while the Pisistratidae and Aleuadae gave their opinions.


7.7.1
7073
ὡς δὲ ἀνεγνώσθη Ξέρξης στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἐνθαῦτα δευτέρῳ μὲν ἔτεϊ μετὰ τὸν θάνατον τὸν Δαρείου πρῶτα στρατηίην ποιέεται ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀπεστεῶτας .
After being persuaded to send an expedition against Hellas, Xerxes first marched against the rebels in the year after Darius' death.


7.7.1
7074
τούτους μέν νυν καταστρεψάμενος καὶ Αἴγυπτον πᾶσαν πολλὸν δουλοτέρην ποιήσας ἢ ἐπὶ Δαρείου ἦν , ἐπιτράπει Ἀχαιμένεϊ ἀδελφεῷ μὲν ἑωυτοῦ , Δαρείου δὲ παιδί .
He subdued them and laid Egypt under a much harder slavery than in the time of Darius, and he handed it over to Achaemenes, his own brother and Darius' son.


7.7.1
7075
Ἀχαιμένεα μέν νυν ἐπιτροπεύοντα Αἰγύπτου χρόνῳ μετέπειτα ἐφόνευσε Ἰνάρως ὁ Ψαμμητίχου ἀνὴρ Λίβυς .
While governing Egypt, this Achaemenes was at a later time slain by a Libyan, Inaros son of Psammetichus.


7.8.1
7076
Ξέρξης δὲ μετὰ Αἰγύπτου ἅλωσιν ὡς ἔμελλε ἐς χεῖρας ἄξεσθαι τὸ στράτευμα τὸ ἐπὶ τὰς Ἀθήνας , σύλλογον ἐπίκητον Περσέων τῶν ἀρίστων ἐποιέετο , ἵνα γνώμας τε πύθηται σφέων καὶ αὐτὸς ἐν πᾶσι εἴπῃ τὰ θέλει .
After the conquest of Egypt, intending now to take in hand the expedition against Athens, Xerxes held a special assembly of the noblest among the Persians, so he could learn their opinions and declare his will before them all.


7.8.1
7077
ὡς δὲ συνελέχθησαν , ἔλεξεν Ξέρξης τάδε .
When they were assembled, Xerxes spoke to them as follows:


7.8A.1
7078
" ἄνδρες Πέρσαι , οὔτ’ αὐτὸς κατηγήσομαι νόμον τόνδε ἐν ὑμῖν τιθείς , παραδεξάμενός τε αὐτῷ χρήσομαι .
“Men of Persia, I am not bringing in and establishing a new custom, but following one that I have inherited.


7.8A.1
7079
ὡς γὰρ ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι τῶν πρεσβυτέρων , οὐδαμά κω ἠτρεμίσαμεν , ἐπείτε παρελάβομεν τὴν ἡγεμονίην τήνδε παρὰ Μήδων , Κύρου κατελόντος Ἀστυάγεα ·
As I learn from our elders, we have never yet remained at peace ever since Cyrus deposed Astyages and we won this sovereignty from the Medes.


7.8A.1
7080
ἀλλὰ θεός τε οὕτω ἄγει καὶ αὐτοῖσι ἡμῖν πολλὰ ἐπέπουσι συμφέρεται ἐπὶ τὸ ἄμεινον .
It is the will of heaven; and we ourselves win advantage by our many enterprises.


7.8A.1
7081
τὰ μέν νυν Κῦρός τε καὶ Καμβύσης πατήρ τε ἐμὸς Δαρεῖος κατεργάσαντο καὶ προσεκτήσαντο ἔθνεα , ἐπισταμένοισι εὖ οὐκ ἄν τις λέγοι .
No one needs to tell you, who already know them well, which nations Cyrus and Cambyses and Darius my father subdued and added to our realm.


7.8A.2
7082
ἐγὼ δὲ ἐπείτε παρέλαβον τὸν θρόνον τοῦτον , ἐφρόντιζον ὅκως μὴ λείψομαι τῶν πρότερον γενομένων ἐν τιμῇ τῇδε μηδὲ ἐλάσσω προσκτήσομαι δύναμιν Πέρσῃσι ·
Ever since I came to this throne, I have considered how I might not fall short of my predecessors in this honor, and not add less power to the Persians;


7.8A.2
7083
φροντίζων δὲ εὑρίσκω ἅμα μὲν κῦδος τε ἡμῖν προσγινόμενον χώρην τε τῆς νῦν ἐκτήμεθα οὐκ ἐλάσσονα οὐδὲ φλαυροτέρην παμφορωτέρην τε , ἅμα δὲ τιμωρίην τε καὶ τίσιν γινομένην .
and my considerations persuade me that we may win not only renown, but a land neither less nor worse, and more fertile, than that which we now possess; and we would also gain vengeance and requital.


7.8A.2
7084
διὸ ὑμέας νῦν ἐγὼ συνέλεξα , ἵνα τὸ νοέω πρήσσειν ὑπερθέωμαι ὑμῖν " ·
For this cause I have now summoned you together, that I may impart to you what I intend to do.


7.8B.1
7085
" μέλλω ζεύξας τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἐλᾶν στρατὸν διὰ τῆς Εὐρώπης ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἵνα Ἀθηναίους τιμωρήσωμαι ὅσα δὴ πεποιήκασι Πέρσας τε καὶ πατέρα τὸν ἐμόν .
It is my intent to bridge the  Hellespont and lead my army through  Europe to  Hellas, so I may punish the Athenians for what they have done to the Persians and to my father.


7.8B.2
7086
ὡρᾶτε μέν νυν καὶ πατέρα τὸν ἐμὸν Δαρεῖον ἰθύοντα στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας τούτους .
You saw that Darius my father was set on making an expedition against these men.


7.8B.2
7087
ἀλλ’ ὃ μὲν τετελεύτηκε καὶ οὐκ ἐξεγένετο αὐτῷ τιμωρήσασθαι ·
But he is dead, and it was not granted him to punish them.


7.8B.2
7088
ἐγὼ δὲ ὑπέρ τε ἐκείνου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Περσέων οὐ πρότερον παύσομαι πρὶν ἢ ἕλω τε καὶ πυρώσω τὰς Ἀθήνας , οἵ γε ἐμὲ καὶ πατέρα τὸν ἐμὸν ὑπῆρξαν ἄδικα ποιεῦντες .
On his behalf and that of all the Persians, I will never rest until I have taken Athens and burnt it, for the unprovoked wrong that its people did to my father and me.


7.8B.3
7089
πρῶτα μὲν ἐς Σάρδις ἐλθόντες , ἅμα Ἀρισταγόρῃ τῷ Μιλησίῳ δούλῳ δὲ ἡμετέρῳ ἀπικόμενοι , ἐνέπρησαν τά τε ἄλσεα καὶ τὰ ἱρά ·
First they came to Sardis with our slave Aristagoras the Milesian and burnt the groves and the temples;


7.8B.3
7090
δεύτερα δὲ ἡμέας οἷα ἔρξαν ἐς τὴν σφετέρην ἀποβάντας , ὅτε Δᾶτίς τε καὶ Ἀρταφρένης ἐστρατήγεον , τὰ ἐπίστασθέ κου πάντες " .
next, how they dealt with us when we landed on their shores, when Datis and Artaphrenes were our generals, I suppose you all know.


7.8C.1
7091
" τούτων μὲν τοίνυν εἵνεκα ἀνάρτημαι ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς στρατεύεσθαι , ἀγαθὰ δὲ ἐν αὐτοῖσι τοσάδε ἀνευρίσκω λογιζόμενος ·
For these reasons I am resolved to send an army against them;


7.8C.1
7092
εἰ τούτους τε καὶ τοὺς τούτοισι πλησιοχώρους καταστρεψόμεθα , οἳ Πέλοπος τοῦ Φρυγὸς νέμονται χώρην , γῆν τὴν Περσίδα ἀποδέξομεν τῷ Διὸς αἰθέρι ὁμουρέουσαν .
and I reckon that we will find the following benefits among them: if we subdue those men, and their neighbors who dwell in the land of Pelops the Phrygian, we will make the borders of Persian territory and of the firmament of heaven be the same.


7.8C.2
7093
οὐ γὰρ δὴ χώρην γε οὐδεμίαν κατόψεται ἥλιος ὅμουρον ἐοῦσαν τῇ ἡμετέρῃ , ἀλλὰ σφέας πάσας ἐγὼ ἅμα ὑμῖν χώρην θήσω , διὰ πάσης διεξελθὼν τῆς Εὐρώπης .
No land that the sun beholds will border ours, but I will make all into one country, when I have passed over the whole of  Europe.


7.8C.3
7094
πυνθάνομαι γὰρ ὧδε ἔχειν , οὔτε τινὰ πόλιν ἀνδρῶν οὐδεμίαν οὔτε ἔθνος οὐδὲν ἀνθρώπων ὑπολείπεσθαι , τὸ ἡμῖν οἷόν τε ἔσται ἐλθεῖν ἐς μάχην , τούτων τῶν κατέλεξα ὑπεξαραιρημένων .
I learn that this is the situation: no city of men or any human nation which is able to meet us in battle will be left, if those of whom I speak are taken out of our way.


7.8C.3
7095
οὕτω οἵ τε ἡμῖν αἴτιοι ἕξουσι δούλιον ζυγὸν οἵ τε ἀναίτιοι " .
Thus the guilty and the innocent will alike bear the yoke of slavery.


7.8D.1
7096
" ὑμεῖς δ’ ἄν μοι τάδε ποιέοντες χαρίζοισθε ·
This is how you would best please me:


7.8D.1
7097
ἐπεὰν ὑμῖν σημήνω τὸν χρόνον ἐς τὸν ἥκειν δεῖ , προθύμως πάντα τινὰ ὑμέων χρήσει παρεῖναι .
when I declare the time for your coming, every one of you must eagerly appear;


7.8D.1
7098
ὃς ἂν δὲ ἔχων ἥκῃ παρεσκευασμένον στρατὸν κάλλιστα , δώσω οἱ δῶρα τὰ τιμιώτατα νομίζεται εἶναι ἐν ἡμετέρου .
and whoever comes with his army best equipped will receive from me such gifts as are reckoned most precious among us.


7.8D.2
7099
ποιητέα μέν νυν ταῦτα ἐστὶ οὕτω ·
Thus it must be done;


7.8D.2
7100
ἵνα δὲ μὴ ἰδιοβουλεύειν ὑμῖν δοκέω , τίθημι τὸ πρῆγμα ἐς μέσον , γνώμην κελεύων ὑμέων τὸν βουλόμενον ἀποφαίνεσθαι " .
but so that I not seem to you to have my own way, I lay the matter before you all, and bid whoever wishes to declare his opinion.”


7.8D.2
7101
ταῦτα εἴπας ἐπαύετο .
So spoke Xerxes and ceased.


7.9.1
7102
μετ’ αὐτὸν δὲ Μαρδόνιος ἔλεγε " ὦ δέσποτα , οὐ μοῦνον εἶς τῶν γενομένων Περσέων ἄριστος ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἐσομένων , ὃς τά τε ἄλλα λέγων ἐπίκεο ἄριστα καὶ ἀληθέστατα , καὶ Ἴωνας τοὺς ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ κατοικημένους οὐκ ἐάσεις καταγελάσαι ἡμῖν ἐόντας ἀναξίους .
After him Mardonius said: “Master, you surpass not only all Persians that have been but also all that shall be; besides having dealt excellently and truly with all other matters, you will not suffer the Ionians who dwell in  Europe to laugh at us, which they have no right to do.


7.9.2
7103
καὶ γὰρ δεινὸν ἂν εἴη πρῆγμα , εἰ Σάκας μὲν καὶ Ἰνδοὺς καὶ Αἰθίοπάς τε καὶ Ἀσσυρίους ἄλλα τε ἔθνεα πολλὰ καὶ μεγάλα ἀδικήσαντα Πέρσας οὐδέν , ἀλλὰ δύναμιν προσκτᾶσθαι βουλόμενοι , καταστρεψάμενοι δούλους ἔχομεν , Ἕλληνας δὲ ὑπάρξαντας ἀδικίης οὐ τιμωρησόμεθα " ·
It would be strange indeed if we who have subdued and made slaves of Sacae and Indians and Ethiopians and Assyrians and many other great nations, for no wrong done to the Persians but of mere desire to add to our power, will not take vengeance on the Greeks for unprovoked wrongs.


7.9A.1
7104
" τί δείσαντες ;
What have we to fear from them?


7.9A.1
7105
κοίην πλήθεος συστροφήν ;
Have they a massive population or abundance of wealth?


7.9A.1
7106
κοίην δὲ χρημάτων δύναμιν ;
Their manner of fighting we know,


7.9A.1
7107
τῶν ἐπιστάμεθα μὲν τὴν μάχην , ἐπιστάμεθα δὲ τὴν δύναμιν ἐοῦσαν ἀσθενέα ·
and we know how weak their power is; we have conquered and hold their sons,


7.9A.1
7108
ἔχομεν δὲ αὐτῶν παῖδας καταστρεψάμενοι , τούτους οἳ ἐν τῇ ἡμετέρῃ κατοικημένοι Ἴωνές τε καὶ Αἰολέες καὶ Δωριέες καλέονται .
those who dwell in our land and are called Ionians and Aeolians and Dorians.


7.9A.2
7109
ἐπειρήθην δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ἤδη ἐπελαύνων ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας τούτους ὑπὸ πατρὸς τοῦ σοῦ κελευσθείς , καί μοι μέχρι Μακεδονίης ἐλάσαντι καὶ ὀλίγον ἀπολιπόντι ἐς αὐτὰς Ἀθήνας ἀπικέσθαι οὐδεὶς ἠντιώθη ἐς μάχην " .
I myself have made trial of these men, when by your father's command I marched against them. I marched as far as  Macedonia and almost to  Athens itself, yet none came out to meet me in battle.


7.9B.1
7110
" καίτοι γε ἐώθασι Ἕλληνες , ὡς πυνθάνομαι , ἀβουλότατα πολέμους ἵστασθαι ὑπό τε ἀγνωμοσύνης καὶ σκαιότητος .
Yet the Greeks are accustomed to wage wars, as I learn,


7.9B.1
7111
ἐπεὰν γὰρ ἀλλήλοισι πόλεμον προείπωσι , ἐξευρόντες τὸ κάλλιστον χωρίον καὶ λειότατον , ἐς τοῦτο κατιόντες μάχονται , ὥστε σὺν κακῷ μεγάλῳ οἱ νικῶντες ἀπαλλάσσονται ·
and they do it most senselessly in their wrongheadedness and folly. When they have declared war against each other, they come down to the fairest and most level ground that they can find and fight there,so that the victors come off with great harm;


7.9B.1
7112
περὶ δὲ τῶν ἑσσουμένων οὐδὲ λέγω ἀρχήν ·
of the vanquished I say not so much as a word,


7.9B.1
7113
ἐξώλεες γὰρ δὴ γίνονται ·
for they are utterly destroyed.


7.9B.2
7114
τοὺς χρῆν ἐόντας ὁμογλώσσους κήρυξί τε διαχρεωμένους καὶ ἀγγέλοισι καταλαμβάνειν τὰς διαφορὰς καὶ παντὶ μᾶλλον ἢ μάχῃσι ·
Since they speak the same language, they should end their disputes by means of heralds or messengers, or by any way rather than fighting;


7.9B.2
7115
εἰ δὲ πάντως ἔδεε πολεμέειν πρὸς ἀλλήλους , ἐξευρίσκειν χρῆν τῇ ἑκάτεροι εἰσὶ δυσχειρωτότατοι καὶ ταύτῃ πειρᾶν .
if they must make war upon each other, they should each discover where they are in the strongest position and make the attempt there.


7.9B.2
7116
τρόπῳ τοίνυν οὐ χρηστῷ Ἕλληνες διαχρεώμενοι , ἐμέο ἐλάσαντος μέχρι Μακεδονίης γῆς , οὐκ ἦλθον ἐς τούτου λόγον ὥστε μάχεσθαι " .
The Greek custom, then, is not good; and when I marched as far as the land of Macedonia, it had not come into their minds to fight.


7.9C.1
7117
" σοὶ δὲ δὴ μέλλει τίς ὦ βασιλεῦ ἀντιώσεσθαι πόλεμον προφέρων , ἄγοντι καὶ πλῆθος τὸ ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης καὶ νέας τὰς ἁπάσας ;
But against you, O king, who shall make war? You will bring the multitudes of Asia, and all your ships.


7.9C.1
7118
ὡς μὲν ἐγὼ δοκέω , οὐκ ἐς τοῦτο θράσεος ἀνήκει τὰ Ἑλλήνων πρήγματα ·
I think there is not so much boldness in Hellas as that;


7.9C.1
7119
εἰ δὲ ἄρα ἔγωγε ψευσθείην γνώμῃ καὶ ἐκεῖνοι ἐπαερθέντες ἀβουλίῃ ἔλθοιεν ἡμῖν ἐς μάχην , μάθοιεν ἂν ὡς εἰμὲν ἀνθρώπων ἄριστοι τὰ πολέμια .
but if time should show me wrong in my judgment, and those men prove foolhardy enough to do battle with us, they would be taught that we are the greatest warriors on earth.


7.9C.1
7120
ἔστω δ’ ὦν μηδὲν ἀπείρητον ·
Let us leave nothing untried;


7.9C.1
7121
αὐτόματον γὰρ οὐδέν , ἀλλ’ ἀπὸ πείρης πάντα ἀνθρώποισι φιλέει γίνεσθαι " .
for nothing happens by itself, and all men's gains are the fruit of adventure.”


7.10.1
7122
Μαρδόνιος μὲν τοσαῦτα ἐπιλεήνας τὴν Ξέρξεω γνώμην ἐπέπαυτο ·
Thus Mardonius smoothed Xerxes' resolution and stopped.


7.10.1
7123
σιωπώντων δὲ τῶν ἄλλων Περσέων καὶ οὐ τολμώντων γνώμην ἀποδείκνυσθαι ἀντίην τῇ προκειμένῃ , Ἀρτάβανος ὁ Ὑστάσπεος , πάτρως ἐὼν Ξέρξῃ , τῷ δὴ καὶ πίσυνος ἐὼν ἔλεγε τάδε .
The rest of the Persians held their peace, not daring to utter any opinion contrary to what had been put forward; then Artabanus son of Hystaspes, the king's uncle, spoke. Relying on his position, he said,


7.10A.1
7124
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , μὴ λεχθεισέων μὲν γνωμέων ἀντιέων ἀλλήλῃσι οὐκ ἔστι τὴν ἀμείνω αἱρεόμενον ἑλέσθαι , ἀλλὰ δεῖ τῇ εἰρημένῃ χρᾶσθαι , λεχθεισέων δὲ ἔστι , ὥσπερ τὸν χρυσὸν τὸν ἀκήρατον αὐτὸν μὲν ἐπ’ ἑωυτοῦ οὐ διαγινώσκομεν , ἐπεὰν δὲ παρατρίψωμεν ἄλλῳ χρυσῷ , διαγινώσκομεν τὸν ἀμείνω .
“O king, if opposite opinions are not uttered, it is impossible for someone to choose the better; the one which has been spoken must be followed. If they are spoken, the better can be found; just as the purity of gold cannot be determined by itself, but when gold is compared with gold by rubbing, we then determine the better.


7.10A.2
7125
ἐγὼ δὲ καὶ πατρὶ τῷ σῷ , ἀδελφεῷ δὲ ἐμῷ Δαρείῳ ἠγόρευον μὴ στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ Σκύθας , ἄνδρας οὐδαμόθι γῆς ἄστυ νέμοντας .
Now I advised Darius, your father and my brother, not to lead his army against the Scythians, who have no cities anywhere to dwell in.


7.10A.2
7126
ὁ δὲ ἐλπίζων Σκύθας τοὺς νομάδας καταστρέψεσθαι ἐμοί τε οὐκ ἐπείθετο , στρατευσάμενός τε πολλοὺς καὶ ἀγαθοὺς τῆς στρατιῆς ἀποβαλὼν ἀπῆλθε .
But he hoped to subdue the nomadic Scythians and would not obey me; he went on the expedition and returned after losing many gallant men from his army.


7.10A.3
7127
σὺ δὲ ὦ βασιλεῦ μέλλεις ἐπ’ ἄνδρας στρατεύεσθαι πολλὸν ἀμείνονας ἢ Σκύθας , οἳ κατὰ θάλασσάν τε ἄριστοι καὶ κατὰ γῆν λέγονται εἶναι .
You, O king, are proposing to lead your armies against far better men than the Scythians — men who are said to be excellent warriors by sea and land.


7.10A.3
7128
τὸ δὲ αὐτοῖσι ἔνεστι δεινόν , ἐμὲ σοὶ δίκαιον ἐστὶ φράζειν " .
It is right that I should show you what danger there is in this.


7.10B.1
7129
" ζεύξας φῂς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἐλᾶν στρατὸν διὰ τῆς Εὐρώπης ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
You say that you will bridge the Hellespont and march your army through Europe to Hellas.


7.10B.1
7130
καὶ δὴ καὶ συνήνεικέ σε ἤτοι κατὰ γῆν ἢ καὶ κατὰ θάλασσαν ἑσσωθῆναι , ἢ καὶ κατ’ ἀμφότερα ·
Now suppose you happen to be defeated either by land or by sea, or even both; the men are said to be valiant,


7.10B.1
7131
οἱ γὰρ ἄνδρες λέγονται εἶναι ἄλκιμοι , πάρεστι δὲ καὶ σταθμώσασθαι , εἰ στρατιήν γε τοσαύτην σὺν Δάτι καὶ Ἀρταφρένεϊ ἐλθοῦσαν ἐς τὴν Ἀττικὴν χώρην μοῦνοι Ἀθηναῖοι διέφθειραν .
and we may well guess that it is so, since the Athenians alone destroyed the great army that followed Datis and Artaphrenes to Attica.


7.10B.2
7132
οὔκων ἀμφοτέρῃ σφι ἐχώρησε .
Suppose they do not succeed in both ways;


7.10B.2
7133
ἀλλ’ ἢν τῇσι νηυσὶ ἐμβάλωσι καὶ νικήσαντες ναυμαχίῃ πλέωσι ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον καὶ ἔπειτα λύσωσι τὴν γέφυραν , τοῦτο δὴ βασιλεῦ γίνεται δεινόν " .
but if they attack with their ships and prevail in a sea-fight, and then sail to the Hellespont and destroy your bridge, that, O king, is the hour of peril.


7.10C.1
7134
" ἐγὼ δὲ οὐδεμιῇ σοφίῃ οἰκηίῃ αὐτὸς ταῦτα συμβάλλομαι , ἀλλ’ οἷον κοτὲ ἡμέας ὀλίγου ἐδέησε καταλαβεῖν πάθος , ὅτε πατὴρ σὸς ζεύξας Βόσπορον τὸν Θρηίκιον , γεφυρώσας δὲ ποταμὸν Ἴστρον διέβη ἐπὶ Σκύθας .
It is from no wisdom of my own that I thus conjecture; it is because I know what disaster once almost overtook us, when your father, making a highway over the Thracian Bosporus and bridging the river Ister, crossed over to attack the Scythians.


7.10C.1
7135
τότε παντοῖοι ἐγένοντο Σκύθαι δεόμενοι Ἰώνων λῦσαι τὸν πόρον , τοῖσι ἐπετέτραπτο ἡ φυλακὴ τῶν γεφυρέων τοῦ Ἴστρου .
At that time the Scythians used every means of entreating the Ionians, who had been charged to guard the bridges of the Ister, to destroy the way of passage.


7.10C.2
7136
καὶ τότε γε Ἱστιαῖος ὁ Μιλήτου τύραννος εἰ ἐπέσπετο τῶν ἄλλων τυράννων τῇ γνώμῃ μηδὲ ἠναντιώθη , διέργαστο ἂν τὰ Περσέων πρήγματα .
If Histiaeus the tyrant of Miletus had consented to the opinion of the other tyrants instead of opposing it, the power of Persia would have perished. Yet it is dreadful even in the telling,


7.10C.2
7137
καίτοι καὶ λόγῳ ἀκοῦσαι δεινόν , ἐπ’ ἀνδρί γε ἑνὶ πάντα τὰ βασιλέος πρήγματα γεγενῆσθαι " .
that one man should hold in his hand all the king's fortunes.


7.10D.1
7138
" σὺ ὦν μὴ βούλευ ἐς κίνδυνον μηδένα τοιοῦτον ἀπικέσθαι μηδεμιῆς ἀνάγκης ἐούσης , ἀλλὰ ἐμοὶ πείθευ .
So do not plan to run the risk of any such danger when there is no need for it. Listen to me instead:


7.10D.1
7139
νῦν μὲν τὸν σύλλογον τόνδε διάλυσον ·
for now dismiss this assembly;


7.10D.1
7140
αὖτις δέ , ὅταν τοι δοκέῃ , προσκεψάμενος ἐπὶ σεωυτοῦ προαγόρευε τά τοι δοκέει εἶναι ἄριστα .
consider the matter by yourself and, whenever you so please, declare what seems best to you.


7.10D.2
7141
τὸ γὰρ εὖ βουλεύεσθαι κέρδος μέγιστον εὑρίσκω ἐόν ·
A well-laid plan is always to my mind most profitable;


7.10D.2
7142
εἰ γὰρ καὶ ἐναντιωθῆναί τι θέλει , βεβούλευται μὲν οὐδὲν ἧσσον εὖ , ἕσσωται δὲ ὑπὸ τῆς τύχης τὸ βούλευμα ·
even if it is thwarted later, the plan was no less good, and it is only chance that has baffled the design;


7.10D.2
7143
ὁ δὲ βουλευσάμενος αἰσχρῶς , εἴ οἱ ἡ τύχη ἐπίσποιτο , εὕρημα εὕρηκε , ἧσσον δὲ οὐδέν οἱ κακῶς βεβούλευται " .
but if fortune favor one who has planned poorly, then he has gotten only a prize of chance, and his plan was no less bad.


7.10E.1
7144
" ὁρᾷς τὰ ὑπερέχοντα ζῷα ὡς κεραυνοῖ ὁ θεὸς οὐδὲ ἐᾷ φαντάζεσθαι , τὰ δὲ σμικρὰ οὐδέν μιν κνίζει ·
You see how the god smites with his thunderbolt creatures of greatness and does not suffer them to display their pride, while little ones do not move him to anger;


7.10E.1
7145
ὁρᾷς δὲ ὡς ἐς οἰκήματα τὰ μέγιστα αἰεὶ καὶ δένδρεα τὰ τοιαῦτα ἀποσκήπτει τὰ βέλεα ·
and you see how it is always on the tallest buildings and trees that his bolts fall;


7.10E.1
7146
φιλέει γὰρ ὁ θεὸς τὰ ὑπερέχοντα πάντα κολούειν .
for the god loves to bring low all things of surpassing greatness.


7.10E.1
7147
οὕτω δὲ καὶ στρατὸς πολλὸς ὑπὸ ὀλίγου διαφθείρεται κατὰ τοιόνδε ·
Thus a large army is destroyed by a smaller,


7.10E.1
7148
ἐπεάν σφι ὁ θεὸς φθονήσας φόβον ἐμβάλῃ ἢ βροντήν , δι’ ὦν ἐφθάρησαν ἀναξίως ἑωυτῶν .
when the jealous god sends panic or the thunderbolt among them, and they perish unworthily;


7.10E.1
7149
οὐ γὰρ ἐᾷ φρονέειν μέγα ὁ θεὸς ἄλλον ἢ ἑωυτόν " .
for the god suffers pride in none but himself.


7.10F.1
7150
" ἐπειχθῆναι μέν νυν πᾶν πρῆγμα τίκτει σφάλματα , ἐκ τῶν ζημίαι μεγάλαι φιλέουσι γίνεσθαι ·
Now haste is always the parent of failure, and great damages are likely to arise;


7.10F.1
7151
ἐν δὲ τῷ ἐπισχεῖν ἔνεστι ἀγαθά , εἰ μὴ παραυτίκα δοκέοντα εἶναι , ἀλλ’ ἀνὰ χρόνον ἐξεύροι τις ἄν " .
but in waiting there is good, and in time this becomes clear, even though it does not seem so in the present.


7.10G.1
7152
" σοὶ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ὦ βασιλεῦ συμβουλεύω ·
This, O king, is my advice to you.


7.10G.1
7153
σὺ δέ , ὦ παῖ Γοβρύεω Μαρδόνιε , παῦσαι λέγων λόγους ματαίους περὶ Ἑλλήνων οὐκ ἐόντων ἀξίων φλαύρως ἀκούειν .
But you, Mardonius son of Gobryas, cease your foolish words about the Greeks, for they do not deserve to be maligned.


7.10G.1
7154
Ἕλληνας γὰρ διαβάλλων ἐπαείρεις αὐτὸν βασιλέα στρατεύεσθαι ·
By slandering the Greeks you incite the king to send this expedition;


7.10G.1
7155
αὐτοῦ δὲ τούτου εἵνεκα δοκέεις μοι πᾶσαν προθυμίην ἐκτείνειν .
that is the end to which you press with all eagerness.


7.10G.1
7156
μή νυν οὕτω γένηται .
Let it not be so.


7.10G.2
7157
διαβολὴ γὰρ ἐστὶ δεινότατον ·
Slander is a terrible business;


7.10G.2
7158
ἐν τῇ δύο μὲν εἰσὶ οἱ ἀδικέοντες , εἷς δὲ ὁ ἀδικεόμενος .
there are two in it who do wrong and one who suffers wrong.


7.10G.2
7159
ὁ μὲν γὰρ διαβάλλων ἀδικέει οὐ παρεόντι κατηγορέων , ὁ δὲ ἀδικέει ἀναπειθόμενος πρὶν ἢ ἀτρεκέως ἐκμάθῃ ·
The slanderer wrongs another by accusing an absent man, and the other does wrong in that he is persuaded before he has learned the whole truth;


7.10G.2
7160
ὁ δὲ δὴ ἀπεὼν τοῦ λόγου τάδε ἐν αὐτοῖσι ἀδικέεται , διαβληθείς τε ὑπὸ τοῦ ἑτέρου καὶ νομισθεὶς πρὸς τοῦ ἑτέρου κακὸς εἶναι " .
the absent man does not hear what is said of him and suffers wrong in the matter, being maligned by the one and condemned by the other.


7.10H.1
7161
" ἀλλ’ εἰ δὴ δεῖ γε πάντως ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας τούτους στρατεύεσθαι , φέρε , βασιλεὺς μὲν αὐτὸς ἐν ἤθεσι τοῖσι Περσέων μενέτω , ἡμέων δὲ ἀμφοτέρων παραβαλλομένων τὰ τέκνα , στρατηλάτεε αὐτὸς σὺ ἐπιλεξάμενός τε ἄνδρας τοὺς ἐθέλεις καὶ λαβὼν στρατιὴν ὁκόσην τινὰ βούλεαι .
If an army must by all means be sent against these Greeks, hear me now: let the king himself remain in the Persian land, and let us two stake our children's lives upon it; you lead out the army, choosing whatever men you wish and taking as great an army as you desire.


7.10H.2
7162
καὶ ἢν μὲν τῇ σὺ λέγεις ἀναβαίνῃ βασιλέι τὰ πρήγματα , κτεινέσθων οἱ ἐμοὶ παῖδες , πρὸς δὲ αὐτοῖσι καὶ ἐγώ ·
If the king's fortunes fare as you say, let my sons be slain, and myself with them;


7.10H.2
7163
ἢν δὲ τῇ ἐγὼ προλέγω , οἱ σοὶ ταῦτα πασχόντων , σὺν δέ σφι καὶ σύ , ἢν ἀπονοστήσῃς .
but if it turns out as I foretell, let your sons be so treated, and you likewise, if you return.


7.10H.3
7164
εἰ δὲ ταῦτα μὲν ὑποδύνειν οὐκ ἐθελήσεις , σὺ δὲ πάντως στράτευμα ἀνάξεις ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἀκούσεσθαι τινὰ φημὶ τῶν αὐτοῦ τῇδε ὑπολειπομένων Μαρδόνιον , μέγα τι κακὸν ἐξεργασάμενον Πέρσας , ὑπὸ κυνῶν τε καὶ ὀρνίθων διαφορεύμενον ἤ κου ἐν γῇ τῇ Ἀθηναίων ἢ σέ γε ἐν τῇ Λακεδαιμονίων , εἰ μὴ ἄρα καὶ πρότερον κατ’ ὁδόν , γνόντα ἐπ’ οἵους ἄνδρας ἀναγινώσκεις στρατεύεσθαι βασιλέα " .
But if you are unwilling to submit to this and will at all hazards lead your army overseas to  Hellas, then I think that those left behind in this place will hear that Mardonius has done great harm to  Persia, and has been torn apart by dogs and birds in the land of  Athens or of  Lacedaemon, if not even before that on the way there; and that you have learned what kind of men you persuade the king to attack.”


7.11.1
7165
Ἀρτάβανος μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεξε , Ξέρξης δὲ θυμωθεὶς ἀμείβεται τοῖσιδε .
Thus spoke Artabanus. Xerxes answered angrily,


7.11.1
7166
" Ἀρτάβανε , πατρὸς εἶς τοῦ ἐμοῦ ἀδελφεός ·
“Artabanus, you are my father's brother;


7.11.1
7167
τοῦτό σε ῥύσεται μηδένα ἄξιον μισθὸν λαβεῖν ἐπέων ματαίων .
that will save you from receiving the fitting reward of foolish words.


7.11.1
7168
καί τοι ταύτην τὴν ἀτιμίην προστίθημι ἐόντι κακῷ καὶ ἀθύμῳ , μήτε συστρατεύεσθαι ἔμοιγε ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα αὐτοῦ τε μένειν ἅμα τῇσι γυναιξί ·
But for your cowardly lack of spirit I lay upon you this disgrace, that you will not go with me and my army against Hellas, but will stay here with the women;


7.11.1
7169
ἐγὼ δὲ καὶ ἄνευ σέο ὅσα περ εἶπα ἐπιτελέα ποιήσω .
I myself will accomplish all that I have said, with no help from you.


7.11.2
7170
μὴ γὰρ εἴην ἐκ Δαρείου τοῦ Ὑστάσπεος τοῦ Ἀρσάμεος τοῦ Ἀριαράμνεω τοῦ Τεΐσπεος τοῦ Κύρου τοῦ Καμβύσεω τοῦ Τεΐσπεος τοῦ Ἀχαιμένεος γεγονώς , μὴ τιμωρησάμενος Ἀθηναίους , εὖ ἐπιστάμενος ὅτι εἰ ἡμεῖς ἡσυχίην ἄξομεν , ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἐκεῖνοι , ἀλλὰ καὶ μάλα στρατεύσονται ἐπὶ τὴν ἡμετέρην , εἰ χρὴ σταθμώσασθαι τοῖσι ὑπαργμένοισι ἐξ ἐκείνων , οἳ Σάρδις τε ἐνέπρησαν καὶ ἤλασαν ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην .
May I not be the son of Darius son of Hystaspes son of Arsames son of Ariaramnes son of Teispes son of Cyrus son of Cambyses son of Teispes son of Achaemenes, if I do not have vengeance on the Athenians; I well know that if we remain at peace they will not; they will assuredly invade our country, if we may infer from what they have done already, for they burnt  Sardis and marched into  Asia.


7.11.3
7171
οὔκων ἐξαναχωρέειν οὐδετέροισι δυνατῶς ἔχει , ἀλλὰ ποιέειν ἢ παθεῖν πρόκειται ἀγών , ἵνα ἢ τάδε πάντα ὑπὸ Ἕλλησι ἢ ἐκεῖνα πάντα ὑπὸ Πέρσῃσι γένηται ·
It is not possible for either of us to turn back: to do or to suffer is our task, so that what is ours be under the Greeks, or what is theirs under the Persians;


7.11.3
7172
τὸ γὰρ μέσον οὐδὲν τῆς ἔχθρης ἐστί .
there is no middle way in our quarrel.


7.11.4
7173
καλὸν ὦν προπεπονθότας ἡμέας τιμωρέειν ἤδη γίνεται , ἵνα καὶ τὸ δεινὸν τὸ πείσομαι τοῦτο μάθω , ἐλάσας ἐπ’ ἄνδρας τούτους , τούς γε καὶ Πέλοψ ὁ Φρύξ , ἐὼν πατέρων τῶν ἐμῶν δοῦλος , κατεστρέψατο οὕτω ὡς καὶ ἐς τόδε αὐτοί τε ὥνθρωποι καὶ ἡ γῆ αὐτῶν ἐπώνυμοι τοῦ καταστρεψαμένου καλέονται " .
Honor then demands that we avenge ourselves for what has been done to us; thus will I learn what is this evil that will befall me when I march against these Greeks — men that even Pelops the Phrygian, the slave of my forefathers, did so utterly subdue that to this day they and their country are called by the name of their conqueror.”


7.12.1
7174
ταῦτα μὲν ἐπὶ τοσοῦτο ἐλέγετο .
The discussion went that far;


7.12.1
7175
μετὰ δὲ εὐφρόνη τε ἐγίνετο καὶ Ξέρξην ἔκνιζε ἡ Ἀρταβάνου γνώμη ·
then night came, and Xerxes was pricked by the advice of Artabanus.


7.12.1
7176
νυκτὶ δὲ βουλὴν διδοὺς πάγχυ εὕρισκέ οἱ οὐ πρῆγμα εἶναι στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
Thinking it over at night, he saw clearly that to send an army against Hellas was not his affair.


7.12.1
7177
δεδογμένων δέ οἱ αὖτις τούτων κατύπνωσε , καὶ δή κου ἐν τῇ νυκτὶ εἶδε ὄψιν τοιήνδε , ὡς λέγεται ὑπὸ Περσέων ·
He made this second resolve and fell asleep;


7.12.1
7178
ἐδόκεε ὁ Ξέρξης ἄνδρα οἱ ἐπιστάντα μέγαν τε καὶ εὐειδέα εἰπεῖν " μετὰ δὴ βουλεύεαι , ὦ Πέρσα , στράτευμα μὴ ἄγειν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , προείπας ἁλίζειν Πέρσας στρατόν ;
then (so the Persians say) in the night he saw this vision: It seemed to Xerxes that a tall and handsome man stood over him and said,


7.12.2
7179
οὔτε ὦν μεταβουλευόμενος ποιέεις εὖ οὔτε ὁ συγγνωσόμενός τοι πάρα ·
“Are you then changing your mind, Persian, and will not lead the expedition against Hellas, although you have proclaimed the mustering of the army?


7.12.2
7180
ἀλλ’ ὥσπερ τῆς ἡμέρης ἐβουλεύσαο ποιέειν , ταύτην ἴθι τῶν ὁδῶν " .
It is not good for you to change your mind, and there will be no one here to pardon you for it; let your course be along the path you resolved upon yesterday.”


7.13.1
7181
τὸν μὲν ταῦτα εἰπόντα ἐδόκεε ὁ Ξέρξης ἀποπτάσθαι , ἡμέρης δὲ ἐπιλαμψάσης ὀνείρου μὲν τούτου λόγον οὐδένα ἐποιέετο , ὁ δὲ Περσέων συναλίσας τοὺς καὶ πρότερον συνέλεξε , ἔλεξέ σφι τάδε .
So the vision spoke, and seemed to Xerxes to vanish away. When day dawned, the king took no account of this dream, and he assembled the Persians whom he had before gathered together and addressed them thus:


7.13.2
7182
" ἄνδρες Πέρσαι , συγγνώμην μοι ἔχετε ὅτι ἀγχίστροφα βουλεύομαι ·
“Persians, forgive me for turning and twisting in my purpose;


7.13.2
7183
φρενῶν τε γὰρ ἐς τὰ ἐμεωυτοῦ πρῶτα οὔκω ἀνήκω , καὶ οἱ παρηγορεόμενοι ἐκεῖνα ποιέειν οὐδένα χρόνον μευ ἀπέχονται .
I am not yet come to the fullness of my wisdom, and I am never free from people who exhort me to do as I said.


7.13.2
7184
ἀκούσαντι μέντοι μοι τῆς Ἀρταβάνου γνώμης παραυτίκα μὲν ἡ νεότης ἐπέζεσε , ὥστε ἀεικέστερα ἀπορρῖψαι ἔπεα ἐς ἄνδρα πρεσβύτερον ἢ χρεόν ·
It is true that when I heard Artabanus' opinion my youthful spirit immediately boiled up, and I burst out with an unseemly and wrongful answer to one older than myself;


7.13.2
7185
νῦν μέντοι συγγνοὺς χρήσομαι τῇ ἐκείνου γνώμῃ .
but now I see my fault and will follow his judgment.


7.13.3
7186
ὡς ὦν μεταδεδογμένον μοι μὴ στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἥσυχοι ἔστε " .
Be at peace, since I have changed my mind about marching against  Hellas.”


7.14.1
7187
Πέρσαι μὲν ὡς ἤκουσαν ταῦτα , κεχαρηκότες προσεκύνεον .
When the Persians heard that, they rejoiced and made obeisance to him.


7.14.1
7188
νυκτὸς δὲ γενομένης αὖτις τ- αὐτὸ ὄνειρον τῷ Ξέρξῃ κατυπνωμένῳ ἔλεγε ἐπιστάν " ὦ παῖ Δαρείου , καὶ δὴ φαίνεαι ἐν Πέρσῃσί τε ἀπειπάμενος τὴν στρατηλασίην καὶ τὰ ἐμὰ ἔπεα ἐν οὐδενὶ ποιησάμενος λόγῳ ὡς παρ’ οὐδενὸς ἀκούσας ;
But when night came on, the same vision stood again over Xerxes as he slept, and said, “Son of Darius, have you then plainly renounced your army's march among the Persians, and made my words of no account, as though you had not heard them?


7.14.1
7189
εὖ νυν τόδ’ ἴσθι ·
Know for certain the following:


7.14.1
7190
ἤν περ μὴ αὐτίκα στρατηλατέῃς , τάδε τοι ἐξ αὐτῶν ἀνασχήσει ·
if you do not lead out your army immediately, this will be the outcome of it:


7.14.1
7191
ὡς καὶ μέγας καὶ πολλὸς ἐγένεο ἐν ὀλίγῳ χρόνῳ , οὕτω καὶ ταπεινὸς ὀπίσω κατὰ τάχος ἔσεαι " .
as you became great and mighty in a short time, so in a moment will you be brought low again.”


7.15.1
7192
Ξέρξης μὲν περιδεὴς γενόμενος τῇ ὄψι ἀνά τε ἔδραμε ἐκ τῆς κοίτης καὶ πέμπει ἄγγελον ἐπὶ Ἀρτάβανον καλέοντα ·
Greatly frightened by the vision, Xerxes leapt up from his bed, and sent a messenger to summon Artabanus.


7.15.1
7193
ἀπικομένῳ δέ οἱ ἔλεγε Ξέρξης τάδε .
When he came, Xerxes said,


7.15.1
7194
" Ἀρτάβανε , ἐγὼ τὸ παραυτίκα μὲν οὐκ ἐσωφρόνεον εἴπας ἐς σὲ μάταια ἔπεα χρηστῆς εἵνεκα συμβουλίης ·
“Artabanus, for a moment I was of unsound mind, and I answered your good advice with foolish words;


7.15.2
7195
μετὰ μέντοι οὐ πολλὸν χρόνον μετέγνων , ἔγνων δὲ ταῦτα μοι ποιητέα ἐόντα τὰ σὺ ὑπεθήκαο .
but after no long time I repented, and saw that it was right for me to follow your advice.


7.15.2
7196
οὔκων δυνατός τοι εἰμὶ ταῦτα βουλόμενος ποιέειν ·
Yet, though I desire to, I cannot do it;


7.15.2
7197
τετραμμένῳ γὰρ δὴ καὶ μετεγνωκότι ἐπιφοιτέον ὄνειρον φαντάζεταί μοι οὐδαμῶς συνεπαινέον ποιέειν με ταῦτα ·
ever since I turned back and repented, a vision keeps coming to haunt my sight,


7.15.2
7198
νῦν δὲ καὶ διαπειλῆσαν οἴχεται .
and it will not allow me to do as you advise; just now it has threatened me and gone.


7.15.3
7199
εἰ ὦν θεός ἐστι ὁ ἐπιπέμπων καί οἱ πάντως ἐν ἡδονῇ ἐστι γενέσθαι στρατηλασίην ἐπὶ Ἑλλάδα , ἐπιπτήσεται καὶ σοὶ τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο ὄνειρον , ὁμοίως καὶ ἐμοὶ ἐντελλόμενον .
Now if a god is sending the vision, and it is his full pleasure that this expedition against Hellas take place,


7.15.3
7200
εὑρίσκω δὲ ὧδ’ ἂν γινόμενα ταῦτα , εἰ λάβοις τὴν ἐμὴν σκευὴν πᾶσαν καὶ ἐνδὺς μετὰ τοῦτο ἵζοιο ἐς τὸν ἐμὸν θρόνον , καὶ ἔπειτα ἐν κοίτῃ τῇ ἐμῇ κατυπνώσειας " .
that same dream will hover about you and give you the same command it gives me. I believe that this is most likely to happen, if you take all my apparel and sit wearing it upon my throne, and then lie down to sleep in my bed.”


7.16.1
7201
Ξέρξης μὲν ταῦτά οἱ ἔλεγε ·
Xerxes said this,


7.16.1
7202
Ἀρτάβανος δὲ οὐ πρώτῳ κελεύσματι πειθόμενος , οἷα οὐκ ἀξιεύμενος ἐς τὸν βασιλήιον θρόνον ἵζεσθαι , τέλος ὡς ἠναγκάζετο εἴπας τάδε ἐποίεε τὸ κελευόμενον .
but Artabanus would not obey the first command, thinking it was not right for him to sit on the royal throne; at last he was compelled and did as he was bid, saying first:


7.16A.1
7203
" ἴσον ἐκεῖνο ὦ βασιλεῦ παρ’ ἐμοὶ κέκριται , φρονέειν τε εὖ καὶ τῷ λέγοντι χρηστὰ ἐθέλειν πείθεσθαι ·
“O king, I judge it of equal worth whether a man is wise or is willing to obey good advice;


7.16A.1
7204
τά σε καὶ ἀμφότερα περιήκοντα ἀνθρώπων κακῶν ὁμιλίαι σφάλλουσι , κατά περ τὴν πάντων χρησιμωτάτην ἀνθρώποισι θάλασσαν πνεύματα φασὶ ἀνέμων ἐμπίπτοντα οὐ περιορᾶν φύσι τῇ ἑωυτῆς χρᾶσθαι .
to both of these you have attained, but the company of bad men trips you up; just as they say that sea, of all things the most serviceable to men, is hindered from following its nature by the blasts of winds that fall upon it.


7.16A.2
7205
ἐμὲ δὲ ἀκούσαντα πρὸς σεῦ κακῶς οὐ τοσοῦτο ἔδακε λύπη ὅσον γνωμέων δύο προκειμενέων Πέρσῃσι , τῆς μὲν ὕβριν αὐξανούσης , τῆς δὲ καταπαυούσης καὶ λεγούσης ὡς κακὸν εἴη διδάσκειν τὴν ψυχὴν πλέον τι δίζησθαι αἰεὶ ἔχειν τοῦ παρεόντος , τοιουτέων προκειμενέων γνωμέων ὅτι τὴν σφαλερωτέρην σεωυτῷ τε καὶ Πέρσῃσι ἀναιρέο " .
It was not that I heard harsh words from you that stung me so much as that, when two opinions were laid before the Persians, one tending to the increase of pride, the other to its abatement, showing how evil a thing it is to teach the heart continual desire of more than it has, of these two opinions you preferred that one which was more fraught with danger to yourself and to the Persians.


7.16B.1
7206
" νῦν ὦν , ἐπειδὴ τέτραψαι ἐπὶ τὴν ἀμείνω , φῄς τοι μετιέντι τὸν ἐπ’ Ἕλληνας στόλον ἐπιφοιτᾶν ὄνειρον θεοῦ τινος πομπῇ , οὐκ ἐῶντά σε καταλύειν τὸν στόλον .
Now when you have turned to the better opinion, you say that, while intending to abandon the expedition against the Greeks, you are haunted by a dream sent by some god, which forbids you to disband the expedition.


7.16B.2
7207
ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ ταῦτα ἐστι , ὦ παῖ , θεῖα .
But this is none of heaven's working, my son.


7.16B.2
7208
ἐνύπνια γὰρ τὰ ἐς ἀνθρώπους πεπλανημένα τοιαῦτα ἐστὶ οἷά σε ἐγὼ διδάξω , ἔτεσι σεῦ πολλοῖσι πρεσβύτερος ἐών ·
The roving dreams that visit men are of such nature as I shall teach you, since I am many years older than you.


7.16B.2
7209
πεπλανῆσθαι αὗται μάλιστα ἐώθασι αἱ ὄψιες τῶν ὀνειράτων , τά τις ἡμέρης φροντίζει .
Those visions that rove about us in dreams are for the most part the thoughts of the day;


7.16B.2
7210
ἡμεῖς δὲ τὰς πρὸ τοῦ ἡμέρας ταύτην τὴν στρατηλασίην καὶ τὸ κάρτα εἴχομεν μετὰ χεῖρας " .
and in these recent days we have been very busy with this expedition.


7.16C.1
7211
" εἰ δὲ ἄρα μή ἐστι τοῦτο τοιοῦτο οἷον ἐγὼ διαιρέω , ἀλλά τι τοῦ θείου μετέχον , σὺ πᾶν αὐτὸ συλλαβὼν εἴρηκας ·
But if this is not as I determine and it has something divine to it, then you have spoken the conclusion of the matter;


7.16C.1
7212
φανήτω γὰρ δὴ καὶ ἐμοὶ ὡς καὶ σοὶ διακελευόμενον .
let it appear to me just as it has to you, and utter its command.


7.16C.1
7213
φανῆναι δὲ οὐδὲν μᾶλλόν μοι ὀφείλει ἔχοντι τὴν ἐσθῆτα ἢ οὐ καὶ τὴν ἐμήν , οὐδέ τι μᾶλλον ἐν κοίτῃ τῇ σῇ ἀναπαυομένῳ ἢ οὐ καὶ ἐν τῇ ἐμῇ , εἴ πέρ γε καὶ ἄλλως ἐθέλει φανῆναι .
If it really wishes to appear, it should do so to me no more by virtue of my wearing your dress instead of mine, and my sleeping in your bed rather than in my own.


7.16C.2
7214
οὐ γὰρ δὴ ἐς τοσοῦτό γε εὐηθείης ἀνήκει τοῦτο , ὅ τι δή κοτε ἐστί , τὸ ἐπιφαινόμενόν τοι ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ , ὥστε δόξει ἐμὲ ὁρῶν σὲ εἶναι , τῇ σῇ ἐσθῆτι τεκμαιρόμενον .
Whatever it is that appears to you in your sleep, surely it has not come to such folly as to infer from your dress that I am you when it sees me.


7.16C.2
7215
εἰ δὲ ἐμὲ μὲν ἐν οὐδενὶ λόγῳ ποιήσεται οὐδὲ ἀξιώσει ἐπιφανῆναι , οὔτε ἢν τὴν ἐμὴν ἐσθῆτα ἔχω οὔτε ἢν τὴν σήν , οὐδὲ ἐπιφοιτήσει , τοῦτο ἤδη μαθητέον ἔσται .
We now must learn if it will take no account of me and not deign to appear and haunt me, whether I am wearing your robes or my own, but will come to you;


7.16C.2
7216
εἰ γὰρ δὴ ἐπιφοιτήσει γε συνεχέως , φαίην ἂν καὶ αὐτὸς θεῖον εἶναι .
if it comes continually, I myself would say that it is something divine.


7.16C.3
7217
εἰ δέ τοι οὕτω δεδόκηται γίνεσθαι καὶ οὐκ οἶά τε αὐτὸ παρατρέψαι , ἀλλ’ ἤδη δεῖ ἐμὲ ἐν κοίτῃ σῇ κατυπνῶσαι , φέρε , τούτων ἐξ ἐμεῦ ἐπιτελευμένων φανήτω καὶ ἐμοί .
If you are determined that this must be done and there is no averting it, and I must lie down to sleep in your bed, so be it; this duty I will fulfill, and let the vision appear also to me.


7.16C.3
7218
μέχρι δὲ τούτου τῇ παρεούσῃ γνώμῃ χρήσομαι " .
But until then I will keep my present opinion.”


7.17.1
7219
τοσαῦτα εἴπας Ἀρτάβανος , ἐλπίζων Ξέρξην ἀποδέξειν λέγοντα οὐδέν , ἐποίεε τὸ κελευόμενον .
So spoke Artabanus and did as he was bid, hoping to prove Xerxes' words vain;


7.17.1
7220
ἐνδὺς δὲ τὴν Ξέρξεω ἐσθῆτα καὶ ἱζόμενος ἐς τὸν βασιλήιον θρόνον ὡς μετὰ ταῦτα κοῖτον ἐποιέετο , ἦλθέ οἱ κατυπνωμένῳ τ- αὐτὸ ὄνειρον τὸ καὶ παρὰ Ξέρξην ἐφοίτα , ὑπερστὰν δὲ τοῦ Ἀρταβάνου εἶπε ·
he put on Xerxes' robes and sat on the king's throne. Then while he slept there came to him in his sleep the same dream that had haunted Xerxes; it stood over him and spoke thus:


7.17.2
7221
" ἆρα σὺ δὴ κεῖνος εἶς ὁ ἀποσπεύδων Ξέρξην στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ὡς δὴ κηδόμενος αὐτοῦ ;
“Are you the one who dissuades Xerxes from marching against Hellas, because you care for him?


7.17.2
7222
ἀλλ’ οὔτε ἐς τὸ μετέπειτα οὔτε ἐς τὸ παραυτίκα νῦν καταπροΐξεαι ἀποτρέπων τὸ χρεὸν γενέσθαι .
Neither in the future nor now will you escape with impunity for striving to turn aside what must be.


7.17.2
7223
Ξέρξην δὲ τὰ δεῖ ἀνηκουστέοντα παθεῖν , αὐτῷ ἐκείνῳ δεδήλωται " .
To Xerxes himself it has been declared what will befall him if he disobeys.”


7.18.1
7224
ταῦτά τε ἐδόκεε Ἀρτάβανος τὸ ὄνειρον ἀπειλέειν καὶ θερμοῖσι σιδηρίοισι ἐκκαίειν αὐτοῦ μέλλειν τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς .
With this threat (so it seemed to Artabanus) the vision was about to burn his eyes with hot irons.


7.18.1
7225
καὶ ὃς ἀμβώσας μέγα ἀναθρώσκει , καὶ παριζόμενος Ξέρξῃ , ὡς τὴν ὄψιν οἱ τοῦ ἐνυπνίου διεξῆλθε ἀπηγεόμενος , δεύτερά οἱ λέγει τάδε .
He leapt up with a loud cry, then sat by Xerxes and told him the whole story of what he had seen in his dream, and next he said:


7.18.2
7226
" ἐγὼ μέν , ὦ βασιλεῦ , οἶα ἄνθρωπος ἰδὼν ἤδη πολλά τε καὶ μεγάλα πεσόντα πρήγματα ὑπὸ ἡσσόνων , οὐκ ἔων σε τὰ πάντα τῇ ἡλικίῃ εἴκειν , ἐπιστάμενος ὡς κακὸν εἴη τὸ πολλῶν ἐπιθυμέειν , μεμνημένος μὲν τὸν ἐπὶ Μασσαγέτας Κύρου στόλον ὡς ἔπρηξε , μεμνημένος δὲ καὶ τὸν ἐπ’ Αἰθίοπας τὸν Καμβύσεω , συστρατευόμενος δὲ καὶ Δαρείῳ ἐπὶ Σκύθας .
“O King, since I have seen, as much as a man may, how the greater has often been brought low by the lesser, I forbade you to always give rein to your youthful spirit, knowing how evil a thing it is to have many desires, and remembering the end of Cyrus' expedition against the Massagetae and of Cambyses' against the Ethiopians, and I myself marched with Darius against the Scythians.


7.18.3
7227
ἐπιστάμενος ταῦτα γνώμην εἶχον ἀτρεμίζοντά σε μακαριστὸν εἶναι πρὸς πάντων ἀνθρώπων .
Knowing this, I judged that you had only to remain in peace for all men to deem you fortunate.


7.18.3
7228
ἐπεὶ δὲ δαιμονίη τις γίνεται ὁρμή , καὶ Ἕλληνας , ὡς οἶκε , καταλαμβάνει τις φθορὴ θεήλατος , ἐγὼ μὲν καὶ αὐτὸς τρέπομαι καὶ τὴν γνώμην μετατίθεμαι , σὺ δὲ σήμηνον μὲν Πέρσῃσι τὰ ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ πεμπόμενα , χρᾶσθαι δὲ κέλευε τοῖσι ἐκ σέο πρώτοισι προειρημένοισι ἐς τὴν παρασκευήν , ποίεε δὲ οὕτω ὅκως τοῦ θεοῦ παραδιδόντος τῶν σῶν ἐνδεήσει μηδέν " .
But since there is some divine motivation, and it seems that the gods mark Hellas for destruction, I myself change and correct my judgment. Now declare the gods' message to the Persians, and bid them obey your first command for all due preparation. Do this, so that nothing on your part be lacking to the fulfillment of the gods' commission.”


7.18.4
7229
τούτων δὲ λεχθέντων , ἐνθαῦτα ἐπαερθέντες τῇ ὄψι , ὡς ἡμέρη ἐγένετο τάχιστα , Ξέρξης τε ὑπερετίθετο ταῦτα Πέρσῃσι , καὶ Ἀρτάβανος , ὃς πρότερον ἀποσπεύδων μοῦνος ἐφαίνετο , τότε ἐπισπεύδων φανερὸς ἦν .
After this was said, they were incited by the vision, and when daylight came Xerxes imparted all this to the Persians. Artabanus now openly encouraged that course which he alone had before openly discouraged.


7.19.1
7230
ὁρμημένῳ δὲ Ξέρξῃ στρατηλατέειν μετὰ ταῦτα τρίτη ὄψις ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ ἐγένετο , τὴν οἱ Μάγοι ἔκριναν ἀκούσαντες φέρειν τε ἐπὶ πᾶσαν γῆν δουλεύσειν τέ οἱ πάντας ἀνθρώπους .
Xerxes was now intent on the expedition and then saw a third vision in his sleep, which the Magi interpreted to refer to the whole earth and to signify that all men should be his slaves.


7.19.1
7231
ἡ δὲ ὄψις ἦν ἥδε ·
This was the vision:


7.19.1
7232
ἐδόκεε ὁ Ξέρξης ἐστεφανῶσθαι ἐλαίης θαλλῷ , ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ἐλαίης τοὺς κλάδους γῆν πᾶσαν ἐπισχεῖν , μετὰ δὲ ἀφανισθῆναι περὶ τῇ κεφαλῇ κείμενον τὸν στέφανον .
Xerxes thought that he was crowned with an olive bough, of which the shoots spread over the whole earth, and then the crown vanished from off his head where it was set.


7.19.2
7233
κρινάντων δὲ ταῦτα τῶν Μάγων , Περσέων τε τῶν συλλεχθέντων αὐτίκα πᾶς ἀνὴρ ἐς τὴν ἀρχὴν ἑωυτοῦ ἀπελάσας εἶχε προθυμίην πᾶσαν ἐπὶ τοῖσι εἰρημένοισι , θέλων αὐτὸς ἕκαστος τὰ προκείμενα δῶρα λαβεῖν , καὶ Ξέρξης τοῦ στρατοῦ οὕτω ἐπάγερσιν ποιέεται , χῶρον πάντα ἐρευνῶν τῆς ἠπείρου .
The Magi interpreted it in this way, and immediately every single man of the Persians who had been assembled rode away to his own province and there used all zeal to fulfill the kings command, each desiring to receive the promised gifts. Thus it was that Xerxes mustered his army, searching out every part of the continent.


7.20.1
7234
ἀπὸ γὰρ Αἰγύπτου ἁλώσιος ἐπὶ μὲν τέσσερα ἔτεα πλήρεα παραρτέετο στρατιήν τε καὶ τὰ πρόσφορα τῇ στρατιῇ , πέμπτῳ δὲ ἔτεϊ ἀνομένῳ ἐστρατηλάτεε χειρὶ μεγάλῃ πλήθεος .
For full four years after the conquest of  Egypt he was equipping his force and preparing all that was needed for it; before the fifth year was completed, he set forth on his march with the might of a great multitude.


7.20.2
7235
στόλων γὰρ τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν πολλῷ δὴ μέγιστος οὗτος ἐγένετο , ὥστε μήτε τὸν Δαρείου τὸν ἐπὶ Σκύθας παρὰ τοῦτον μηδένα φαίνεσθαι , μήτε τὸν Σκυθικόν , ὅτε Σκύθαι Κιμμερίους διώκοντες ἐς τὴν Μηδικὴν χώρην ἐσβαλόντες σχεδὸν πάντα τὰ ἄνω τῆς Ἀσίης καταστρεψάμενοι ἐνέμοντο , τῶν εἵνεκεν ὕστερον Δαρεῖος ἐτιμωρέετο , μήτε κατὰ τὰ λεγόμενα τὸν Ἀτρειδέων ἐς Ἴλιον , μήτε τὸν Μυσῶν τε καὶ Τευκρῶν τὸν πρὸ τῶν Τρωικῶν γενόμενον , οἳ διαβάντες ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην κατὰ Βόσπορον τούς τε Θρήικας κατεστρέψαντο πάντας καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰόνιον πόντον κατέβησαν , μέχρι τε Πηνειοῦ ποταμοῦ τὸ πρὸς μεσαμβρίης ἤλασαν .
This was by far the greatest of all expeditions that we know of. The one that Darius led against the Scythians is nothing compared to it; neither is the Scythian expedition when they burst into Media in pursuit of the Cimmerians and subdued and ruled almost all the upper lands of  Asia (it was for this that Darius afterwards attempted to punish them). According to the reports, the expedition led by the sons of Atreus against  Troy is also nothing by comparison; neither is the one of the Mysians and Teucrians which before the Trojan war crossed the  Bosporus into  Europe, subdued all the Thracians, and came down to the  Ionian sea, marching southward as far as the river Peneus.


7.21.1
7236
αὗται αἱ πᾶσαι οὐδ’ εἰ ἕτεραι πρὸς ταύτῃσι προσγενόμεναι στρατηλασίαι μιῆς τῆσδε οὐκ ἄξιαι .
All these expeditions and whatever others have happened in addition could not together be compared with this single one.


7.21.1
7237
τί γὰρ οὐκ ἤγαγε ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης ἔθνος ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα Ξέρξης ;
For what nation did Xerxes not lead from Asia against Hellas?


7.21.1
7238
κοῖον δὲ πινόμενόν μιν ὕδωρ οὐκ ἐπέλιπε , πλὴν τῶν μεγάλων ποταμῶν ;
What water did not fail when being drunk up, except only the greatest rivers?


7.21.2
7239
οἳ μὲν γὰρ νέας παρείχοντο , οἳ δὲ ἐς πεζὸν ἐτετάχατο , τοῖσι δὲ ἵππος προσετέτακτο , τοῖσι δὲ ἱππαγωγὰ πλοῖα ἅμα στρατευομένοισι , τοῖσι δὲ ἐς τὰς γεφύρας μακρὰς νέας παρέχειν , τοῖσι δὲ σῖτά τε καὶ νέας .
Some people supplied him with ships, some were enrolled in his infantry, some were assigned the provision of horsemen, others of horse-bearing transports to follow the army, and others again of warships for the bridges, or of food and ships.


7.22.1
7240
καὶ τοῦτο μέν , ὡς προσπταισάντων τῶν πρώτων περιπλεόντων περὶ τὸν Ἄθων προετοιμάζετο ἐκ τριῶν ἐτέων κου μάλιστα τὰ ἐς τὸν Ἄθων .
Since those who had earlier attempted to sail around  Athos had suffered shipwreck, for about three years preparations had been underway there.


7.22.1
7241
ἐν γὰρ Ἐλαιοῦντι τῆς Χερσονήσου ὅρμεον τριήρεες ·
Triremes were anchored off Elaeus in the  Chersonese;


7.22.1
7242
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὁρμώμενοι ὤρυσσον ὑπὸ μαστίγων παντοδαποὶ τῆς στρατιῆς , διάδοχοι δ’ ἐφοίτεον ·
with these for their headquarters, all sorts of men in the army were compelled by whippings to dig a canal, coming by turns to the work;


7.22.1
7243
ὤρυσσον δὲ καὶ οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἄθων κατοικημένοι .
the inhabitants about  Athos also dug.


7.22.2
7244
Βουβάρης δὲ ὁ Μεγαβάζου καὶ Ἀρταχαίης ὁ Ἀρταίου ἄνδρες Πέρσαι ἐπέστασαν τοῦ ἔργου .
Bubares son of Megabazus and Artachaees son of Artaeus, both Persians, were the overseers of the workmen.


7.22.2
7245
ὁ γὰρ Ἄθως ἐστὶ ὄρος μέγα τε καὶ ὀνομαστόν , ἐς θάλασσαν κατῆκον , οἰκημένον ὑπὸ ἀνθρώπων .
 Athos is a great and famous mountain, running out into the sea and inhabited by men.


7.22.2
7246
τῇ δὲ τελευτᾷ ἐς τὴν ἤπειρον τὸ ὄρος , χερσονησοειδές τε ἐστὶ καὶ ἰσθμὸς ὡς δυώδεκα σταδίων ·
At the mountain's landward end it is in the form of a peninsula, and there is an isthmus about twelve stadia wide;


7.22.2
7247
πεδίον δὲ τοῦτο καὶ κολωνοὶ οὐ μεγάλοι ἐκ θαλάσσης τῆς Ἀκανθίων ἐπὶ θάλασσαν τὴν ἀντίον Τορώνης .
here is a place of level ground or little hills, from the sea by Acanthus to the sea opposite  Torone.


7.22.3
7248
ἐν δὲ τῷ ἰσθμῷ τούτῳ , ἐς τὸν τελευτᾷ ὁ Ἄθως , Σάνη πόλις Ἑλλὰς οἴκηται , αἳ δὲ ἐκτὸς Σάνης , ἔσω δὲ τοῦ Ἄθω οἰκημέναι , τὰς τότε ὁ Πέρσης νησιώτιδας ἀντὶ ἠπειρωτίδων ὅρμητο ποιέειν ·
On this isthmus which is at the end of  Athos, there stands a Greek town, Sane;


7.22.3
7249
εἰσὶ δὲ αἵδε , Δῖον Ὀλόφυξος Ἀκρόθῳον Θύσσος Κλεωναί .
there are others situated seaward of Sane and landward of  Athos, and the Persian now intended to make them into island and not mainland towns; they are  Dion, Olophyxus, Acrothoum, Thyssus, and Cleonae.


7.23.1
7250
πόλιες μὲν αὗται αἳ τὸν Ἄθων νέμονται , ὤρυσσον δὲ ὧδε δασάμενοι τὸν χῶρον οἱ βάρβαροι κατὰ ἔθνεα ·
These are the towns situated on  Athos.


7.23.1
7251
κατὰ Σάνην πόλιν σχοινοτενὲς ποιησάμενοι , ἐπείτε ἐγίνετο βαθέα ἡ διῶρυξ , οἳ μὲν κατώτατα ἑστεῶτες ὤρυσσον , ἕτεροι δὲ παρεδίδοσαν τὸν αἰεὶ ἐξορυσσόμενον χοῦν ἄλλοισι κατύπερθε ἑστεῶσι ἐπὶ βάθρων , οἳ δ’ αὖ ἐκδεκόμενοι ἑτέροισι , ἕως ἀπίκοντο ἐς τοὺς ἀνωτάτω ·
The foreigners dug as follows, dividing up the ground by nation: they made a straight line near the town of Sane; when the channel had been dug to some depth, some men stood at the bottom of it and dug, others took the dirt as it was dug out and delivered it to yet others that stood higher on stages, and they again to others as they received it, until they came to those that were highest;


7.23.1
7252
οὗτοι δὲ ἐξεφόρεόν τε καὶ ἐξέβαλλον .
these carried it out and threw it away.


7.23.2
7253
τοῖσι μέν νυν ἄλλοισι πλὴν Φοινίκων καταρρηγνύμενοι οἱ κρημνοὶ τοῦ ὀρύγματος πόνον διπλήσιον παρεῖχον ·
For all except the Phoenicians, the steep sides of the canal caved in, doubling their labor;


7.23.2
7254
ἅτε γὰρ τοῦ τε ἄνω στόματος καὶ τοῦ κάτω τὰ αὐτὰ μέτρα ποιευμένων , ἔμελλέ σφι τοιοῦτο ἀποβήσεσθαι .
since they made the span the same breadth at its mouth and at the bottom, this was bound to happen.


7.23.3
7255
οἱ δὲ Φοίνικες σοφίην ἔν τε τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ἔργοισι ἀποδείκνυνται καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐν ἐκείνῳ .
But the Phoenicians showed the same skill in this as in all else they do;


7.23.3
7256
ἀπολαχόντες γὰρ μόριον ὅσον αὐτοῖσι ἐπέβαλλε , ὤρυσσον τὸ μὲν ἄνω στόμα τῆς διώρυχος ποιεῦντες διπλήσιον ἢ ὅσον ἔδεε αὐτὴν τὴν διώρυχα γενέσθαι , προβαίνοντος δὲ τοῦ ἔργου συνῆγον αἰεί ·
taking in hand the portion that fell to them, they dug by making the topmost span of the canal as wide again as the canal was to be, and narrowed it as they worked lower,


7.23.3
7257
κάτω τε δὴ ἐγίνετο καὶ ἐξισοῦτο τοῖσι ἄλλοισι τὸ ἔργον .
until at the bottom their work was of the same span as that of the others.


7.23.4
7258
ἐνθαῦτα λειμών ἐστι , ἵνα σφι ἀγορή τε ἐγίνετο καὶ πρητήριον ·
There is a meadow there, where they made a place for buying and marketing;


7.23.4
7259
σῖτος δέ σφι πολλὸς ἐφοίτα ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης ἀληλεσμένος .
much ground grain frequently came to them from  Asia.


7.24.1
7260
ὡς μὲν ἐμὲ συμβαλλόμενον εὑρίσκειν , μεγαλοφροσύνης εἵνεκεν αὐτὸ Ξέρξης ὀρύσσειν ἐκέλευε , ἐθέλων τε δύναμιν ἀποδείκνυσθαι καὶ μνημόσυνα λιπέσθαι ·
As far as I can judge by conjecture, Xerxes gave the command for this digging out of pride, wishing to display his power and leave a memorial;


7.24.1
7261
παρεὸν γὰρ μηδένα πόνον λαβόντας τὸν ἰσθμὸν τὰς νέας διειρύσαι , ὀρύσσειν ἐκέλευε διώρυχα τῇ θαλάσσῃ εὖρος ὡς δύο τριήρεας πλέειν ὁμοῦ ἐλαστρεομένας .
with no trouble they could have drawn their ships across the isthmus, yet he ordered them to dig a canal from sea to sea, wide enough to float two triremes rowed abreast.


7.24.1
7262
τοῖσι δὲ αὐτοῖσι τούτοισι , τοῖσί περ καὶ τὸ ὄρυγμα , προσετέτακτο καὶ τὸν Στρυμόνα ποταμὸν ζεύξαντας γεφυρῶσαι .
The same men who were assigned the digging were also assigned to join the banks of the river Strymon by a bridge.


7.25.1
7263
ταῦτα μέν νυν οὕτω ἐποίεε , παρεσκευάζετο δὲ καὶ ὅπλα ἐς τὰς γεφύρας βύβλινά τε καὶ λευκολίνου , ἐπιτάξας Φοίνιξί τε καὶ Αἰγυπτίοισι , καὶ σιτία τῇ στρατιῇ καταβάλλειν , ἵνα μὴ λιμήνειε ἡ στρατιὴ μηδὲ τὰ ὑποζύγια ἐλαυνόμενα ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ·
Thus Xerxes did this. He assigned the Phoenicians and Egyptians to make ropes of papyrus and white flax for the bridges, and to store provisions for his army, so that neither the army nor the beasts of burden would starve on the march to  Hellas.


7.25.2
7264
ἀναπυθόμενος δὲ τοὺς χώρους καταβάλλειν ἐκέλευε ἵνα ἐπιτηδεότατον εἴη , ἄλλα ἄλλῃ ἀγινέοντας ὁλκάσι τε καὶ πορθμηίοισι ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης πανταχόθεν .
After making inquiry, he ordered them to store it in the most fitting places, carrying it to the various places from all parts of  Asia in cargo ships and transports.


7.25.2
7265
τὸν δὲ ὦν πλεῖστον ἐς Λευκὴν ἀκτὴν καλεομένην τῆς Θρηίκης ἀγίνεον , οἳ δὲ ἐς Τυρόδιζαν τὴν Περινθίων , οἳ δὲ ἐς Δορίσκον , οἳ δὲ ἐς Ἠιόνα τὴν ἐπὶ Στρυμόνι , οἳ δὲ ἐς Μακεδονίην διατεταγμένοι .
They brought most of it to the White Headland (as it is called) in  Thrace; some were dispatched to Tyrodiza in the Perinthian country or to Doriscus, others to Eion on the Strymon or to  Macedonia.


7.26.1
7266
ἐν ᾧ δὲ οὗτοι τὸν προκείμενον πόνον ἐργάζοντο , ἐν τούτῳ ὁ πεζὸς ἅπας συλλελεγμένος ἅμα Ξέρξῃ ἐπορεύετο ἐς Σάρδις , ἐκ ἐκ Κριτάλλων ὁρμηθεὶς τῶν ἐν Καππαδοκίῃ ·
While these worked at their appointed task, all the land force had been mustered and was marching with Xerxes to  Sardis, setting forth from Critalla in  Cappadocia,


7.26.1
7267
ἐνθαῦτα γὰρ εἴρητο συλλέγεσθαι πάντα τὸν κατ’ ἤπειρον μέλλοντα ἅμα αὐτῷ Ξέρξῃ πορεύεσθαι στρατόν .
which was the place appointed for gathering all the army that was to march with Xerxes himself by land.


7.26.2
7268
ὃς μέν νυν τῶν ὑπάρχων στρατὸν κάλλιστα ἐσταλμένον ἀγαγὼν τὰ προκείμενα παρὰ βασιλέος ἔλαβε δῶρα , οὐκ ἔχω φράσαι ·
Now which of his governors received the promised gifts from the king for bringing the best-equipped army, I cannot say;


7.26.2
7269
οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀρχὴν ἐς κρίσιν τούτου πέρι ἐλθόντας οἶδα .
I do not even know if the matter was ever determined.


7.26.3
7270
οἳ δὲ ἐπείτε διαβάντες τὸν Ἅλυν ποταμὸν ὡμίλησαν τῇ Φρυγίῃ , δι’ αὐτῆς πορευόμενοι ἀπίκοντο ἐς Κελαινάς , ἵνα πηγαὶ ἀναδιδοῦσι Μαιάνδρου ποταμοῦ καὶ ἑτέρου οὐκ ἐλάσσονος ἢ Μαιάνδρου , τῷ οὔνομα τυγχάνει ἐὸν Καταρρήκτης , ὃς ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς ἀγορῆς τῆς Κελαινέων ἀνατέλλων ἐς τὸν Μαίανδρον ἐκδιδοῖ ·
When they had crossed the river  Halys and entered  Phrygia, they marched through that country to Celaenae, where rises the source of the river  Maeander and of another river no smaller, which is called Cataractes;


7.26.3
7271
ἐν τῇ καὶ ὁ τοῦ Σιληνοῦ Μαρσύεω ἀσκὸς ἀνακρέμαται , τὸν ὑπὸ Φρυγῶν λόγος ἔχει ὑπὸ Ἀπόλλωνος ἐκδαρέντα ἀνακρεμασθῆναι .
it rises right in the market-place of Celaenae and issues into the  Maeander. The skin of Marsyas the Silenus also hangs there; the Phrygian story tells that it was flayed off him and hung up by Apollo.


7.27.1
7272
ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ πόλι ὑποκατήμενος Πύθιος ὁ Ἄτους ἀνὴρ Λυδὸς ἐξείνισε τὴν βασιλέος στρατιὴν πᾶσαν ξεινίοισι μεγίστοισι καὶ αὐτὸν Ξέρξην , χρήματά τε ἐπαγγέλλετο βουλόμενος ἐς τὸν πόλεμον παρέχειν .
In this city Pythius son of Atys, a Lydian, sat awaiting them; he entertained Xerxes himself and all the king's army with the greatest hospitality, and declared himself willing to provide money for the war.


7.27.2
7273
ἐπαγγελλομένου δὲ χρήματα Πυθίου , εἴρετο Ξέρξης Περσέων τοὺς παρεόντας τίς τε ἐὼν ἀνδρῶν Πύθιος καὶ κόσα χρήματα ἐκτημένος ἐπαγγέλλοιτο ταῦτα .
When Pythius offered the money, Xerxes asked the Persians present who this Pythius was and how much wealth he possessed in making the offer.


7.27.2
7274
οἳ δὲ εἶπαν " ὦ βασιλεῦ , οὗτος ἐστὶ ὅς τοι τὸν πατέρα Δαρεῖον ἐδωρήσατο τῇ πλατανίστῳ τῇ χρυσέῃ καὶ τῇ ἀμπέλῳ ·
They said, “O king, this is the one who gave your father Darius the gift of a golden plane-tree and vine;


7.27.2
7275
ὃς καὶ νῦν ἐστι πρῶτος ἀνθρώπων πλούτῳ τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν μετὰ σέ " .
he is now the richest man we know of after you.”


7.28.1
7276
θωμάσας δὲ τῶν ἐπέων τὸ τελευταῖον Ξέρξης αὐτὸς δεύτερα εἴρετο Πύθιον ὁκόσα οἱ εἴη χρήματα .
Xerxes marvelled at this last saying and next himself asked Pythius how much wealth he had.


7.28.1
7277
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ὦ βασιλεῦ , οὔτε σε ἀποκρύψω οὔτε σκήψομαι τὸ μὴ εἰδέναι τὴν ἐμεωυτοῦ οὐσίην , ἀλλ’ ἐπιστάμενός τοι ἀτρεκέως καταλέξω .
“O king,” said Pythius, “I will not conceal the quantity of my property from you, nor pretend that I do not know; I know and will tell you the exact truth.


7.28.2
7278
ἐπείτε γὰρ τάχιστά σε ἐπυθόμην ἐπὶ θάλασσαν καταβαίνοντα τὴν Ἑλληνίδα , βουλόμενός τοι δοῦναι ἐς τὸν πόλεμον χρήματα ἐξεμάνθανον , καὶ εὗρον λογιζόμενος ἀργυρίου μὲν δύο χιλιάδας ἐούσας μοι ταλάντων , χρυσίου δὲ τετρακοσίας μυριάδας στατήρων Δαρεικῶν ἐπιδεούσας ἑπτὰ χιλιάδων .
As soon as I learned that you were coming down to the Greek sea, I wanted to give you money for the war, so I inquired into the matter, and my reckoning showed me that I had two thousand talents of silver, and four million Daric staters of gold, lacking seven thousand.


7.28.3
7279
καὶ τούτοισί σε ἐγὼ δωρέομαι , αὐτῷ δέ μοι ἀπὸ ἀνδραπόδων τε καὶ γεωπέδων ἀρκέων ἐστὶ βίος " .
All this I freely give to you; for myself, I have a sufficient livelihood from my slaves and my farms.”


7.29.1
7280
ὃ μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεγε , Ξέρξης δὲ ἡσθεὶς τοῖσι εἰρημένοισι εἶπε " ξεῖνε Λυδέ , ἐγὼ ἐπείτε ἐξῆλθον τὴν Περσίδα χώρην , οὐδενὶ ἀνδρὶ συνέμιξα ἐς τόδε ὅστις ἠθέλησε ξείνια προθεῖναι στρατῷ τῷ ἐμῷ , οὐδὲ ὅστις ἐς ὄψιν τὴν ἐμὴν καταστὰς αὐτεπάγγελτος ἐς τὸν πόλεμον ἐμοὶ ἠθέλησε συμβαλέσθαι χρήματα , ἔξω σεῦ .
Thus he spoke. Xerxes was pleased with what he said and replied:


7.29.1
7281
σὺ δὲ καὶ ἐξείνισας μεγάλως στρατὸν τὸν ἐμὸν καὶ χρήματα μεγάλα ἐπαγγέλλεαι .
“My Lydian friend, since I came out of  Persia I have so far met with no man who was willing to give hospitality to my army, nor who came into my presence unsummoned and offered to furnish money for the war, besides you.


7.29.2
7282
σοὶ ὦν ἐγὼ ἀντὶ αὐτῶν γέρεα τοιάδε δίδωμι ·
But you have entertained my army nobly and offer me great sums. In return for this I give you these privileges:


7.29.2
7283
ξεῖνόν τέ σε ποιεῦμαι ἐμὸν καὶ τὰς τετρακοσίας μυριάδας τοι τῶν στατήρων ἀποπλήσω παρ’ ἐμεωυτοῦ δοὺς τὰς ἑπτὰ χιλιάδας , ἵνα μή τοι ἐπιδεέες ἔωσι αἱ τετρακόσιαι μυριάδες ἑπτὰ χιλιάδων , ἀλλὰ ᾖ τοι ἀπαρτιλογίη ὑπ’ ἐμέο πεπληρωμένη .
I make you my friend, and out of my own wealth I give you the seven thousand staters which will complete your total of four million, so that your four million not lack the seven thousand and the even number be reached by my completing it.


7.29.3
7284
ἔκτησό τε αὐτὸς τά περ αὐτὸς ἐκτήσαο , ἐπίστασό τε εἶναι αἰεὶ τοιοῦτος ·
Remain in possession of what you now possess, and be mindful to be always such as you are;


7.29.3
7285
οὐ γάρ τοι ταῦτα ποιεῦντι οὔτε ἐς τὸ παρεὸν οὔτε ἐς χρόνον μεταμελήσει " .
neither for the present nor in time will you regret what you now do.”


7.30.1
7286
ταῦτα δὲ εἴπας καὶ ἐπιτελέα ποιήσας ἐπορεύετο τὸ πρόσω αἰεὶ .
Xerxes said this and made good his words, then journeyed ever onward.


7.30.1
7287
Ἄναυα δὲ καλεομένην Φρυγῶν πόλιν παραμειβόμενος καὶ λίμνην ἐκ τῆς ἅλες γίνονται , ἀπίκετο ἐς Κολοσσὰς πόλιν μεγάλην Φρυγίης ·
Passing by the Phrygian town called Anaua, and the lake from which salt is obtained, he came to  Colossae, a great city in  Phrygia;


7.30.1
7288
ἐν τῇ Λύκος ποταμὸς ἐς χάσμα γῆς ἐσβάλλων ἀφανίζεται , ἔπειτα διὰ σταδίων ὡς πέντε μάλιστά κῃ ἀναφαινόμενος ἐκδιδοῖ καὶ οὗτος ἐς τὸν Μαίανδρον .
there the river Lycus plunges into a cleft in the earth and disappears, until it reappears about five stadia away; this river issues into the  Maeander.


7.30.2
7289
ἐκ δὲ Κολοσσέων ὁ στρατὸς ὁρμώμενος ἐπὶ τοὺς οὔρους τῶν Φρυγῶν καὶ Λυδῶν ἀπίκετο ἐς Κύδραρα πόλιν , ἔνθα στήλη καταπεπηγυῖα , σταθεῖσα δὲ ὑπὸ Κροίσου , καταμηνύει διὰ γραμμάτων τοὺς οὔρους .
From  Colossae the army held its course for the borders of  Phrygia and  Lydia, and came to the city of Cydrara, where there stands a pillar set up by Croesus which marks the boundary with an inscription.


7.31.1
7290
ὡς δὲ ἐκ τῆς Φρυγίης ἐσέβαλε ἐς τὴν Λυδίην , σχιζομένης τῆς ὁδοῦ καὶ τῆς μὲν ἐς ἀριστερὴν ἐπὶ Καρίης φερούσης τῆς δὲ ἐς δεξιὴν ἐς Σάρδις , τῇ καὶ πορευομένῳ διαβῆναι τὸν Μαίανδρον ποταμὸν πᾶσα ἀνάγκη γίνεται καὶ ἰέναι παρὰ Καλλάτηβον πόλιν , ἐν τῇ ἄνδρες δημιοεργοὶ μέλι ἐκ μυρίκης τε καὶ πυροῦ ποιεῦσι , ταύτην ἰὼν ὁ Ξέρξης τὴν ὁδὸν εὗρε πλατάνιστον , τὴν κάλλεος εἵνεκα δωρησάμενος κόσμῳ χρυσέῳ καὶ μελεδωνῷ ἀθανάτῳ ἀνδρὶ ἐπιτρέψας δευτέρῃ ἡμέρῃ ἀπίκετο ἐς τῶν Λυδῶν τὸ ἄστυ .
Passing from  Phrygia into  Lydia, he came to the place where the roads part; the road on the left leads to  Caria, the one on the right to  Sardis; on the latter the traveller must cross the river  Maeander and pass by the city of Callatebus, where craftsmen make honey out of wheat and tamarisks. Xerxes went by this road and found a plane-tree, which he adorned with gold because of its beauty, and he assigned one of his immortals to guard it. On the next day he reached the city of the Lydians.


7.32.1
7291
ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἐς Σάρδις πρῶτα μὲν ἀπέπεμπε κήρυκας ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα αἰτήσοντας γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ προερέοντας δεῖπνα βασιλέι παρασκευάζειν ·
After he arrived in  Sardis, he first sent heralds to  Hellas to demand earth and water and to command the preparation of meals for the king.


7.32.1
7292
πλὴν οὔτε ἐς Ἀθήνας οὔτε ἐς Λακεδαίμονα ἀπέπεμπε ἐπὶ γῆς αἴτησιν , τῇ δὲ ἄλλῃ πάντῃ .
He sent demands for earth everywhere except to  Athens and  Lacedaemon.


7.32.1
7293
τῶνδε δὲ εἵνεκα τὸ δεύτερον ἀπέπεμπε ἐπὶ γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ ·
The reason for his sending for earth and water the second time was this:


7.32.1
7294
ὅσοι πρότερον οὐκ ἔδοσαν Δαρείῳ πέμψαντι , τούτους πάγχυ ἐδόκεε τότε δείσαντας δώσειν ·
he fully believed that whoever had not previously given it to Darius' messengers would now be compelled to give by fear;


7.32.1
7295
βουλόμενος ὦν αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἐκμαθεῖν ἀκριβέως ἔπεμπε .
so he sent out of desire to know this for certain.


7.33.1
7296
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα παρεσκευάζετο ὡς ἐλῶν ἐς Ἄβυδον .
After this he prepared to march to  Abydos;


7.33.1
7297
οἳ δὲ ἐν τούτῳ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἐζεύγνυσαν ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην .
meanwhile his men were bridging the  Hellespont from  Asia to  Europe.


7.33.1
7298
ἔστι δὲ τῆς Χερσονήσου τῆς ἐν Ἑλλησπόντῳ , Σηστοῦ τε πόλιος μεταξὺ καὶ Μαδύτου , ἀκτὴ παχέα ἐς θάλασσαν κατήκουσα Ἀβύδῳ καταντίον ·
On the  Chersonese, which is on the  Hellespont, between the city of  Sestus and  Madytus there is a broad headland running out into the sea opposite  Abydos.


7.33.1
7299
ἔνθα μετὰ ταῦτα , χρόνῳ ὕστερον οὐ πολλῷ , ἐπὶ Ξανθίππου τοῦ Ἀρίφρονος στρατηγοῦ Ἀθηναῖοι Ἀρταΰκτην ἄνδρα Πέρσην λαβόντες Σηστοῦ ὕπαρχον ζῶντα πρὸς σανίδα διεπασσάλευσαν , ὃς καὶ ἐς τοῦ Πρωτεσίλεω τὸ ἱρὸν ἐς Ἐλαιοῦντα ἀγινεόμενος γυναῖκας ἀθέμιστα ἔρδεσκε .
It was here that not long afterwards the Athenians, when Xanthippus son of Ariphron was their general, took Artayctes, a Persian and the governor of  Sestus, and crucified him alive; he had been in the habit of bringing women right into the temple of Protesilaus at Elaeus and doing impious deeds there.


7.34.1
7300
ἐς ταύτην ὦν τὴν ἀκτὴν ἐξ Ἀβύδου ὁρμώμενοι ἐγεφύρουν τοῖσι προσέκειτο , τὴν μὲν λευκολίνου Φοίνικες , τὴν δ’ ἑτέρην τὴν βυβλίνην Αἰγύπτιοι .
The men who had been given this assignment made bridges starting from Abydos across to that headland; the Phoenicians one of flaxen cables, and the Egyptians a papyrus one.


7.34.1
7301
ἔστι δὲ ἑπτὰ στάδιοι ἐξ Ἀβύδου ἐς τὴν ἀπαντίον .
From Abydos to the opposite shore it is a distance of seven stadia.


7.34.1
7302
καὶ δὴ ἐζευγμένου τοῦ πόρου ἐπιγενόμενος χειμὼν μέγας συνέκοψέ τε ἐκεῖνα πάντα καὶ διέλυσε .
But no sooner had the strait been bridged than a great storm swept down, breaking and scattering everything.


7.35.1
7303
ὡς δ’ ἐπύθετο Ξέρξης , δεινὰ ποιεύμενος τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἐκέλευσε τριηκοσίας ἐπικέσθαι μάστιγι πληγὰς καὶ κατεῖναι ἐς τὸ πέλαγος πεδέων ζεῦγος .
When Xerxes heard of this, he was very angry and commanded that the Hellespont be whipped with three hundred lashes, and a pair of fetters be thrown into the sea.


7.35.1
7304
ἤδη δὲ ἤκουσα ὡς καὶ στιγέας ἅμα τούτοισι ἀπέπεμψε στίξοντας τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον .
I have even heard that he sent branders with them to brand the Hellespont.


7.35.2
7305
ἐνετέλλετο δὲ ὦν ῥαπίζοντας λέγειν βάρβαρά τε καὶ ἀτάσθαλα ·
He commanded them while they whipped to utter words outlandish and presumptuous,


7.35.2
7306
" ὦ πικρὸν ὕδωρ , δεσπότης τοι δίκην ἐπιτιθεῖ τήνδε , ὅτι μιν ἠδίκησας οὐδὲν πρὸς ἐκείνου ἄδικον παθόν .
“Bitter water, our master thus punishes you, because you did him wrong though he had done you none.


7.35.2
7307
καὶ βασιλεὺς μὲν Ξέρξης διαβήσεταί σε , ἤν τε σύ γε βούλῃ ἤν τε μή ·
Xerxes the king will pass over you, whether you want it or not;


7.35.2
7308
σοὶ δὲ κατὰ δίκην ἄρα οὐδεὶς ἀνθρώπων θύει ὡς ἐόντι καὶ θολερῷ καὶ ἁλμυρῷ ποταμῷ " .
in accordance with justice no one offers you sacrifice, for you are a turbid and briny river.”


7.35.3
7309
τήν τε δὴ θάλασσαν ἐνετέλλετο τούτοισι ζημιοῦν καὶ τῶν ἐπεστεώτων τῇ ζεύξι τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου ἀποταμεῖν τὰς κεφαλάς .
He commanded that the sea receive these punishments and that the overseers of the bridge over the  Hellespont be beheaded.


7.36.1
7310
καὶ οἳ μὲν ταῦτα ἐποίεον , τοῖσι προσέκειτο αὕτη ἡ ἄχαρις τιμή , τὰς δὲ ἄλλοι ἀρχιτέκτονες ἐζεύγνυσαν .
So this was done by those who were appointed to the thankless honor, and new engineers set about making the bridges.


7.36.1
7311
ἐζεύγνυσαν δὲ ὧδε , πεντηκοντέρους καὶ τριήρεας συνθέντες , ὑπὸ μὲν τὴν πρὸς τοῦ Εὐξείνου πόντου ἑξήκοντά τε καὶ τριηκοσίας , ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν ἑτέρην τεσσερεσκαίδεκα καὶ τριηκοσίας , τοῦ μὲν Πόντου ἐπικαρσίας τοῦ δὲ Ἑλλησπόντου κατὰ ῥόον , ἵνα ἀνακωχεύῃ τὸν τόνον τῶν ὅπλων ·
They made the bridges as follows: in order to lighten the strain of the cables, they placed fifty-oared ships and triremes alongside each other, three hundred and sixty to bear the bridge nearest the Euxine sea, and three hundred and fourteen to bear the other; all lay obliquely to the line of the Pontus and parallel with the current of the Hellespont.


7.36.2
7312
συνθέντες δὲ ἀγκύρας κατῆκαν περιμήκεας , τὰς μὲν πρὸς τοῦ Πόντου τῆς ἑτέρης τῶν ἀνέμων εἵνεκεν τῶν ἔσωθεν ἐκπνεόντων , τῆς δὲ ἑτέρης πρὸς ἑσπέρης τε καὶ τοῦ Αἰγαίου ζεφύρου τε καὶ νότου εἵνεκα .
After putting the ships together they let down very great anchors, both from the end of the ships on the Pontus side to hold fast against the winds blowing from within that sea, and from the other end, towards the west and the Aegean, to hold against the west and south winds.


7.36.2
7313
διέκπλοον δὲ ὑπόφαυσιν κατέλιπον τῶν πεντηκοντέρων καὶ τριηρέων , ἵνα καὶ ἐς τὸν Πόντον ἔχῃ ὁ βουλόμενος πλέειν πλοίοισι λεπτοῖσι καὶ ἐκ τοῦ Πόντου ἔξω .
They left a narrow opening to sail through in the line of fifty-oared ships and triremes, that so whoever wanted to could sail by small craft to the Pontus or out of it.


7.36.3
7314
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσαντες κατέτεινον ἐκ γῆς στρεβλοῦντες ὄνοισι ξυλίνοισι τὰ ὅπλα , οὐκέτι χωρὶς ἑκάτερα τάξαντες , ἀλλὰ δύο μὲν λευκολίνου δασάμενοι ἐς ἑκατέρην , τέσσερα δὲ τῶν βυβλίνων .
After doing this, they stretched the cables from the land, twisting them taut with wooden windlasses; they did not as before keep the two kinds apart, but assigned for each bridge two cables of flax and four of papyrus.


7.36.3
7315
παχύτης μὲν ἦν ἡ αὐτὴ καὶ καλλονή , κατὰ λόγον δὲ ἐμβριθέστερα ἦν τὰ λίνεα , τοῦ τάλαντον ὁ πῆχυς εἷλκε .
All were of the same thickness and quality, but the flaxen were heavier in proportion, a cubit of each weighing a talent.


7.36.4
7316
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἐγεφυρώθη ὁ πόρος , κορμοὺς ξύλων καταπρίσαντες καὶ ποιήσαντες ἴσους τῆς σχεδίης τῷ εὔρεϊ κόσμῳ ἐτίθεσαν κατύπερθε τῶν ὅπλων τοῦ τόνου , θέντες δὲ ἐπεξῆς ἐνθαῦτα αὖτις ἐπεζεύγνυον ·
All these had the same thickness and fine appearance, but the flaxen were heavier in proportion, for a cubit of them weighed a talent.


7.36.5
7317
ποιήσαντες δὲ ταῦτα ὕλην ἐπεφόρησαν , κόσμῳ δὲ θέντες καὶ τὴν ὕλην γῆν ἐπεφόρησαν , κατανάξαντες δὲ καὶ τὴν γῆν φραγμὸν παρείρυσαν ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν , ἵνα μὴ φοβέηται τὰ ὑποζύγια τὴν θάλασσαν ὑπερορῶντα καὶ οἱ ἵπποι .
When the strait was thus bridged, they sawed logs of wood to a length equal to the breadth of the floating supports, and laid them in order on the taut cables; after placing them together they then made them fast. After doing this, they carried brushwood onto the bridge; when this was all laid in order they heaped earth on it and stamped it down; then they made a fence on either side, so that the beasts of burden and horses not be frightened by the sight of the sea below them.


7.37.1
7318
ὡς δὲ τά τε τῶν γεφυρέων κατεσκεύαστο καὶ τὰ περὶ τὸν Ἄθων , οἵ τε χυτοὶ περὶ τὰ στόματα τῆς διώρυχος , οἳ τῆς ῥηχίης εἵνεκεν ἐποιήθησαν , ἵνα μὴ πίμπληται τὰ στόματα τοῦ ὀρύγματος , καὶ αὐτὴ ἡ διῶρυξ παντελέως πεποιημένη ἀγγέλλετο , ἐνθαῦτα χειμερίσας ἅμα τῶ ἔαρι παρεσκευασμένος ὁ στρατὸς ἐκ τῶν Σαρδίων ὁρμᾶτο ἐλῶν ἐς Ἄβυδον ·
When the bridges and the work at  Athos were ready, and both the dikes at the canal's entrances, built to prevent the surf from silting up the entrances of the dug passage, and the canal itself were reported to be now completely finished, the army then wintered. At the beginning of spring the army made ready and set forth from  Sardis to march to  Abydos.


7.37.2
7319
ὁρμημένῳ δέ οἱ ὁ ἥλιος ἐκλιπὼν τὴν ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἕδρην ἀφανὴς ἦν οὔτ’ ἐπινεφέλων ἐόντων αἰθρίης τε τὰ μάλιστα , ἀντὶ ἡμέρης τε νὺξ ἐγένετο .
As it was setting out, the sun left his place in the heaven and was invisible, although the sky was without clouds and very clear, and the day turned into night.


7.37.2
7320
ἰδόντι δὲ καὶ μαθόντι τοῦτο τῷ Ξέρξῃ ἐπιμελὲς ἐγένετο , καὶ εἴρετο τοὺς Μάγους τὸ θέλει προφαίνειν τὸ φάσμα .
When Xerxes saw and took note of that, he was concerned and asked the Magi what the vision might signify.


7.37.3
7321
οἱ δὲ ἔφραζον ὡς Ἕλλησι προδεικνύει ὁ θεὸς ἔκλειψιν τῶν πολίων , λέγοντες ἥλιον εἶναι Ἑλλήνων προδέκτορα , σελήνην δὲ σφέων .
They declared to him that the god was showing the Greeks the abandonment of their cities; for the sun (they said) was the prophet of the Greeks, as the moon was their own.


7.37.3
7322
ταῦτα πυθόμενος ὁ Ξέρξης περιχαρὴς ἐὼν ἐποιέετο τὴν ἔλασιν .
Xerxes rejoiced exceedingly to hear that and continued on his march.


7.38.1
7323
ὡς δ’ ἐξήλαυνε τὴν στρατιήν , Πύθιος ὁ Λυδὸς καταρρωδήσας τὸ ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ φάσμα ἐπαερθείς τε τοῖσι δωρήμασι , ἐλθὼν παρὰ Ξέρξην ἔλεγε τάδε .
As Xerxes led his army away, Pythius the Lydian, frightened by the heavenly vision and encouraged by the gifts that he had received, came to Xerxes and said,


7.38.1
7324
" ὦ δέσποτα , χρηίσας ἄν τι σεῦ βουλοίμην τυχεῖν , τὸ σοὶ μὲν ἐλαφρὸν τυγχάνει ἐὸν ὑπουργῆσαι , ἐμοὶ δὲ μέγα γενόμενον " .
“Master, I have a favor to ask that I desire of you, easy for you to grant and precious for me to receive.”


7.38.2
7325
Ξέρξης δὲ πᾶν μᾶλλον δοκέων μιν χρηίσειν ἢ τὸ ἐδεήθη , ἔφη τε ὑπουργήσειν καὶ δὴ ἀγορεύειν ἐκέλευε ὅτευ δέοιτο .
Xerxes supposed that Pythius would demand anything rather than what he did ask and answered that he would grant the request, bidding him declare what he desired.


7.38.2
7326
ὁ δὲ ἐπείτε ταῦτα ἤκουσε , ἔλεγε θαρσήσας τάδε .
When Pythius heard this, he took courage and said:


7.38.2
7327
" ὦ δέσποτα , τυγχάνουσί μοι παῖδες ἐόντες πέντε , καί σφεας καταλαμβάνει πάντας ἅμα σοὶ στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
“Master, I have five sons, and all of them are constrained to march with you against Hellas.


7.38.3
7328
σὺ δέ , ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἐμὲ ἐς τόδε ἡλικίης ἥκοντα οἰκτείρας τῶν μοι παίδων ἕνα παράλυσον τῆς στρατηίης τὸν πρεσβύτατον , ἵνα αὐτοῦ τε ἐμεῦ καὶ τῶν χρημάτων ἦ μελεδωνός ·
I pray you, O king, take pity on me in my advanced age, and release one of my sons, the eldest, from service, so that he may take care of me and of my possessions;


7.38.3
7329
τοὺς δὲ τέσσερας ἄγευ ἅμα σεωυτῷ , καὶ πρήξας τὰ νοέεις νοστήσειας ὀπίσω " .
take the four others with you, and may you return back with all your plans accomplished.”


7.39.1
7330
κάρτα τε ἐθυμώθη ὁ Ξέρξης καὶ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
Xerxes became very angry and thus replied:


7.39.1
7331
" ὦ κακὲ ἄνθρωπε , σὺ ἐτόλμησας , ἐμεῦ στρατευομένου αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα καὶ ἄγοντος παῖδας ἐμοὺς καὶ ἀδελφεοὺς καὶ οἰκηίους καὶ φίλους , μνήσασθαι περὶ σέο παιδός , ἐὼν ἐμὸς δοῦλος , τὸν χρῆν πανοικίῃ αὐτῇ τῇ γυναικὶ συνέπεσθαι ;
“Villain, you see me marching against Hellas myself, and taking with me my sons and brothers and relations and friends; do you, my slave, who should have followed me with all your household and your very wife, speak to me of your son?


7.39.1
7332
εὖ νυν τόδ’ ἐξεπίστασο , ὡς ἐν τοῖσι ὠσὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων οἰκέει ὁ θυμός , ὃς χρηστὰ μὲν ἀκούσας τέρψιος ἐμπιπλεῖ τὸ σῶμα , ὑπεναντία δὲ τούτοισι ἀκούσας ἀνοιδέει .
Be well assured of this, that a man's spirit dwells in his ears; when it hears good words it fills the whole body with delight, but when it hears the opposite it swells with anger.


7.39.2
7333
ὅτε μέν νυν χρηστὰ ποιήσας ἕτερα τοιαῦτα ἐπηγγέλλεο , εὐεργεσίῃσι βασιλέα οὐ καυχήσεαι ὑπερβαλέσθαι ·
When you did me good service and promised more, you will never boast that you outdid your king in the matter of benefits;


7.39.2
7334
ἐπείτε δὲ ἐς τὸ ἀναιδέστερον ἐτράπευ , τὴν μὲν ἀξίην οὐ λάμψεαι , ἐλάσσω δὲ τῆς ἀξίης .
and now that you have turned aside to the way of shamelessness, you will receive a lesser requital than you merit.


7.39.2
7335
σὲ μὲν γὰρ καὶ τοὺς τέσσερας τῶν παίδων ῥύεται τὰ ξείνια ·
You and four of your sons are saved by your hospitality;


7.39.2
7336
τοῦ δὲ ἑνός , τοῦ περιέχεαι μάλιστα , τῇ ψυχῇ ζημιώσεαι " .
but you shall be punished by the life of that one you most desire to keep.”


7.39.3
7337
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ὑπεκρίνατο , αὐτίκα ἐκέλευε τοῖσι προσετέτακτο ταῦτα πρήσσειν , τῶν Πυθίου παίδων ἐξευρόντας τὸν πρεσβύτατον μέσον διαταμεῖν , διαταμόντας δὲ τὰ ἡμίτομα διαθεῖναι τὸ μὲν ἐπὶ δεξιὰ τῆς ὁδοῦ τὸ δ’ ἐπ’ ἀριστερά , καὶ ταύτῃ διεξιέναι τὸν στρατόν .
With that reply, he immediately ordered those who were assigned to do these things to find the eldest of Pythius sons and cut him in half, then to set one half of his body on the right side of the road and the other on the left, so that the army would pass between them.


7.40.1
7338
ποιησάντων δὲ τούτων τοῦτο , μετὰ ταῦτα διεξήιε ὁ στρατός .
This they did, and the army passed between.


7.40.1
7339
ἡγέοντο δὲ πρῶτοι μὲν οἱ σκευοφόροι τε καὶ τὰ ὑποζύγια , μετὰ δὲ τούτους σύμμικτος στρατὸς παντοίων ἐθνέων ἀναμίξ , οὐ διακεκριμένοι ·
First went the baggage train and the beasts of burden, and after them a mixed army of all sorts of nations, not according to their divisions but all mingled together;


7.40.1
7340
τῇ δὲ ὑπερημίσεες ἦσαν , ἐνθαῦτα διελέλειπτο , καὶ οὐ συνέμισγον οὗτοι βασιλέι .
when more than half had passed there was a space left, and these did not come near the king.


7.40.2
7341
προηγεῦντο μὲν δὴ ἱππόται χίλιοι , ἐκ Περσέων πάντων ἀπολελεγμένοι ·
After that, first came a thousand horsemen, chosen out of all Persians;


7.40.2
7342
μετὰ δὲ αἰχμοφόροι χίλιοι καὶ οὗτοι ἐκ πάντων ἀπολελεγμένοι , τὰς λόγχας κάτω ἐς τὴν γῆν τρέψαντες ·
next, a thousand spearmen, picked men like the others, carrying their spears reversed;


7.40.2
7343
μετὰ δὲ ἱροὶ Νησαῖοι καλεόμενοι ἵπποι δέκα κεκοσμημένοι ὡς κάλλιστα .
and after them ten horses of the breed called Nesaean, equipped most splendidly.


7.40.3
7344
Νησαῖοι δὲ καλέονται ἵπποι ἐπὶ τοῦδε ·
The horses are called Nesaean for this reason.


7.40.3
7345
ἔστι πεδίον μέγα τῆς Μηδικῆς τῷ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Νήσαιον ·
There is in Media a wide plain of that name,


7.40.3
7346
τοὺς ὦν δὴ ἵππους τοὺς μεγάλους φέρει τὸ πεδίον τοῦτο .
where the great horses are bred.


7.40.4
7347
ὄπισθε δὲ τούτων τῶν δέκα ἵππων ἅρμα Διὸς ἱρὸν ἐπετέτακτο , τὸ ἵπποι μὲν εἷλκον λευκοὶ ὀκτώ , ὄπισθε δὲ αὖ τῶν ἵππων εἵπετο πεζῇ ἡνίοχος ἐχόμενος τῶν χαλινῶν ·
Behind these ten horses was the place of the sacred chariot of Zeus, drawn by eight white horses, with the charioteer following the horses on foot and holding the reins;


7.40.4
7348
οὐδεὶς γὰρ δὴ ἐπὶ τοῦτον τὸν θρόνον ἀνθρώπων ἐπιβαίνει .
for no mortal man may mount into that seat.


7.40.4
7349
τούτου δὲ ὄπισθε αὐτὸς Ξέρξης ἐπ’ ἅρματος ἵππων Νησαίων ·
After these came Xerxes himself in a chariot drawn by Nesaean horses;


7.40.4
7350
παραβεβήκεε δέ οἱ ἡνίοχος τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Πατιράμφης , Ὀτάνεω ἀνδρὸς Πέρσεω παῖς .
beside him was his charioteer, whose name was Patiramphes, the son of Otanes, a Persian.


7.41.1
7351
ἐξήλασε μὲν οὕτω ἐκ Σαρδίων Ξέρξης , μετεκβαίνεσκε δέ , ὅκως μιν λόγος αἱρέοι , ἐκ τοῦ ἅρματος ἐς ἁρμάμαξαν .
In this way Xerxes rode out from Sardis;


7.41.1
7352
αὐτοῦ δὲ ὄπισθε αἰχμοφόροι Περσέων οἱ ἄριστοί τε καὶ γενναιότατοι χίλιοι , κατὰ νόμον τὰς λόγχας ἔχοντες , μετὰ δὲ ἵππος ἄλλη χιλίη ἐκ Περσέων ἀπολελεγμένη , μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἵππον ἐκ τῶν λοιπῶν Περσέων ἀπολελεγμένοι μύριοι .
but whenever the thought took him he would alight from the chariot into a carriage. Behind him came a thousand spearmen of the best and noblest blood of Persia, carrying their spears in the customary manner; after them a thousand picked Persian horsemen, and after the horse ten thousand that were foot soldiers, chosen out of the rest of the Persians.


7.41.1
7353
οὗτος πεζὸς ἦν ·
This was the foot guard;


7.41.2
7354
καὶ τούτων χίλιοι μὲν ἐπὶ τοῖσι δόρασι ἀντὶ τῶν σαυρωτήρων ῥοιὰς εἶχον χρυσέας καὶ πέριξ συνεκλήιον τοὺς ἄλλους , οἱ δὲ εἰνακισχίλιοι ἐντὸς τούτων ἐόντες ἀργυρέας ῥοιὰς εἶχον ·
of these, a thousand had golden pomegranate knobs on their spear-shafts instead of spikes, and they surrounded the rest;


7.41.2
7355
εἶχον δὲ χρυσέας ῥοιὰς καὶ οἱ ἐς τὴν γῆν τρέποντες τὰς λόγχας , καὶ μῆλα οἱ ἄγχιστα ἑπόμενοι Ξέρξῃ .
those with golden pomegranates had their spears turned downwards, while those who came closest behind Xerxes had golden pomegranates too.


7.41.2
7356
τοῖσι δὲ μυρίοισι ἐπετέτακτο ἵππος Περσέων μυρίη .
The ten thousand had been followed by ten thousand Persian horsemen.


7.41.2
7357
μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἵππον διέλειπε καὶ δύο σταδίους , καὶ ἔπειτα ὁ λοιπὸς ὅμιλος ἤιε ἀναμίξ .
After the horse there was a gap of two stadia, and then the rest of the host followed, all mingled together.


7.42.1
7358
ἐποιέετο δὲ τὴν ὁδὸν ἐκ τῆς Λυδίης ὁ στρατὸς ἐπί τε ποταμὸν Κάικον καὶ γῆν τὴν Μυσίην , ἀπὸ δὲ Καΐκου ὁρμώμενος , Κάνης ὄρος ἔχων ἐν ἀριστερῇ , διὰ τοῦ Ἀταρνέος ἐς Καρήνην πόλιν ·
From Lydia the army took its course to the river Caicus and the land of Mysia;


7.42.1
7359
ἀπὸ δὲ ταύτης διὰ Θήβης πεδίου ἐπορεύετο , Ἀδραμύττειόν τε πόλιν καὶ Ἄντανδρον τὴν Πελασγίδα παραμειβόμενος .
leaving the Caicus, they went through Atarneus to the city of Carene, keeping the mountain of Cane on the left.


7.42.2
7360
τὴν Ἴδην δὲ λαβὼν ἐς ἀριστερὴν χεῖρα ἤιε ἐς τὴν Ἰλιάδα γῆν .
Then they came into the territory of Ilium, with Ida on their left.


7.42.2
7361
καὶ πρῶτα μέν οἱ ὑπὸ τῇ Ἴδῃ νύκτα ἀναμείναντι βρονταί τε καὶ πρηστῆρες ἐπεσπίπτουσι καί τινα αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ συχνὸν ὅμιλον διέφθειραν .
When they had halted for the night at the foot of Ida, a storm of thunder and lightning fell upon them, killing a great crowd of them there.


7.43.1
7362
ἀπικομένου δὲ τοῦ στρατοῦ ἐπὶ ποταμὸν Σκάμανδρον , ὃς πρῶτος ποταμῶν , ἐπείτε ἐκ Σαρδίων ὁρμηθέντες ἐπεχείρησαν τῇ ὁδῷ , ἐπέλιπε τὸ ῥέεθρον οὐδ’ ἀπέχρησε τῇ στρατιῇ τε καὶ τοῖσι κτήνεσι πινόμενος ·
When the army had come to the river Scamander, which was the first river after the beginning of their march from Sardis that fell short of their needs and was not sufficient for the army and the cattle to drink


7.43.1
7363
ἐπὶ τοῦτον δὴ τὸν ποταμὸν ὡς ἀπίκετο Ξέρξης , ἐς τὸ Πριάμου Πέργαμον ἀνέβη ἵμερον ἔχων θεήσασθαι ·
— arriving at this river, Xerxes ascended to the citadel of Priam, having a desire to see it.


7.43.2
7364
θεησάμενος δὲ καὶ πυθόμενος ἐκείνων ἕκαστα τῇ Ἀθηναίῃ τῇ Ἰλιάδι ἔθυσε βοῦς χιλίας , χοὰς δὲ οἱ Μάγοι τοῖσι ἥρωσι ἐχέαντο .
After he saw it and asked about everything there, he sacrificed a thousand cattle to Athena of Ilium, and the Magi offered libations to the heroes.


7.43.2
7365
ταῦτα δὲ ποιησαμένοισι νυκτὸς φόβος ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον ἐνέπεσε .
After they did this, a panic fell upon the camp in the night.


7.43.2
7366
ἅμα ἡμέρῃ δὲ ἐπορεύετο ἐνθεῦτεν , ἐν ἀριστερῇ μὲν ἀπέργων Ῥοίτιον πόλιν καὶ Ὀφρύνειον καὶ Δάρδανον , ἥ περ δὴ Ἀβύδῳ ὅμουρος ἐστί , ἐν δεξιῇ δὲ Γέργιθας Τευκρούς .
When it was day they journeyed on from there, keeping on their left the cities of Rhoetium and Ophryneum and Dardanus, which borders Abydos, and on their right the Teucrian Gergithae.


7.44.1
7367
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐγένετο ἐν Ἀβύδῳ μέσῃ , ἠθέλησε Ξέρξης ἰδέσθαι πάντα τὸν στρατόν ·
When they were at Abydos, Xerxes wanted to see the whole of his army.


7.44.1
7368
καὶ προεπεποίητο γὰρ ἐπὶ κολωνοῦ ἐπίτηδες αὐτῷ ταύτῃ προεξέδρη λίθου λευκοῦ , ἐποίησαν δὲ Ἀβυδηνοὶ ἐντειλαμένου πρότερον βασιλέος , ἐνθαῦτα ὡς ἵζετο , κατορῶν ἐπὶ τῆς ἠιόνος ἐθηεῖτο καὶ τὸν πεζὸν καὶ τὰς νέας , θηεύμενος δὲ ἱμέρθη τῶν νεῶν ἅμιλλαν γινομένην ἰδέσθαι .
A lofty seat of white stone had been set up for him on a hill there for this very purpose, built by the people of Abydos at the king's command. There he sat and looked down on the seashore, viewing his army and his fleet; as he viewed them he desired to see the ships contend in a race.


7.44.1
7369
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐγένετό τε καὶ ἐνίκων Φοίνικες Σιδώνιοι , ἥσθη τε τῇ ἁμίλλῃ καὶ τῇ στρατιῇ .
They did so, and the Phoenicians of Sidon won; Xerxes was pleased with the race and with his expedition.


7.45.1
7370
ὡς δὲ ὥρα πάντα μὲν τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ὑπὸ τῶν νεῶν ἀποκεκρυμμένον , πάσας δὲ τὰς ἀκτὰς καὶ τὰ Ἀβυδηνῶν πεδία ἐπίπλεα ἀνθρώπων , ἐνθαῦτα ὁ Ξέρξης ἑωυτὸν ἐμακάρισε , μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο ἐδάκρυσε .
When he saw the whole  Hellespont covered with ships, and all the shores and plains of  Abydos full of men, Xerxes first declared himself blessed, and then wept.


7.46.1
7371
μαθὼν δέ μιν Ἀρτάβανος ὁ πάτρως , ὃς τὸ πρῶτον γνώμην ἀπεδέξατο ἐλευθέρως οὐ συμβουλεύων Ξέρξῃ στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , οὗτος ὡνὴρ φρασθεὶς Ξέρξην δακρύσαντα εἴρετο τάδε .
His uncle Artabanus perceived this, he who in the beginning had spoken his mind freely and advised Xerxes not to march against Hellas.


7.46.1
7372
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , ὡς πολλὸν ἀλλήλων κεχωρισμένα ἐργάσαο νῦν τε καὶ ὀλίγῳ πρότερον ·
Marking how Xerxes wept, he questioned him and said, “O king, what a distance there is between what you are doing now and a little while ago!


7.46.1
7373
μακαρίσας γὰρ σεωυτὸν δακρύεις " .
After declaring yourself blessed you weep.”


7.46.2
7374
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ἐσῆλθε γάρ με λογισάμενον κατοικτεῖραι ὡς βραχὺς εἴη ὁ πᾶς ἀνθρώπινος βίος , εἰ τούτων γε ἐόντων τοσούτων οὐδεὶς ἐς ἑκατοστὸν ἔτος περιέσται " .
Xerxes said, “I was moved to compassion when I considered the shortness of all human life, since of all this multitude of men not one will be alive a hundred years from now.”


7.46.2
7375
ὁ δὲ ἀμείβετο λέγων " ἕτερα τούτου παρὰ τὴν ζόην πεπόνθαμεν οἰκτρότερα .
Artabanus answered, “In one life we have deeper sorrows to bear than that.


7.46.3
7376
ἐν γὰρ οὕτω βραχέι βίῳ οὐδεὶς οὕτω ἄνθρωπος ἐὼν εὐδαίμων πέφυκε οὔτε τούτων οὔτε τῶν ἄλλων , τῷ οὐ παραστήσεται πολλάκις καὶ οὐκὶ ἅπαξ τεθνάναι βούλεσθαι μᾶλλον ἢ ζώειν .
Short as our lives are, there is no human being either here or elsewhere so fortunate that it will not occur to him, often and not just once, to wish himself dead rather than alive.


7.46.3
7377
αἵ τε γὰρ συμφοραὶ προσπίπτουσαι καὶ αἱ νοῦσοι συνταράσσουσαι καὶ βραχὺν ἐόντα μακρὸν δοκέειν εἶναι ποιεῦσι τὸν βίον .
Misfortunes fall upon us and sicknesses trouble us, so that they make life, though short, seem long.


7.46.4
7378
οὕτω ὁ μὲν θάνατος μοχθηρῆς ἐούσης τῆς ζόης καταφυγὴ αἱρετωτάτη τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ γέγονε , ὁ δὲ θεὸς γλυκὺν γεύσας τὸν αἰῶνα φθονερὸς ἐν αὐτῷ εὑρίσκεται ἐών " .
Life is so miserable a thing that death has become the most desirable refuge for humans; the god is found to be envious in this, giving us only a taste of the sweetness of living.”


7.47.1
7379
Ξέρξης δὲ ἀμείβετο λέγων " Ἀρτάβανε , βιοτῆς μέν νυν ἀνθρωπηίης πέρι , ἐούσης τοιαύτης οἵην περ σὺ διαιρέαι εἶναι , παυσώμεθα , μηδὲ κακῶν μεμνώμεθα χρηστὰ ἔχοντες πρήγματα ἐν χερσί , φράσον δέ μοι τόδε ·
Xerxes answered and said, “Artabanus, human life is such as you define it to be. Let us speak no more of that, nor remember evils in our present prosperous estate.


7.47.1
7380
εἴ τοι ἡ ὄψις τοῦ ἐνυπνίου μὴ ἐναργὴς οὕτω ἐφάνη , εἶχες ἂν τὴν ἀρχαίην γνώμην , οὐκ ἐῶν με στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἢ μετέστης ἄν ;
But tell me this: if you had not seen the vision in your dream so clearly, would you still have held your former opinion and advised me not to march against Hellas, or would you have changed your mind?


7.47.1
7381
φέρε τοῦτό μοι ἀτρεκέως εἰπέ " .
Come, tell me this truly.”


7.47.2
7382
ὁ δὲ ἀμείβετο λέγων " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ὄψις μὲν ἡ ἐπιφανεῖσα τοῦ ὀνείρου ὡς βουλόμεθα ἀμφότεροι τελευτήσειε , ἐγὼ δ’ ἔτι καὶ ἐς τόδε δείματος εἰμὶ ὑπόπλεος οὐδ’ ἐντὸς ἐμεωυτοῦ , ἄλλα τε πολλὰ ἐπιλεγόμενος καὶ δὴ καὶ ὁρῶν τοι δύο τὰ μέγιστα πάντων ἐόντα πολεμιώτατα " .
Artabanus answered and said, “O king, may the vision that appeared in my dream bring such an end as we both desire! But I am even now full of fear and beside myself for many reasons, especially when I see that the two greatest things in the world are your greatest enemies.”


7.48.1
7383
Ξέρξης δὲ πρὸς ταῦτα ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
Xerxes made this response: “Are you possessed? What are these two things that you say are my greatest enemies?


7.48.1
7384
" δαιμόνιε ἀνδρῶν , κοῖα ταῦτα λέγεις εἶναι δύο μοι πολεμιώτατα ;
Is there some fault with the numbers of my land army? Does it seem that the Greek army will be many times greater than ours?


7.48.1
7385
κότερά τοι ὁ πεζὸς μεμπτὸς κατὰ πλῆθος ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν στράτευμα φαίνεται πολλαπλήσιον ἔσεσθαι τοῦ ἡμετέρου , ἢ τὸ ναυτικὸν τὸ ἡμέτερον λείψεσθαι τοῦ ἐκείνων , ἢ καὶ συναμφότερα ταῦτα ;
Or do you think that our navy will fall short of theirs? Or that the fault is in both?


7.48.1
7386
εἰ γάρ τοι ταύτῃ φαίνεται ἐνδεέστερα εἶναι τὰ ἡμέτερα πρήγματα , στρατοῦ ἂν ἄλλου τις τὴν ταχίστην ἄγερσιν ποιέοιτο " .
If our power seems to you to lack anything in this regard, it would be best to muster another army as quickly as possible.”


7.49.1
7387
ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο λέγων " ὦ βασιλεῦ , οὔτε στρατὸν τοῦτον , ὅστις γε σύνεσιν ἔχει , μέμφοιτ’ ἂν οὔτε τῶν νεῶν τὸ πλῆθος ·
Artabanus answered and said, “O king, there is no fault that any man of sound judgment could find either with this army or with the number of your ships;


7.49.1
7388
ἢν δὲ πλεῦνας συλλέξῃς , τὰ δύο τοι τὰ λέγω πολλῷ ἔτι πολεμιώτερα γίνεται .
and if you gather more, those two things I speak of become even much more your enemies.


7.49.1
7389
τὰ δὲ δύο ταῦτα ἐστὶ γῆ τε καὶ θάλασσα .
These two are the land and the sea.


7.49.2
7390
οὔτε γὰρ τῆς θαλάσσης ἐστὶ λιμὴν τοσοῦτος οὐδαμόθι , ὡς ἐγὼ εἰκάζω , ὅστις ἐγειρομένου χειμῶνος δεξάμενός σευ τοῦτο τὸ ναυτικὸν φερέγγυος ἔσται διασῶσαι τὰς νέας .
The sea has nowhere any harbor, as I conjecture, that will be able to receive this navy and save your ships if a storm arise.


7.49.2
7391
καίτοι οὐκὶ ἕνα αὐτὸν δεῖ εἶναι τὸν λιμένα , ἀλλὰ παρὰ πᾶσαν τὴν ἤπειρον παρ’ ἣν δὴ κομίζεαι .
Yet there has to be not just one such harbor, but many of them all along the land you are sailing by.


7.49.3
7392
οὔκων δὴ ἐόντων τοι λιμένων ὑποδεξίων , μάθε ὅτι αἱ συμφοραὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἄρχουσι καὶ οὐκὶ ὥνθρωποι τῶν συμφορέων .
Since there are no harbors able to receive you, understand that men are the subjects and not the rulers of their accidents.


7.49.3
7393
καὶ δὴ τῶν δύο τοι τοῦ ἑτέρου εἰρημένου τὸ ἕτερον ἔρχομαι ἐρέων .
I have spoken of one of the two, and now I will tell you of the other.


7.49.4
7394
γῆ δὲ πολεμίη τῇδέ τοι κατίσταται ·
The land is your enemy in this way:


7.49.4
7395
εἰ θέλει τοι μηδὲν ἀντίξοον καταστῆναι , τοσούτῳ τοι γίνεται πολεμιωτέρη ὅσῳ ἂν προβαίνῃς ἑκαστέρω , τὸ πρόσω αἰεὶ κλεπτόμενος ·
if nothing is going to stand in your way and hinder you, the land becomes more your enemy the further you advance, constantly unaware of what lies beyond;


7.49.4
7396
εὐπρηξίης δὲ οὐκ ἔστι ἀνθρώποισι οὐδεμία πληθώρη .
no man is ever satisfied with success.


7.49.5
7397
καὶ δή τοι , ὡς οὐδενὸς ἐναντιευμένου , λέγω τὴν χώρην πλεῦνα ἐν πλέονι χρόνῳ γινομένην λιμὸν τέξεσθαι .
So I say that if no one opposes you, the increase of your territory and the time passed in getting it will breed famine.


7.49.5
7398
ἀνὴρ δὲ οὕτω ἂν εἴη ἄριστος , εἰ βουλευόμενος μὲν ἀρρωδέοι , πᾶν ἐπιλεγόμενος πείσεσθαι χρῆμα , ἐν δὲ τῷ ἔργῳ θρασὺς εἴη " .
The best man is one who is timid while making plans because he takes into account all that may happen to him, but is bold in action.”


7.50.1
7399
ἀμείβεται Ξέρξης τοῖσιδε .
Xerxes answered,


7.50.1
7400
" Ἀρτάβανε , οἰκότως μὲν σύ γε τούτων ἕκαστα διαιρέαι ·
“Artabanus, you define these matters reasonably.


7.50.1
7401
ἀτὰρ μήτε πάντα φοβέο μήτε πᾶν ὁμοίως ἐπιλέγεο .
But do not fear everything, nor take account of all alike;


7.50.1
7402
εἰ γὰρ δὴ βούλοιο ἐπὶ τῷ αἰεὶ ἐπεσφερομένῳ πρήγματι τὸ πᾶν ὁμοίως ἐπιλέγεσθαι , ποιήσειας ἂν οὐδαμὰ οὐδέν ·
If you wanted to take everything equally into account on every occasion that happens, you would never do anything;


7.50.1
7403
κρέσσον δὲ πάντα θαρσέοντα ἥμισυ τῶν δεινῶν πάσχειν μᾶλλον ἢ πᾶν χρῆμα προδειμαίνοντα μηδαμὰ μηδὲν παθεῖν .
it is better to do everything boldly and suffer half of what you dread than to fear all chances and so never suffer anything.


7.50.2
7404
εἰ δὲ ἐρίξων πρὸς πᾶν τὸ λεγόμενον μὴ τὸ βέβαιον ἀποδέξεις , σφάλλεσθαι ὀφείλεις ἐν αὐτοῖσι ὁμοίως καὶ ὁ ὑπεναντία τούτοισι λέξας .
But if you quarrel with whatever is said yet cannot put forth a secure position, you must be proved as wrong on your part as he who holds the contrary opinion.


7.50.2
7405
τοῦτο μέν νυν ἐπ’ ἴσης ἔχει ·
In this both are alike:


7.50.2
7406
εἰδέναι δὲ ἄνθρωπον ἐόντα κῶς χρὴ τὸ βέβαιον ;
how can someone who is only human know where there is security?


7.50.2
7407
δοκέω μὲν οὐδαμῶς .
I think it is impossible.


7.50.2
7408
τοῖσι τοίνυν βουλομένοισι ποιέειν ὡς τὸ ἐπίπαν φιλέει γίνεσθαι τὰ κέρδεα , τοῖσι δὲ ἐπιλεγομένοισί τε πάντα καὶ ὀκνέουσι οὐ μάλα ἐθέλει .
Those who have the will to act most often win the rewards, not those who hesitate and take account of all chances.


7.50.3
7409
ὁρᾷς τὰ Περσέων πρήγματα ἐς ὃ δυνάμιος προκεχώρηκε .
You see what power Persia has attained.


7.50.3
7410
εἰ τοίνυν ἐκεῖνοι οἱ πρὸ ἐμεῦ γενόμενοι βασιλέες γνώμῃσι ἐχρέωντο ὁμοίῃσι καὶ σύ , ἢ μὴ χρεώμενοι γνώμῃσι τοιαύτῃσι ἄλλους συμβούλους εἶχον τοιούτους , οὐκ ἄν κοτε εἶδες αὐτὰ ἐς τοῦτο προελθόντα ·
Now if those kings who came before me had held such opinions as yours, or if they had not held them but had had advisers like you, you would never have seen our fortunes at their present height;


7.50.3
7411
νῦν δὲ κινδύνους ἀναρριπτέοντες ἐς τοῦτο σφέα προηγάγοντο .
but as it is those kings ran the risks and advanced them to this height.


7.50.3
7412
μεγάλα γὰρ πρήγματα μεγάλοισι κινδύνοισι ἐθέλει καταιρέεσθαι .
Great successes are not won except by great risks.


7.50.4
7413
ἡμεῖς τοίνυν ὁμοιεύμενοι ἐκείνοισι ὥρην τε τοῦ ἔτεος καλλίστην πορευόμεθα , καὶ καταστρεψάμενοι πᾶσαν τὴν Εὐρώπην νοστήσομεν ὀπίσω , οὔτε λιμῷ ἐντυχόντες οὐδαμόθι οὔτε ἄλλο ἄχαρι οὐδὲν παθόντες .
So we will do as they did; we are travelling in the fairest season of the year, and we will return home the conquerors of all Europe without suffering famine or any other harm anywhere.


7.50.4
7414
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ αὐτοὶ πολλὴν φορβὴν φερόμενοι πορευόμεθα , τοῦτο δέ , τῶν ἄν κου ἐπιβέωμεν γῆν καὶ ἔθνος , τούτων τὸν σῖτον ἕξομεν ·
First, we carry ample provisions with us on our march; second, we will have the food of those whose land and nation we invade;


7.50.4
7415
ἐπ’ ἀροτῆρας δὲ καὶ οὐ νομάδας στρατευόμεθα ἄνδρας " .
for we are marching against men who are tillers of the soil, not nomads.”


7.51.1
7416
λέγει Ἀρτάβανος μετὰ ταῦτα " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἐπείτε ἀρρωδέειν οὐδὲν ἐᾷς πρῆγμα , σὺ δέ μευ συμβουλίην ἔνδεξαι ·
Then said Artabanus: “O king, I see that you will not allow us to fear any danger.


7.51.1
7417
ἀναγκαίως γὰρ ἔχει περὶ πολλῶν πρηγμάτων πλεῦνα λόγον ἐκτεῖναι .
But take from me this advice, as there is need for much speaking when our affairs are so great.


7.51.1
7418
Κῦρος ὁ Καμβύσεω Ἰωνίην πᾶσαν πλὴν Ἀθηναίων κατεστρέψατο δασμοφόρον εἶναι Πέρσῃσι .
Cyrus son of Cambyses subdued and made tributary to Persia all Ionians except only the Athenians.


7.51.2
7419
τούτους ὦν τοὺς ἄνδρας συμβουλεύω τοι μηδεμιῇ μηχανῇ ἄγειν ἐπὶ τοὺς πατέρας ·
I advise you by no means to lead these Ionians against the land of their fathers,


7.51.2
7420
καὶ γὰρ ἄνευ τούτων οἷοί τε εἰμὲν τῶν ἐχθρῶν κατυπέρτεροι γίνεσθαι .
since even without their aid we are well able to overcome our enemies.


7.51.2
7421
ἢ γὰρ σφέας , ἢν ἕπωνται , δεῖ ἀδικωτάτους γίνεσθαι καταδουλουμένους τὴν μητρόπολιν , ἢ δικαιοτάτους συνελευθεροῦντας .
If they come with our army, they must either behave very unjustly by enslaving their mother city, or very justly by aiding it to be free.


7.51.3
7422
ἀδικώτατοι μέν νυν γινόμενοι οὐδὲν κέρδος μέγα ἡμῖν προσβάλλουσι , δικαιότατοι δὲ γινόμενοι οἷοί τε δηλήσασθαι μεγάλως τὴν σὴν στρατιὴν γίνονται .
If they deal very unjustly they bring us no great advantage, but by dealing very justly they may well do great harm to your army.


7.51.3
7423
ἐς θυμὸν ὦν βάλευ καὶ τὸ παλαιὸν ἔπος ὡς εὖ εἴρηται , τὸ μὴ ἅμα ἀρχῇ πᾶν τέλος καταφαίνεσθαι " .
Take to heart the truth of that ancient saying, that the end of every matter is not revealed at its beginning.”


7.52.1
7424
ἀμείβεται πρὸς ταῦτα Ξέρξης " Ἀρτάβανε , τῶν ἀπεφήναο γνωμέων σφάλλεαι κατὰ ταύτην δὴ μάλιστα , ὃς Ἴωνας φοβέαι μὴ μεταβάλωσι , τῶν ἔχομεν γνῶμα μέγιστον , τῶν σύ τε μάρτυς γίνεαι καὶ οἱ συστρατευσάμενοι Δαρείῳ ἄλλοι ἐπὶ Σκύθας , ὅτι ἐπὶ τούτοισι ἡ πᾶσα Περσικὴ στρατιὴ ἐγένετο διαφθεῖραι καὶ περιποιῆσαι , οἳ δὲ δικαιοσύνην καὶ πιστότητα ἐνέδωκαν , ἄχαρι δὲ οὐδέν .
Xerxes answered, “Artabanus, in all your pronouncements you are most mistaken when you fear that the Ionians might change sides; we have the surest guarantee for them, and you and all who marched with Darius against the Scythians can bear witness. They had the power to destroy or to save the whole Persian army, and they gave proof of their justice and faithfulness, with no evil intent.


7.52.2
7425
πάρεξ δὲ τούτου , ἐν τῇ ἡμετέρῃ καταλιπόντας τέκνα καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ χρήματα οὐδ’ ἐπιλέγεσθαι χρὴ νεώτερόν τι ποιήσειν .
Moreover, since they have left their children and wives and possessions in our country, we need not consider it even possible that they will make any violent change.


7.52.2
7426
οὕτω μηδὲ τοῦτο φοβέο , ἀλλὰ θυμὸν ἔχων ἀγαθὸν σῶζε οἶκόν τε τὸν ἐμὸν καὶ τυραννίδα τὴν ἐμήν ·
So be rid of that fear; keep a stout heart and guard my household and tyranny;


7.52.2
7427
σοὶ γὰρ ἐγὼ μούνῳ ἐκ πάντων σκῆπτρα τὰ ἐμὰ ἐπιτράπω " .
to you alone I entrust the symbols of my kingship.”


7.53.1
7428
ταῦτα εἴπας καὶ Ἀρτάβανον ἀποστείλας ἐς Σοῦσα δεύτερα μετεπέμψατο Ξέρξης Περσέων τοὺς δοκιμωτάτους ·
Xerxes spoke thus and sent Artabanus away to Susa.


7.53.1
7429
ἐπεὶ δέ οἱ παρῆσαν , ἔλεγέ σφι τάδε .
He next sent for the most notable among the Persians, and when they were present he said,


7.53.1
7430
" ὦ Πέρσαι , τῶνδ’ ἐγὼ ὑμέων χρηίζων συνέλεξα , ἄνδρας τε γενέσθαι ἀγαθοὺς καὶ μὴ καταισχύνειν τὰ πρόσθε ἐργασμένα Πέρσῃσι , ἐόντα μεγάλα τε καὶ πολλοῦ ἄξια , ἀλλ’ εἷς τε ἕκαστος καὶ οἱ σύμπαντες προθυμίην ἔχωμεν ·
“Persians, I have assembled you to make this demand, that you bear yourselves bravely and never sully the great and glorious former achievements of the Persians.


7.53.1
7431
ξυνὸν γὰρ πᾶσι τοῦτο ἀγαθὸν σπεύδεται .
Let us each and all be zealous, for the good that we seek is common to all.


7.53.2
7432
τῶνδε δὲ εἵνεκα προαγορεύω ἀντέχεσθαι τοῦ πολέμου ἐντεταμένως ·
For these reasons I bid you set your hands to the war strenuously;


7.53.2
7433
ὡς γὰρ ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι , ἐπ’ ἄνδρας στρατευόμεθα ἀγαθούς , τῶν ἢν κρατήσωμεν , οὐ μή τις ἡμῖν ἄλλος στρατὸς ἀντιστῇ κοτε ἀνθρώπων .
I know that we march against valiant men, and if we overcome them it is certain that no other human army will ever withstand us.


7.53.2
7434
νῦν δὲ διαβαίνωμεν ἐπευξάμενοι τοῖσι θεοῖσι οἳ Πέρσας λελόγχασι " .
Let us now cross over, after praying to the gods who hold Persia for their allotted realm.”


7.54.1
7435
ταύτην μὲν τὴν ἡμέρην παρεσκευάζοντο ἐς τὴν διάβασιν ·
All that day they made preparations for the crossing.


7.54.1
7436
τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίῃ ἀνέμενον τὸν ἥλιον ἐθέλοντες ἰδέσθαι ἀνίσχοντα , θυμιήματά τε παντοῖα ἐπὶ τῶν γεφυρέων καταγίζοντες καὶ μυρσίνῃσι στορνύντες τὴν ὁδόν .
On the next they waited until they could see the sun rise, burning all kinds of incense on the bridges and strewing the road with myrtle boughs.


7.54.2
7437
ὡς δ’ ἐπανέτελλε ὁ ἥλιος , σπένδων ἐκ χρυσέης φιάλης Ξέρξης ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν εὔχετο πρὸς τὸν ἥλιον μηδεμίαν οἱ συντυχίην τοιαύτην γενέσθαι , ἥ μιν παύσει καταστρέψασθαι τὴν Εὐρώπην πρότερον ἢ ἐπὶ τέρμασι τοῖσι ἐκείνης γένηται .
At sunrise Xerxes poured a libation from a golden phial into the sea, praying to the sun that no accident might befall him which would keep him from subduing Europe before he reached its farthest borders.


7.54.2
7438
εὐξάμενος δὲ ἐσέβαλε τὴν φιάλην ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον καὶ χρύσεον κρητῆρα καὶ Περσικὸν ξίφος , τὸν ἀκινάκην καλέουσι .
After the prayer, he cast the phial into the Hellespont, and along with it a golden bowl, and a Persian sword which they call “acinaces.”


7.54.3
7439
ταῦτα οὐκ ἔχω ἀτρεκέως διακρῖναι οὔτε εἰ τῷ ἡλίῳ ἀνατιθεὶς κατῆκε ἐς τὸ πέλαγος , οὔτε εἰ μετεμέλησέ οἱ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον μαστιγώσαντι καὶ ἀντὶ τούτων τὴν θάλασσαν ἐδωρέετο .
As for these, I cannot rightly determine whether he cast them into the sea for offerings to the sun, or repented having whipped the  Hellespont and gave gifts to the sea as atonement.


7.55.1
7440
ὡς δὲ ταῦτά οἱ ἐπεποίητο , διέβαινον κατὰ μὲν τὴν ἑτέρην τῶν γεφυρέων τὴν πρὸς τοῦ Πόντου ὁ πεζός τε καὶ ἡ ἵππος ἅπασα , κατὰ δὲ τὴν πρὸς τὸ Αἰγαῖον τὰ ὑποζύγια καὶ ἡ θεραπηίη .
When they had done this they crossed over, the foot and horse all by the bridge nearest to the  Pontus, the beasts of burden and the service train by the bridge towards the  Aegean.


7.55.2
7441
ἡγέοντο δὲ πρῶτα μὲν οἱ μύριοι Πέρσαι , ἐστεφανωμένοι πάντες , μετὰ δὲ τούτους ὁ σύμμικτος στρατὸς παντοίων ἐθνέων .
The ten thousand Persians, all wearing garlands, led the way, and after them came the mixed army of diverse nations.


7.55.2
7442
ταύτην μὲν τὴν ἡμέρην οὗτοι , τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίῃ πρῶτοι μὲν οἵ τε ἱππόται καὶ οἱ τὰς λόγχας κάτω τρέποντες ·
All that day these crossed; on the next, first crossed the horsemen and the ones who carried their spears reversed;


7.55.2
7443
ἐστεφάνωντο δὲ καὶ οὗτοι .
these also wore garlands.


7.55.3
7444
μετὰ δὲ οἵ τε ἵπποι οἱ ἱροὶ καὶ τὸ ἅρμα τὸ ἱρόν , ἐπὶ δὲ αὐτός τε Ξέρξης καὶ οἱ αἰχμοφόροι καὶ οἱ ἱππόται οἱ χίλιοι , ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοισι ὁ ἄλλος στρατός .
After them came the sacred horses and the sacred chariot, then Xerxes himself and the spearmen and the thousand horse, and after them the rest of the army.


7.55.3
7445
καὶ αἱ νέες ἅμα ἀνήγοντο ἐς τὴν ἀπεναντίον .
Meanwhile the ships put out and crossed to the opposite shore.


7.55.3
7446
ἤδη δὲ ἤκουσα καὶ ὕστατον διαβῆναι βασιλέα πάντων .
But I have also heard that the king crossed last of all.


7.56.1
7447
Ξέρξης δὲ ἐπεὶ διέβη ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην , ἐθηεῖτο τὸν στρατὸν ὑπὸ μαστίγων διαβαίνοντα ·
When Xerxes had passed over to Europe, he viewed his army crossing under the lash.


7.56.1
7448
διέβη δὲ ὁ στρατὸς αὐτοῦ ἐν ἑπτὰ ἡμέρῃσι καὶ ἐν ἑπτὰ εὐφρόνῃσι , ἐλινύσας οὐδένα χρόνον .
Seven days and seven nights it was in crossing, with no pause.


7.56.2
7449
ἐνθαῦτα λέγεται , Ξέρξεω ἤδη διαβεβηκότος τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον , ἄνδρα εἰπεῖν Ἑλλησπόντιον " ὦ Ζεῦ , τί δὴ ἀνδρὶ εἰδόμενος Πέρσῃ καὶ οὔνομα ἀντὶ Διὸς Ξέρξην θέμενος ἀνάστατον τὴν Ἑλλάδα θέλεις ποιῆσαι , ἄγων πάντας ἀνθρώπους ;
It is said that when Xerxes had now crossed the Hellespont, a man of the Hellespont cried,


7.56.2
7450
καὶ γὰρ ἄνευ τούτων ἐξῆν τοι ποιέειν ταῦτα " .
“O Zeus, why have you taken the likeness of a Persian man and changed your name to Xerxes, leading the whole world with you to remove Hellas from its place? You could have done that without these means.”


7.57.1
7451
ὡς δὲ διέβησαν πάντες , ἐς ὁδὸν ὁρμημένοισι τέρας σφι ἐφάνη μέγα , τὸ Ξέρξης ἐν οὐδενὶ λόγῳ ἐποιήσατο καίπερ εὐσύμβλητον ἐόν ·
When all had passed over and were ready for the road, a great portent appeared among them.


7.57.1
7452
ἵππος γὰρ ἔτεκε λαγόν .
Xerxes took no account of it, although it was easy to interpret: a mare gave birth to a hare.


7.57.1
7453
εὐσύμβλητον ὦν τῇδε τοῦτο ἐγένετο , ὅτι ἔμελλε μὲν ἐλᾶν στρατιὴν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα Ξέρξης ἀγαυρότατα καὶ μεγαλοπρεπέστατα , ὀπίσω δὲ περὶ ἑωυτοῦ τρέχων ἥξειν ἐς τὸν αὐτὸν χῶρον .
The meaning of it was easy to guess: Xerxes was to march his army to Hellas with great pomp and pride, but to come back to the same place fleeing for his life.


7.57.1
7454
ἐγένετο δὲ καὶ ἕτερον αὐτῷ τέρας ἐόντι ἐν Σάρδισι ·
There was another portent that was shown to him at Sardis:


7.57.2
7455
ἡμίονος γὰρ ἔτεκε ἡμίονον διξὰ ἔχουσαν αἰδοῖα , τὰ μὲν ἔρσενος τὰ δὲ θηλέης ·
A mule gave birth to a mule that had double genitals, both male and female,


7.57.2
7456
κατύπερθε δὲ ἦν τὰ τοῦ ἔρσενος .
the male above the other.


7.57.2
7457
τῶν ἀμφοτέρων λόγον οὐδένα ποιησάμενος τὸ πρόσω ἐπορεύετο , σὺν δέ οἱ ὁ πεζὸς στρατός .
But he took no account of either sign and journeyed onward; the land army was with him.


7.58.1
7458
ὁ δὲ ναυτικὸς ἔξω τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον πλέων παρὰ γῆν ἐκομίζετο , τὰ ἔμπαλιν πρήσσων τοῦ πεζοῦ .
His navy sailed out of the  Hellespont and travelled along the land, going across from the land army.


7.58.2
7459
ὃ μὲν γὰρ πρὸς ἑσπέρην ἔπλεε , ἐπὶ Σαρπηδονίης ἄκρης ποιεύμενος τὴν ἄπιξιν , ἐς τὴν αὐτῷ προείρητο ἀπικομένῳ περιμένειν ·
The ships sailed westwards, laying their course for the headland of Sarpedon, where Xerxes had ordered them to go and wait for him;


7.58.2
7460
ὁ δὲ κατ’ ἤπειρον στρατὸς πρὸς ἠῶ τε καὶ ἡλίου ἀνατολὰς ἐποιέετο τὴν ὁδὸν διὰ τῆς Χερσονήσου , ἐν δεξιῇ μὲν ἔχων τὸν Ἕλλης τάφον τῆς Ἀθάμαντος , ἐν ἀριστερῇ δὲ Καρδίην πόλιν , διὰ μέσης δὲ πορευόμενος πόλιος τῇ οὔνομα τυγχάνει ἐὸν Ἀγορή .
The army of the mainland travelled towards the east and the sunrise through the Chersonese, with the tomb of Athamas' daughter Helle on its right and the town of Cardia on its left, marching through the middle of a city called Agora.


7.58.3
7461
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ κάμπτων τὸν κόλπον τὸν Μέλανα καλεόμενον καὶ Μέλανα ποταμόν , οὐκ ἀντισχόντα τότε τῇ στρατιῇ τὸ ῥέεθρον ἀλλ’ ἐπιλιπόντα , τοῦτον τὸν ποταμὸν διαβάς , ἐπ’ οὗ καὶ ὁ κόλπος οὗτος τὴν ἐπωνυμίην ἔχει , ἤιε πρὸς ἑσπέρην , Αἶνόν τε πόλιν Αἰολίδα καὶ Στεντορίδα λίμνην παρεξιών , ἐς ὃ ἀπίκετο ἐς Δορίσκον .
From there they rounded the head of the Black Bay (as it is called) and crossed the Black River, which could not hold its own then against the army, but gave out — crossing this river, which gives its name to the bay, they went westwards, past the Aeolian city of  Aenus and the marsh of Stentor, until they came to Doriscus.


7.59.1
7462
ὁ δὲ Δορίσκος ἐστὶ τῆς Θρηίκης αἰγιαλός τε καὶ πεδίον μέγα , διὰ δὲ αὐτοῦ ῥέει ποταμὸς μέγας Ἕβρος ·
The territory of Doriscus is in Thrace, a wide plain by the sea, and through it flows a great river, the Hebrus;


7.59.1
7463
ἐν τῷ τεῖχός τε ἐδέδμητο βασιλήιον τοῦτο τὸ δὴ Δορίσκος κέκληται , καὶ Περσέων φρουρὴ ἐν αὐτῷ κατεστήκεε ὑπὸ Δαρείου ἐξ ἐκείνου τοῦ χρόνου ἐπείτε ἐπὶ Σκύθας ἐστρατεύετο .
Here had been built that royal fortress which is called Doriscus, and a Persian guard had been posted there by Darius ever since the time of his march against Scythia.


7.59.2
7464
ἔδοξε ὦν τῷ Ξέρξῃ ὁ χῶρος εἶναι ἐπιτήδεος ἐνδιατάξαι τε καὶ ἐξαριθμῆσαι τὸν στρατόν , καὶ ἐποίεε ταῦτα .
It seemed to Xerxes to be a fit place for him to arrange and number his army, and he did so.


7.59.2
7465
τὰς μὲν δὴ νέας τὰς πάσας ἀπικομένας ἐς Δορίσκον οἱ ναύαρχοι κελεύσαντος Ξέρξεω ἐς τὸν αἰγιαλὸν τὸν προσεχέα Δορίσκῳ ἐκόμισαν , ἐν τῷ Σάλη τε Σαμοθρηικίη πεπόλισται πόλις καὶ Ζώνη , τελευτᾷ δὲ αὐτοῦ Σέρρειον ἄκρη ὀνομαστή .
All the ships had now arrived at Doriscus, and the captains at Xerxes' command brought them to the beach near Doriscus, where stands the Samothracian city of Sane, and Zone; at the end is Serreum, a well-known headland.


7.59.2
7466
ὁ δὲ χῶρος οὗτος τὸ παλαιὸν ἦν Κικόνων .
This country was in former days possessed by the Cicones.


7.59.3
7467
ἐς τοῦτον τὸν αἰγιαλὸν κατασχόντες τὰς νέας ἀνέψυχον ἀνελκύσαντες .
To this beach they brought in their ships and hauled them up for rest.


7.59.3
7468
ὁ δὲ ἐν τῷ Δορίσκῳ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον τῆς στρατιῆς ἀριθμὸν ἐποιέετο .
Meanwhile Xerxes made a reckoning of his forces at Doriscus.


7.60.1
7469
ὅσον μέν νυν ἕκαστοι παρεῖχον πλῆθος ἐς ἀριθμόν , οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν τὸ ἀτρεκές ·
I cannot give the exact number that each part contributed to the total,


7.60.1
7470
οὐ γὰρ λέγεται πρὸς οὐδαμῶν ἀνθρώπων ·
for there is no one who tells us that;


7.60.1
7471
σύμπαντος δὲ τοῦ στρατοῦ τοῦ πεζοῦ τὸ πλῆθος ἐφάνη ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν μυριάδες .
But the total of the whole land army was shown to be one million and seven hundred thousand.


7.60.2
7472
ἐξηρίθμησαν δὲ τόνδε τὸν τρόπον ·
They were counted in this way:


7.60.2
7473
συνήγαγόν τε ἐς ἕνα χῶρον μυριάδα ἀνθρώπων , καὶ συννάξαντες ταύτην ὡς μάλιστα εἶχον περιέγραψαν ἔξωθεν κύκλον ·
Ten thousand men were collected in one place, and when they were packed together as closely as could be a line was drawn around them;


7.60.2
7474
περιγράψαντες δὲ καὶ ἀπέντες τοὺς μυρίους αἱμασιὴν περιέβαλον κατὰ τὸν κύκλον , ὕψος ἀνήκουσαν ἀνδρὶ ἐς τὸν ὀμφαλόν ·
When this was drawn, the ten thousand were sent away and a wall of stones was built on the line reaching up to a man's navel;


7.60.3
7475
ταύτην δὲ ποιήσαντες ἄλλους ἐσεβίβαζον ἐς τὸ περιοικοδομημένον , μέχρι οὗ πάντας τούτῳ τῷ τρόπῳ ἐξηρίθμησαν .
When this was done, others were brought into the walled space, until in this way all were numbered.


7.60.3
7476
ἀριθμήσαντες δὲ κατὰ ἔθνεα διέτασσον .
When they had been numbered, they were marshalled by nations.


7.61.1
7477
οἱ δὲ στρατευόμενοι οἵδε ἦσαν , Πέρσαι μὲν ὧδε ἐσκευασμένοι ·
The men who served in the army were the following: the Persians were equipped in this way:


7.61.1
7478
περὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι εἶχον τιάρας καλεομένους πίλους ἀπαγέας , περὶ δὲ τὸ σῶμα κιθῶνας χειριδωτοὺς ποικίλους , G? λεπίδος σιδηρέης ὄψιν ἰχθυοειδέος , περὶ δὲ τὰ σκέλεα ἀναξυρίδας , ἀντὶ δὲ ἀσπίδων γέρρα ·
They wore on their heads loose caps called tiaras, and on their bodies embroidered sleeved tunics, with scales of iron like the scales of fish in appearance, and trousers on their legs; for shields they had wicker bucklers,


7.61.1
7479
ὑπὸ δὲ φαρετρεῶνες ἐκρέμαντο ·
With quivers hanging beneath them;


7.61.1
7480
αἰχμὰς δὲ βραχέας εἶχον , τόξα δὲ μεγάλα , ὀιστοὺς δὲ καλαμίνους , πρὸς δὲ ἐγχειρίδια παρὰ τὸν δεξιὸν μηρὸν παραιωρεύμενα ἐκ τῆς ζώνης .
They carried short spears, long bows, and reed arrows, and daggers that hung from the girdle by the right thigh.


7.61.2
7481
καὶ ἄρχοντα παρείχοντο Ὀτάνεα τὸν Ἀμήστριος πατέρα τῆς Ξέρξεω γυναικός , ἐκαλέοντο δὲ πάλαι ὑπὸ μὲν Ἑλλήνων Κηφῆνες , ὑπὸ μέντοι σφέων αὐτῶν καὶ τῶν περιοίκων Ἀρταῖοι .
Their commander was Otanes, son of Amestris and father of Xerxes' wife. They were formerly called by the Greeks Cephenes, but by themselves and their neighbors Artaei.


7.61.3
7482
ἐπεὶ δὲ Περσεὺς ὁ Δανάης τε καὶ Διὸς ἀπίκετο παρὰ Κηφέα τὸν Βήλου καὶ ἔσχε αὐτοῦ τὴν θυγατέρα Ἀνδρομέδην , γίνεται αὐτῷ παῖς τῷ οὔνομα ἔθετο Πέρσην , τοῦτον δὲ αὐτοῦ καταλείπει ·
When Perseus son of Danae and Zeus had come to Cepheus son of Belus and married his daughter Andromeda,


7.61.3
7483
ἐτύγχανε γὰρ ἄπαις ἐὼν ὁ Κηφεὺς ἔρσενος γόνου .
A son was born to him whom he called Perses, and he left him there; for Cepheus had no male offspring;


7.61.3
7484
ἐπὶ τούτου δὴ τὴν ἐπωνυμίην ἔσχον .
It was from this Perses that the Persians took their name.


7.62.1
7485
Μῆδοι δὲ τὴν αὐτὴν ταύτην ἐσταλμένοι ἐστρατεύοντο ·
The Medes in the army were equipped like the Persians;


7.62.1
7486
Μηδικὴ γὰρ αὕτη ἡ σκευή ἐστι καὶ οὐ Περσική .
Indeed, that fashion of armor is Median, not Persian.


7.62.1
7487
οἱ δὲ Μῆδοι ἄρχοντα μὲν παρείχοντο Τιγράνην ἄνδρα Ἀχαιμενίδην , ἐκαλέοντο δὲ πάλαι πρὸς πάντων Ἄριοι , ἀπικομένης δὲ Μηδείης τῆς Κολχίδος ἐξ Ἀθηνέων ἐς τοὺς Ἀρίους τούτους μετέβαλον καὶ οὗτοι τὸ οὔνομα .
Their commander was Tigranes, an Achaemenid. The Medes were formerly called by everyone Arians, but when the Colchian woman Medea came from Athens to the Arians they changed their name, like the Persians.


7.62.1
7488
αὐτοὶ περὶ σφέων ὧδε λέγουσι Μῆδοι .
This is the Medes' own account of themselves.


7.62.2
7489
Κίσσιοι δὲ στρατευόμενοι τὰ μὲν ἄλλα κατά περ Πέρσαι ἐσκευάδατο , ἀντὶ δὲ τῶν πίλων μιτρηφόροι ἦσαν .
The Cissians in the army were equipped like the Persians, but they wore turbans instead of caps.


7.62.2
7490
Κισσίων δὲ ἦρχε Ἀνάφης ὁ Ὀτάνεω .
Their commander was Anaphes son of Otanes.


7.62.2
7491
Ὑρκάνιοι δὲ κατά περ Πέρσαι ἐσεσάχατο , ἡγεμόνα παρεχόμενοι Μεγάπανον τὸν Βαβυλῶνος ὕστερον τούτων ἐπιτροπεύσαντα .
The Hyrcanians were armed like the Persians; their leader was Megapanus, who was afterwards the governor of Babylon.


7.63.1
7492
Ἀσσύριοι δὲ στρατευόμενοι περὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι εἶχον χάλκεά τε κράνεα καὶ πεπλεγμένα τρόπον τινὰ βάρβαρον οὐκ εὐαπήγητον , ἀσπίδας δὲ καὶ αἰχμὰς καὶ ἐγχειρίδια παραπλήσια τῇσι Αἰγυπτίῃσι εἶχον , πρὸς δὲ ῥόπαλα ξύλων τετυλωμένα σιδήρῳ , καὶ λινέους θώρηκας .
The Assyrians in the army wore on their heads helmets of twisted bronze made in an outlandish fashion not easy to describe.


7.63.1
7493
οὗτοι δὲ ὑπὸ μὲν Ἑλλήνων καλέονται Σύριοι , ὑπὸ δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων Ἀσσύριοι ἐκλήθησαν .
They carried shields and spears and daggers of Egyptian fashion, and also wooden clubs studded with iron, and they wore linen breastplates. They are called by the Greeks Syrians, but the foreigners called them Assyrians. With them were the Chaldeans.


7.63.1
7494
τούτων δὲ μεταξὺ Χαλδαῖοι .Ἦρχε δὲ σφέων Ὀτάσπης ὁ Ἀρταχαίεω .
Their commander was Otaspes son of Artachaees.


7.64.1
7495
Βάκτριοι δὲ περὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι ἀγχότατα τῶν Μηδικῶν ἔχοντες ἐστρατεύοντο , τόξα δὲ καλάμινα ἐπιχώρια καὶ αἰχμὰς βραχέας .
The Bactrians in the army wore a headgear very similar to the Median, carrying their native reed bows and short spears.


7.64.2
7496
Σάκαι δὲ οἱ Σκύθαι περὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι κυρβασίας ἐς ὀξὺ ἀπηγμένας ὀρθὰς εἶχον πεπηγυίας , ἀναξυρίδας δὲ ἐνεδεδύκεσαν , τόξα δὲ ἐπιχώρια καὶ ἐγχειρίδια , πρὸς δὲ καὶ ἀξίνας σαγάρις εἶχον .
The Sacae, who are Scythians, had on their heads tall caps, erect and stiff and tapering to a point; they wore trousers, and carried their native bows, and daggers, and also axes which they call “sagaris.”


7.64.2
7497
τούτους δὲ ἐόντας Σκύθας Ἀμυργίους Σάκας ἐκάλεον ·
These were Amyrgian Scythians,


7.64.2
7498
οἱ γὰρ Πέρσαι πάντας τοὺς Σκύθας καλέουσι Σάκας .
but were called Sacae; that is the Persian name for all Scythians.


7.64.2
7499
Βακτρίων δὲ καὶ Σακέων ἦρχε Ὑστάσπης ὁ Δαρείου τε καὶ Ἀτόσσης τῆς Κύρου .
The commander of the Bactrians and Sacae was Hystaspes, son of Darius and Cyrus' daughter Atossa.


7.65.1
7500
Ἰνδοὶ δὲ εἵματα μὲν ἐνδεδυκότες ἀπὸ ξύλων πεποιημένα , τόξα δὲ καλάμινα εἶχον καὶ ὀιστοὺς καλαμίνους ·
The Indians wore garments of tree-wool, and carried reed bows and iron-tipped reed arrows.


7.65.1
7501
ἐπὶ δὲ σίδηρος ἦν .
Such was their equipment;


7.65.1
7502
ἐσταλμένοι μὲν δὴ ἦσαν οὕτω Ἰνδοί , προσετετάχατο δὲ συστρατευόμενοι Φαρναζάθρῃ τῷ Ἀρταβάτεω .
They were appointed to march under the command of Pharnazathres son of Artabates.


7.66.1
7503
ἄριοι δὲ τόξοισι μὲν ἐσκευασμένοι ἦσαν Μηδικοῖσι , τὰ δὲ ἄλλα κατά περ Βάκτριοι .
The Arians were equipped with Median bows, but in all else like the Bactrians;


7.66.1
7504
Ἀρίων δὲ ἦρχε Σισάμνης ὁ Ὑδάρνεος .
Their commander was Sisamnes son of Hydarnes.


7.66.1
7505
Πάρθοι δὲ καὶ Χοράσμιοι καὶ Σόγδοι τε καὶ Γανδάριοι καὶ Δαδίκαι τὴν αὐτὴν σκευὴν ἔχοντες τὴν καὶ Βάκτριοι ἐστρατεύοντο .
The Parthians, Chorasmians, Sogdians, Gandarians, and Dadicae in the army had the same equipment as the Bactrians.


7.66.2
7506
τούτων δὲ ἦρχον οἵδε .
The Parthians and Chorasmians had for their commander Artabazus son of Pharnaces,


7.66.2
7507
Πάρθων μὲν καὶ Χορασμίων Ἀρτάβαζος ὁ Φαρνάκεος , Σόγδων δὲ Ἀζάνης ὁ Ἀρταίου , Γανδαρίων δὲ καὶ Δαδικέων Ἀρτύφιος ὁ Ἀρταβάνου .
The Sogdians Azanes son of Artaeus, the Gandarians and Dadicae Artyphius son of Artabanus.


7.67.1
7508
Κάσπιοι δὲ σισύρνας τε ἐνδεδυκότες καὶ τόξα ἐπιχώρια καλάμινα ἔχοντες καὶ ἀκινάκας ἐστρατεύοντο .
The Caspians in the army wore cloaks and carried their native reed bows and short swords.


7.67.1
7509
οὗτοι μὲν οὕτω ἐσκευάδατο , ἡγεμόνα παρεχόμενοι Ἀριόμαρδον τὸν Ἀρτυφίου ἀδελφεόν , Σαράγγαι δὲ εἵματα μὲν βεβαμμένα ἐνέπρεπον ἔχοντες , πέδιλα δὲ ἐς γόνυ ἀνατείνοντα εἶχον , τόξα δὲ καὶ αἰχμὰς Μηδικάς .
Such was their equipment; their leader was Ariomardus, brother of Artyphius.


7.67.1
7510
Σαραγγέων δὲ ἦρχε Φερενδάτης ὁ Μεγαβάζου .
The Sarangae were conspicuous in their dyed garments and knee-high boots, carrying bows and Median spears. Their commander was Pherendates son of Megabazus.


7.67.2
7511
Πάκτυες δὲ σισυρνοφόροι τε ἦσαν καὶ τόξα ἐπιχώρια εἶχον καὶ ἐγχειρίδια .
The Pactyes wore cloaks and carried their native bows and daggers;


7.67.2
7512
Πάκτυες δὲ ἄρχοντα παρείχοντο Ἀρταΰντην τὸν Ἰθαμίτρεω .
Their commander was Artayntes son of Ithamitres.


7.68.1
7513
Οὔτιοι δὲ καὶ Μύκοι τε καὶ Παρικάνιοι ἐσκευασμένοι ἦσαν κατά περ Πάκτυες .
The Utians and Mycians and Paricanians were equipped like the Pactyes;


7.68.1
7514
τούτων δὲ ἦρχον οἵδε , Οὐτίων μὲν καὶ Μύκων Ἀρσαμένης ὁ Δαρείου , Παρικανίων δὲ Σιρομίτρης ὁ Οἰοβάζου .
The Utians and Mycians had for their commander Arsamenes son of Darius, the Paricanians Siromitres son of Oeobazus.


7.69.1
7515
Ἀράβιοι δὲ ζειρὰς ὑπεζωσμένοι ἦσαν , τόξα δέ παλίντονα εἶχον πρὸς δεξιά , μακρά .
The Arabians wore mantles girded up, and carried at their right side long bows curving backwards.


7.69.1
7516
Αἰθίοπες δὲ παρδαλέας τε καὶ λεοντέας ἐναμμένοι , τόξα δὲ εἶχον ἐκ φοίνικος σπάθης πεποιημένα , μακρά , τετραπηχέων οὐκ ἐλάσσω , ἐπὶ δὲ καλαμίνους ὀιστοὺς μικρούς ·
The Ethiopians were wrapped in skins of leopards and lions, and carried bows made of palmwood strips, no less than four cubits long, and short arrows pointed not with iron but with a sharpened stone that they use to carve seals;


7.69.1
7517
ἀντὶ δὲ σιδήρου ἐπῆν λίθος ὀξὺς πεποιημένος , τῷ καὶ τὰς σφρηγῖδας γλύφουσι ·
Furthermore, they had spears pointed with a gazelle's horn sharpened like a lance, and also studded clubs.


7.69.1
7518
πρὸς δὲ αἰχμὰς εἶχον , ἐπὶ δὲ κέρας δορκάδος ἐπῆν ὀξὺ πεποιημένον τρόπον λόγχης ·
The Ethiopians of Asia were for the most part armed like the Indians;


7.69.1
7519
εἶχον δὲ καὶ ῥόπαλα τυλωτά .
But they wore on their heads the skins of horses' foreheads, stripped from the head with ears and mane;


7.69.1
7520
τοῦ δὲ σώματος τὸ μὲν ἥμισυ ἐξηλείφοντο γύψῳ ἰόντες ἐς μάχην , τὸ δὲ ἄλλο ἥμισυ μίλτῳ .
The mane served them for a crest, and they wore the horses' ears stiff and upright; for shields they had bucklers of the skin of cranes.


7.69.2
7521
Ἀραβίων δὲ καὶ Αἰθιόπων τῶν ὑπὲρ Αἰγύπτου οἰκημένων ἦρχε Ἀρσάμης ὁ Δαρείου καὶ Ἀρτυστώνης τῆς Κύρου θυγατρός , τὴν μάλιστα στέρξας τῶν γυναικῶν Δαρεῖος εἰκὼ χρυσέην σφυρήλατον ἐποιήσατο .
When they went into battle they painted half their bodies with gypsum and the other half with vermilion. The Arabians and the Ethiopians who dwell above  Egypt had as commander Arsames, the son of Darius and Artystone daughter of Cyrus, whom Darius loved best of his wives; he had an image made of her of hammered gold.


7.70.1
7522
τῶν μὲν δὴ ὑπὲρ Αἰγύπτου Αἰθιόπων καὶ Ἀραβίων ἦρχε Ἀρσάμης , οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ ἡλίου ἀνατολέων Αἰθίοπες ( διξοὶ γὰρ δὴ ἐστρατεύοντο ) προσετετάχατο τοῖσι Ἰνδοῖσι , διαλλάσσοντες εἶδος μὲν οὐδὲν τοῖσι ἑτέροισι , φωνὴν δὲ καὶ τρίχωμα μοῦνον ·
The Ethiopians above Egypt and the Arabians had Arsames for commander, while the Ethiopians of the east (for there were two kinds of them in the army) served with the Indians;


7.70.1
7523
οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἀπὸ ἡλίου Αἰθίοπες ἰθύτριχες εἰσί , οἱ δ’ ἐκ τῆς Λιβύης οὐλότατον τρίχωμα ἔχουσι πάντων ἀνθρώπων .
They were not different in appearance from the others, only in speech and hair: the Ethiopians from the east are straight-haired, but the ones from Libya have the woolliest hair of all men.


7.70.2
7524
οὗτοι δὲ οἱ ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης Αἰθίοπες τὰ μὲν πλέω κατά περ Ἰνδοὶ ἐσεσάχατο , προμετωπίδια δὲ ἵππων εἶχον ἐπὶ τῇσι κεφαλῇσι σύν τε τοῖσι ὠσὶ ἐκδεδαρμένα καὶ τῇ λοφιῇ ·
These Ethiopians of Asia were for the most part armed like the Indians;


7.70.2
7525
καὶ ἀντὶ μὲν λόφου ἡ λοφιὴ κατέχρα , τὰ δὲ ὦτα τῶν ἵππων ὀρθὰ πεπηγότα εἶχον ·
But they wore on their heads the skins of horses' foreheads, stripped from the head with ears and mane;


7.70.2
7526
προβλήματα δὲ ἀντ’ ἀσπίδων ἐποιεῦντο γεράνων δοράς .
The mane served them for a crest, and they wore the horses' ears stiff and upright; for shields they had bucklers of the skin of cranes.


7.71.1
7527
Λίβυες δὲ σκευὴν μὲν σκυτίνην ἤισαν ἔχοντες , ἀκοντίοισι δὲ ἐπικαύτοισι χρεώμενοι , ἄρχοντα δὲ παρείχοντο Μασσάγην τὸν Ὀαρίζου .
The Libyans came in leather garments, using javelins of burnt wood. Their commander was Massages son of Oarizus.


7.72.1
7528
Παφλαγόνες δὲ ἐστρατεύοντο ἐπὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι κράνεα πεπλεγμένα ἔχοντες , ἀσπίδας δὲ μικρὰς αἰχμάς τε οὐ μεγάλας , πρὸς δὲ ἀκόντια καὶ ἐγχειρίδια , περὶ δὲ τοὺς πόδας πέδιλα ἐπιχώρια ἐς μέσην κνήμην ἀνατείνοντα .
The Paphlagonians in the army had woven helmets on their heads, and small shields and short spears, and also javelins and daggers; they wore their native shoes that reach midway to the knee.


7.72.1
7529
Λίγυες δὲ καὶ Ματιηνοὶ καὶ Μαριανδυνοί τε καὶ Σύριοι τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχοντες Παφλαγόσι ἐστρατεύοντο .
The Ligyes and Matieni and Mariandyni and Syrians were equipped like the Paphlagonians.


7.72.1
7530
οἱ δὲ Σύριοι οὗτοι ὑπὸ Περσέων Καππαδόκαι καλέονται .
These Syrians are called by the Persians Cappadocians.


7.72.2
7531
Παφλαγόνων μέν νυν καὶ Ματιηνῶν Δῶτος ὁ Μεγασίδρου ἦρχε , Μαριανδυνῶν δὲ καὶ Λιγύων καὶ Συρίων Γοβρύης ὁ Δαρείου τε καὶ Ἀρτυστώνης .
Dotus son of Megasidrus was commander of the Paphlagonians and Matieni, Gobryas son of Darius and Artystone of the Mariandyni and Ligyes and Syrians.


7.73.1
7532
φρύγες δὲ ἀγχοτάτω τῆς Παφλαγονικῆς σκευὴν εἶχον , ὀλίγον παραλλάσσοντες .
The Phrygian equipment was very similar to the Paphlagonian, with only a small difference.


7.73.1
7533
οἱ δὲ Φρύγες , ὡς Μακεδόνες λέγουσι , ἐκαλέοντο Βρίγες χρόνον ὅσον Εὐρωπήιοι ἐόντες σύνοικοι ἦσαν Μακεδόσι , μεταβάντες δὲ ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην ἅμα τῇ χώρῃ καὶ τὸ οὔνομα μετέβαλον ἐς Φρύγας .
As the Macedonians say, these Phrygians were called Briges as long as they dwelt in Europe, where they were neighbors of the Macedonians; but when they changed their home to Asia, they changed their name also and were called Phrygians.


7.73.1
7534
Ἀρμένιοι δὲ κατά περ Φρύγες ἐσεσάχατο , ἐόντες Φρυγῶν ἄποικοι .
The Armenians, who are settlers from Phrygia, were armed like the Phrygians.


7.73.1
7535
τούτων συναμφοτέρων ἦρχε Ἀρτόχμης Δαρείου ἔχων θυγατέρα .
Both these together had as their commander Artochmes, who had married a daughter of Darius.


7.74.1
7536
Λυδοὶ δὲ ἀγχοτάτω τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν εἶχον ὅπλα .
The Lydian armor was most similar to the Greek.


7.74.1
7537
οἱ δὲ Λυδοὶ Μηίονες ἐκαλεῦντο τὸ πάλαι , ἐπὶ δὲ Λυδοῦ τοῦ Ἄτους ἔσχον τὴν ἐπωνυμίην , μεταβαλόντες τὸ οὔνομα .
The Lydians were formerly called Meiones, until they changed their name and were called after Lydus son of Atys.


7.74.1
7538
Μυσοὶ δὲ ἐπὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι εἶχον κράνεα ἐπιχώρια , ἀσπίδας δὲ μικράς , ἀκοντίοισι δὲ ἐχρέωντο ἐπικαύτοισι .
The Mysians wore on their heads their native helmets, carrying small shields and javelins of burnt wood.


7.74.2
7539
οὗτοι δὲ εἰσὶ Λυδῶν ἄποικοι , ἀπ’ Ὀλύμπου δὲ ὄρεος καλέονται Ὀλυμπιηνοί .
They are settlers from Lydia, and are called Olympieni after the mountain Olympus.


7.74.2
7540
Λυδῶν δὲ καὶ Μυσῶν ἦρχε Ἀρταφρένης ὁ Ἀρταφρένεος ὃς ἐς Μαραθῶνα ἐσέβαλε ἅμα Δάτι .
The commander of the Lydians and Mysians was that Artaphrenes son of Artaphrenes, who attacked Marathon with Datis.


7.75.1
7541
Θρήικες δὲ ἐπὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι ἀλωπεκέας ἔχοντες ἐστρατεύοντο , περὶ δὲ τὸ σῶμα κιθῶνας , ἐπὶ δὲ ζειρὰς περιβεβλημένοι ποικίλας , περὶ δὲ τοὺς πόδας τε καὶ τὰς κνήμας πέδιλα νεβρῶν , πρὸς δὲ ἀκόντιά τε καὶ πέλτας καὶ ἐγχειρίδια μικρά .
The Thracians in the army wore fox-skin caps on their heads, and tunics on their bodies; over these they wore embroidered mantles; they had shoes of fawnskin on their feet and legs; they also had javelins and little shields and daggers.


7.75.2
7542
οὗτοι δὲ διαβάντες μὲν ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην ἐκλήθησαν Βιθυνοί , τὸ δὲ πρότερον ἐκαλέοντο , ὡς αὐτοὶ λέγουσι , Στρυμόνιοι , οἰκέοντες ἐπὶ Στρυμόνι ·
They took the name of Bithynians after they crossed over to Asia;


7.75.2
7543
ἐξαναστῆναι δὲ φασὶ ἐξ ἠθέων ὑπὸ Τευκρῶν τε καὶ Μυσῶν .
Before that, they were called (as they themselves say) Strymonians, since they lived by the Strymon; they say that they were driven from their homes by Teucrians and Mysians.


7.75.2
7544
Θρηίκων δὲ τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ ἦρχε Βασσάκης ὁ Ἀρταβάνου .
The commander of the Thracians of Asia was Bassaces son of Artabanus.


7.76.1
7545
G? ἀσπίδασδὲ ὠμοβοΐνας εἶχον σμικράς , καὶ προβόλους δύο λυκιοεργέας ἕκαστος εἶχε , ἐπὶ δὲ τῇσι κεφαλῇσι κράνεα χάλκεα ·
The Pisidians had little shields of raw oxhide; each man carried two wolf-hunters' spears; they wore helmets of bronze,


7.76.1
7546
πρὸς δὲ τοῖσι κράνεσι ὦτά τε καὶ κέρεα προσῆν βοὸς χάλκεα , ἐπῆσαν δὲ καὶ λόφοι ·
and on these helmets were the ears and horns of oxen wrought in bronze, and also crests;


7.76.1
7547
τὰς δὲ κνήμας ῥάκεσι φοινικέοισι κατειλίχατο .
Their legs were wrapped around with strips of purple rags.


7.76.1
7548
ἐν τούτοισι τοῖσι ἀνδράσι Ἄρεος ἐστὶ χρηστήριον .
Among these men is a place of divination sacred to Ares.


7.77.1
7549
Καβηλέες δὲ οἱ Μηίονες , Λασόνιοι δὲ καλεύμενοι , τὴν αὐτὴν Κίλιξι εἶχον σκευήν , τὴν ἐγώ , ἐπεὰν κατὰ τὴν Κιλίκων τάξιν διεξιὼν γένωμαι , τότε σημανέω .
The Cabelees, who are Meiones and are called Lasonii, had the same equipment as the Cilicians;


7.77.1
7550
Μιλύαι δὲ αἰχμάς τε βραχέας εἶχον καὶ εἵματα ἐνεπεπορπέατο ·
When I come in my narrative to the place of the Cilicians, I will then declare what it was.


7.77.1
7551
εἶχον δὲ αὐτῶν τόξα μετεξέτεροι Λύκια , περὶ δὲ τῇσι κεφαλῇσι ἐκ διφθερέων πεποιημένας κυνέας .
The Milyae had short spears and garments fastened by brooches; some of them carried Lycian bows and wore caps of skin on their heads.


7.77.1
7552
τούτων πάντων ἦρχε Βάδρης ὁ Ὑστάνεος .
The commander of all these was Badres son of Hystanes.


7.78.1
7553
μόσχοι δὲ περὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι κυνέας ξυλίνας εἶχον , ἀσπίδας δὲ καὶ αἰχμὰς σμικράς ·
The Moschi wore wooden helmets on their heads, and carried shields and small spears.


7.78.1
7554
λόγχαι δὲ ἐπῆσαν μεγάλαι .
There were long points on these.


7.78.1
7555
Τιβαρηνοὶ δὲ καὶ Μάκρωνες καὶ Μοσσύνοικοι κατά περ Μόσχοι ἐσκευασμένοι ἐστρατεύοντο .
The Tibareni and Macrones and Mossynoeci in the army were equipped like the Moschi.


7.78.1
7556
τούτους δὲ συνέτασσον ἄρχοντες οἵδε , Μόσχους μὲν καὶ Τιβαρηνοὺς Ἀριόμαρδος ὁ Δαρείου τε παῖς καὶ Πάρμυος τῆς Σμέρδιος τοῦ Κύρου , Μάκρωνας δὲ καὶ Μοσσυνοίκους Ἀρταΰκτης ὁ Χεράσμιος , ὃς Σηστὸν τὴν ἐν Ἑλλησπόντῳ ἐπετρόπευε .
The commanders who marshalled them were, for the Moschi and Tibareni, Ariomardus son of Darius and Parmys, the daughter of Cyrus' son Smerdis; for the Macrones and Mossynoeci, Artayctes son of Cherasmis, who was governor of Sestus on the Hellespont.


7.79.1
7557
Μᾶρες δὲ ἐπὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι κράνεα ἐπιχώρια πλεκτὰ εἶχον , ἀσπίδας δὲ δερματίνας μικρὰς καὶ ἀκόντια .
The Mares wore on their heads their native woven helmets, and carried javelins and small hide shields.


7.79.1
7558
Κόλχοι δὲ περὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι κράνεα ξύλινα , ἀσπίδας δὲ ὠμοβοΐνας μικρὰς αἰχμάς τε βραχέας , πρὸς δὲ μαχαίρας εἶχον .
The Colchians had wooden helmets and small shields of raw oxhide and short spears, and also swords.


7.79.1
7559
Μαρῶν δὲ καὶ Κόλχων ἦρχε Φαρανδάτης ὁ Τεάσπιος .
The commander of the Mares and Colchians was Pharandates son of Teaspis.


7.79.1
7560
Ἀλαρόδιοι δὲ καὶ Σάσπειρες κατά περ Κόλχοι ὡπλισμένοι ἐστρατεύοντο .
The Alarodians and Saspires in the army were armed like the Colchians;


7.79.1
7561
τούτων δὲ Μασίστιος ὁ Σιρομίτρεω ἦρχε .
 Masistius son of Siromitres was their commander.


7.80.1
7562
τὰ δὲ νησιωτικὰ ἔθνεα τὰ ἐκ τῆς Ἐρυθρῆς θαλάσσης ἑπόμενα , νήσων δὲ ἐν τῇσι τοὺς ἀνασπάστους καλεομένους κατοικίζει βασιλεύς , ἀγχοτάτω τῶν Μηδικῶν εἶχον ἐσθῆτά τε καὶ ὅπλα .
The island tribes that came from the Red Sea, and from the islands where the king settles those who are called Exiles, wore dress and armor very similar to the Median.


7.80.1
7563
τούτων δὲ τῶν νησιωτέων ἦρχε Μαρδόντης ὁ Βαγαίου , ὃς ἐν Μυκάλῃ στρατηγέων δευτέρῳ ἔτεϊ τούτων ἐτελεύτησε ἐν τῇ μάχῃ .
The commander of these islanders was Mardontes son of Bagaeus, who in the next year was general at Mykale and died in the battle.


7.81.1
7564
ταῦτα ἦν τὰ κατ’ ἤπειρον στρατευόμενά τε ἔθνεα καὶ τεταγμένα ἐς τὸν πεζόν .
These are the nations that marched by the mainland and had their places in the infantry.


7.81.1
7565
τούτου ὦν τοῦ στρατοῦ ἦρχον μὲν οὗτοι οἵ περ εἰρέαται , καὶ οἱ διατάξαντες καὶ ἐξαριθμήσαντες οὗτοι ἦσαν καὶ χιλιάρχας τε καὶ μυριάρχας ἀποδέξαντες , ἑκατοντάρχας δὲ καὶ δεκάρχας οἱ μυριάρχαι .
The commanders of this army were those whom I have mentioned, and they were the ones who marshalled and numbered them and appointed captains of thousands and ten thousands; the captains of ten thousands appointed the captains of hundreds and of tens.


7.81.1
7566
τελέων δὲ καὶ ἐθνέων ἦσαν ἄλλοι σημάντορες .
There were others who were leaders of companies and nations.


7.82.1
7567
ἦσαν μὲν δὴ οὗτοι οἵ περ εἰρέαται ἄρχοντες , ἐστρατήγεον δὲ τούτων τε καὶ τοῦ σύμπαντος στρατοῦ τοῦ πεζοῦ Μαρδόνιός τε ὁ Γοβρύεω καὶ Τριτανταίχμης ὁ Ἀρταβάνου τοῦ γνώμην θεμένου μὴ στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ Ἑλλάδα καὶ Σμερδομένης ὁ Ὀτάνεω , Δαρείου ἀμφότεροι οὗτοι ἀδελφεῶν παῖδες , Ξέρξῃ δὲ ἐγίνοντο ἀνεψιοί , καὶ Μασίστης ὁ Δαρείου τε καὶ Ἀτόσσης παῖς καὶ Γέργις ὁ Ἀριάζου καὶ Μεγάβυζος ὁ Ζωπύρου .
These were the commanders, as I have said; the generals of these and of the whole infantry were Mardonius son of Gobryas, Tritantaechmes son of that Artabanus who delivered the opinion that there should be no expedition against  Hellas, Smerdomenes son of Otanes (these two latter were sons of Darius' brothers, and thus they were Xerxes' cousins), Masistes son of Darius and Atossa, Gergis son of Ariazus, and Megabyzus son of Zopyrus.


7.83.1
7568
οὗτοι ἦσαν στρατηγοὶ τοῦ σύμπαντος πεζοῦ χωρὶς τῶν μυρίων ·
These were the generals of the whole infantry, except the Ten Thousand.


7.83.1
7569
τῶν δὲ μυρίων τούτων Περσέων τῶν ἀπολελεγμένων ἐστρατήγεε μὲν Ὑδάρνης ὁ Ὑδάρνεος , ἐκαλέοντο δὲ ἀθάνατοι οἱ Πέρσαι οὗτοι ἐπὶ τοῦδε ·
Hydarnes son of Hydarnes was general of these picked ten thousand Persians, who were called Immortals for this reason:


7.83.1
7570
εἴ τις αὐτῶν ἐξέλιπε τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἢ θανάτῳ βιηθεὶς ἢ νούσῳ , ἄλλος ἀνὴρ ἀραίρητο , καὶ ἐγίνοντο οὐδαμὰ οὔτε πλεῦνες μυρίων οὔτε ἐλάσσονες .
When any one of them was forced to fall out of the number by death or sickness, another was chosen so that they were never more or fewer than ten thousand.


7.83.2
7571
κόσμον δὲ πλεῖστον παρείχοντο διὰ πάντων Πέρσαι , καὶ αὐτοὶ ἄριστοι ἦσαν ·
The Persians showed the richest adornment of all, and they were the best men in the army.


7.83.2
7572
σκευὴν μὲν τοιαύτην εἶχον ἥ περ εἴρηται , χωρὶς δὲ χρυσόν τε πολλὸν καὶ ἄφθονον ἔχοντες ἐνέπρεπον , ἁρμαμάξας τε ἅμα ἤγοντο , ἐν δὲ παλλακὰς καὶ θεραπηίην πολλήν τε καὶ εὖ ἐσκευασμένην ·
Their equipment was such as I have said; beyond this they stood out by the abundance of gold that they had. They also brought carriages bearing concubines and many well-equipped servants;


7.83.2
7573
σῖτα δέ σφι , χωρὶς τῶν ἄλλων στρατιωτέων , κάμηλοί τε καὶ ὑποζύγια ἦγον .
Camels and beasts of burden carried food for them, apart from the rest of the army.


7.84.1
7574
ἱππεύει δὲ ταῦτα τὰ ἔθνεα ·
There are horsemen in these nations, but not all of them furnished cavalry.


7.84.1
7575
πλὴν οὐ πάντα παρείχετο ἵππον , ἀλλὰ τοσάδε μοῦνα , Πέρσαι μὲν τὴν αὐτὴν ἐσκευασμένοι καὶ ὁ πεζὸς αὐτῶν ·
Only the following did so: the Persians, equipped like their infantry,


7.84.1
7576
πλὴν ἐπὶ τῇσι κεφαλῇσι εἶχον ἔνιοι αὐτῶν καὶ χάλκεα καὶ σιδήρεα ἐξεληλαμένα ποιήματα .
except that some of them wore headgear of hammered bronze and iron.


7.85.1
7577
εἰσὶ δὲ τινὲς νομάδες ἄνθρωποι Σαγάρτιοι καλεόμενοι , ἔθνος μὲν Περσικὸν καὶ φωνῇ , σκευὴν δὲ μεταξὺ ἔχουσι πεποιημένην τῆς τε Περσικῆς καὶ τῆς Πακτυϊκῆς ·
There are also certain nomads called Sagartian; they are Persian in speech, and the fashion of their equipment is somewhat between the Persian and the Pactyan;


7.85.1
7578
οἳ παρείχοντο μὲν ἵππον ὀκτακισχιλίην , ὅπλα δὲ οὐ νομίζουσι ἔχειν οὔτε χάλκεα οὔτε σιδήρεα ἔξω ἐγχειριδίων , χρέωνται δὲ σειρῇσι πεπλεγμένῃσι ἐξ ἱμάντων ·
They furnished eight thousand horsemen. It is their custom to carry no armor of bronze or iron, except only daggers, and to use ropes of twisted leather.


7.85.2
7579
ταύτῃσι πίσυνοι ἔρχονται ἐς πόλεμον .
They go to battle relying on these.


7.85.2
7580
ἡ δὲ μάχη τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἥδε ·
This is the manner of fighting of these men:


7.85.2
7581
ἐπεὰν συμμίσγωσι τοῖσι πολεμίοισι , βάλλουσι τὰς σειρὰς ἐπ’ ἄκρῳ βρόχους ἐχούσας ·
when they are at close quarters with their enemy, they throw their ropes, which have a noose at the end;


7.85.2
7582
ὅτευ δ’ ἂν τύχῃ , ἤν τε ἵππου ἤν τε ἀνθρώπου , ἐπ’ ἑωυτὸν ἕλκει ·
Whatever he catches, horse or man, each man drags to himself.


7.85.2
7583
οἳ δὲ ἐν ἕρκεσι ἐμπαλασσόμενοι διαφθείρονται .
The the enemy being entangled in the coils are slain.


7.86.1
7584
τούτων μὲν αὕτη ἡ μάχη , καὶ ἐπετετάχατο ἐς τοὺς Πέρσας ·
Such is their manner of fighting; they were marshalled with the Persians.


7.86.1
7585
Μῆδοι δὲ τήν περ ἐν τῷ πεζῷ εἶχον σκευήν , καὶ Κίσσιοι ὡσαύτως .
The Median cavalry were equipped like their infantry, and the Cissians similarly.


7.86.1
7586
Ἰνδοὶ δὲ σκευῇ μὲν ἐσεσάχατο τῇ αὐτῇ καὶ ἐν τῷ πεζῷ , ἤλαυνον δὲ κέλητας καὶ ἅρματα ·
The Indians were armed in the same manner as their infantry; they rode swift horses and drove chariots.


7.86.1
7587
ὑπὸ δὲ τοῖσι ἅρμασι ὑπῆσαν ἵπποι καὶ ὄνοι ἄγριοι .
Horses and wild asses were yoked to these chariots.


7.86.1
7588
Βάκτριοι δὲ ἐσκευάδατο ὡσαύτως καὶ ἐν τῷ πεζῷ , καὶ Κάσπιοι ὁμοίως .
The Bactrians were equipped as were their foot, and the Caspians in the same manner.


7.86.2
7589
Λίβυες δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ κατά περ ἐν τῷ πεζῷ ·
The Libyans, too, were armed like the men of their infantry.


7.86.2
7590
ἤλαυνον δὲ καὶ οὗτοι πάντες ἅρματα .
All of them also drove chariots.


7.86.2
7591
ὣς δ’ αὕτως Κάσπιοι καὶ Παρικάνιοι ἐσεσάχατο ὁμοίως καὶ ἐν τῷ πεζῷ .
In the same manner, the Caspians and Paricanians were armed as the men of their infantry.


7.86.2
7592
Ἀράβιοι δὲ σκευὴν μὲν εἶχον τὴν αὐτὴν καὶ ἐν τῷ πεζῷ , ἤλαυνον δὲ πάντες καμήλους ταχυτῆτα οὐ λειπομένας ἵππων .
The Arabians had the same equipment as the men of their infantry, and all of them rode on camels no less swift than horses.


7.87.1
7593
ταῦτα τὰ ἔθνεα μοῦνα ἱππεύει .
These nations alone were on horseback;


7.87.1
7594
ἀριθμὸς δὲ τῆς ἵππου ἐγένετο ὀκτὼ μυριάδες , πάρεξ τῶν καμήλων καὶ τῶν ἁρμάτων .
The number of the horsemen was shown to be eighty thousand, besides the camels and the chariots.


7.87.1
7595
οἱ μέν νυν ἄλλοι ἱππέες ἐτετάχατο κατὰ τέλεα , Ἀράβιοι δὲ ἔσχατοι ἐπετετάχατο ·
All the rest of the horsemen were ranked with their companies, but the Arabians were posted last.


7.87.1
7596
ἅτε γὰρ τῶν ἵππων οὔτι ἀνεχομένων τὰς καμήλους , ὕστεροι ἐτετάχατο , ἵνα μὴ φοβέοιτο τὸ ἱππικόν .
Since horses cannot endure camels, their place was in the rear, so that the horses would not be frightened.


7.88.1
7597
Ἵππαρχοι δὲ ἦσαν Ἁρμαμίθρης τε καὶ Τίθαιος Δάτιος παῖδες .
The captains of cavalry were Harmamithres and Tithaeus, sons of Datis;


7.88.1
7598
ὁ δὲ τρίτος σφι συνίππαρχος Φαρνούχης κατελέλειπτο ἐν Σάρδισι νοσέων .
The third who was captain with them, Pharnuches, had been left behind sick at Sardis.


7.88.1
7599
ὡς γὰρ ὁρμῶντο ἐκ Σαρδίων , ἐπὶ συμφορὴν περιέπεσε ἀνεθέλητον ·
As they set forth from Sardis, an unwelcome mishap befell him: a dog ran under the feet of the horse he was riding, and the horse was taken by surprise and frightened, so it reared up and threw Pharnuches;


7.88.1
7600
ἐλαύνοντι γάρ οἱ ὑπὸ τοὺς πόδας τοῦ ἵππου ὑπέδραμε κύων , καὶ ὁ ἵππος οὐ προϊδὼν ἐφοβήθη τε καὶ στὰς ὀρθὸς ἀπεσείσατο τὸν Φαρνούχεα , πεσὼν δὲ αἷμά τε ἤμεε καὶ ἐς φθίσιν περιῆλθε ἡ νοῦσος .
After his fall he vomited blood and began to waste away.


7.88.2
7601
τὸν δὲ ἵππον αὐτίκα κατ’ ἀρχὰς ἐποίησαν ὡς ἐκέλευε ·
The horse was immediately dealt with according to Pharnuches' command;


7.88.2
7602
ἀπαγαγόντες οἱ οἰκέται ἐς τὸν χῶρον ἐν τῷ περ κατέβαλε τὸν δεσπότην , ἐν τοῖσι γούνασι ἀπέταμον τὰ σκέλεα .
His servants led it away to the place where it had thrown their master, and cut off its legs at the knee.


7.88.2
7603
Φαρνούχης μὲν οὕτω παρελύθη τῆς ἡγεμονίης .
Thus it was that Pharnuches lost his command.


7.89.1
7604
τῶν δὲ τριηρέων ἀριθμὸς μὲν ἐγένετο ἑπτὰ καὶ διηκόσιαι καὶ χίλιαι , παρείχοντο δὲ αὐτὰς οἵδε , Φοίνικες μὲν σὺν Σύροισι τοῖσι ἐν τῇ Παλαιστίνῃ τριηκοσίας , ὧδε ἐσκευασμένοι ·
The number of the triremes was twelve hundred and seven, and they were furnished by the following:


7.89.1
7605
περὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι κυνέας εἶχον ἀγχοτάτω πεποιημένας τρόπον τὸν Ἑλληνικόν , ἐνδεδυκότες δὲ θώρηκας λινέους , ἀσπίδας δὲ ἴτυς οὐκ ἐχούσας εἶχον καὶ ἀκόντια .
The Phoenicians with the Syrians of Palestine furnished three hundred; for their equipment, they had on their heads helmets very close to the Greek in style; they wore linen breastplates, and carried shields without rims, and javelins.


7.89.2
7606
οὗτοι δὲ οἱ Φοίνικες τὸ παλαιὸν οἴκεον , ὡς αὐτοὶ λέγουσι , ἐπὶ τῇ Ἐρυθρῇ θαλάσσῃ , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὑπερβάντες τῆς Συρίης οἰκέουσι τὸ παρὰ θάλασσαν ·
These Phoenicians formerly dwelt, as they themselves say, by the Red Sea;


7.89.2
7607
τῆς δὲ Συρίης τοῦτο τὸ χωρίον καὶ τὸ μέχρι Αἰγύπτου πᾶν Παλαιστίνη καλέεται .
They crossed from there and now inhabit the seacoast of Syria. This part of Syria as far as Egypt is all called Palestine.


7.89.2
7608
Αἰγύπτιοι δὲ νέας παρείχοντο διηκοσίας .
The Egyptians furnished two hundred ships.


7.89.3
7609
οὗτοι δὲ εἶχον περὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι κράνεα χηλευτά , ἀσπίδας δὲ κοίλας , τὰς ἴτυς μεγάλας ἐχούσας , καὶ δόρατά τε ναύμαχα καὶ τύχους μεγάλους .
They wore woven helmets and carried hollow shields with broad rims, and spears for sea-warfare, and great battle-axes.


7.89.3
7610
τὸ δὲ πλῆθος αὐτῶν θωρηκοφόροι ἦσαν , μαχαίρας δὲ μεγάλας εἶχον .
Most of them wore cuirasses and carried long swords.


7.90.1
7611
οὗτοι μὲν οὕτω ἐστάλατο , Κύπριοι δὲ παρείχοντο νέας πεντήκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν , ἐσκευασμένοι ὧδε ·
Such was their armor. The Cyprians furnished a hundred and fifty ships; for their equipment,


7.90.1
7612
τὰς μὲν κεφαλὰς εἱλίχατο μίτρῃσι οἱ βασιλέες αὐτῶν , οἱ δὲ ἄλλοι εἶχον κιθῶνας , τὰ δὲ ἄλλα κατά περ Ἕλληνες .
Their princes wore turbans wrapped around their heads, and the people wore tunics, but in all else they were like the Greeks.


7.90.1
7613
τούτων δὲ τοσάδε ἔθνεα εἰσί , οἳ μὲν ἀπὸ Σαλαμῖνος καὶ Ἀθηνέων , οἳ δὲ ἀπ’ Ἀρκαδίης , οἳ δὲ ἀπὸ Κύθνου , οἳ δὲ ἀπὸ Φοινίκης , οἳ δὲ ἀπὸ Αἰθιοπίης , ὡς αὐτοὶ Κύπριοι λέγουσι .
These are their tribes: some are from Salamis and Athens, some from Arcadia, some from Cythnus, some from Phoenice, and some from Ethiopia, as the Cyprians themselves say.


7.91.1
7614
Κίλικες δὲ ἑκατὸν παρείχοντο νέας .
The Cilicians furnished a hundred ships.


7.91.1
7615
οὗτοι δ’ αὖ περὶ μὲν τῇσι κεφαλῇσι κράνεα ἐπιχώρια , λαισήια δὲ εἶχον ἀντ’ ἀσπίδων ὠμοβοέης πεποιημένα , καὶ κιθῶνας εἰρινέους ἐνδεδυκότες ·
They also wore on their heads their native helmets, carried bucklers of raw oxhide for shields, and were clad in woollen tunics;


7.91.1
7616
δύο δὲ ἀκόντια ἕκαστος καὶ ξίφος εἶχον , ἀγχοτάτω τῇσι Αἰγυπτίῃσι μαχαίρῃσι πεποιημένα .
Each had two javelins and a sword very close in style to the knives of Egypt.


7.91.1
7617
οὗτοι δὲ τὸ παλαιὸν Ὑπαχαιοὶ ἐκαλέοντο , ἐπὶ δὲ Κίλικος τοῦ Ἀγήνορος ἀνδρὸς Φοίνικος ἔσχον τὴν ἐπωνυμίην .
These Cilicians were formerly called Hypachaei, and took their name from Cilix son of Agenor, a Phoenician.


7.91.1
7618
Πάμφυλοι δὲ τριήκοντα παρείχοντο νέας Ἑλληνικοῖσι ὅπλοισι ἐσκευασμένοι .
The Pamphylians furnished a hundred ships: they were armed like the Greeks.


7.91.1
7619
οἱ δὲ Πάμφυλοι οὗτοι εἰσὶ τῶν ἐκ Τροίης ἀποσκεδασθέντων ἅμα Ἀμφιλόχῳ καὶ Κάλχαντι .
These Pamphylians are descended from the Trojans of the diaspora who followed Amphilochus and Calchas.


7.92.1
7620
λύκιοι δὲ παρείχοντο νέας πεντήκοντα θωρηκοφόροι τε ἐόντες καὶ κνημιδοφόροι , εἶχον δὲ τόξα κρανέινα καὶ ὀιστοὺς καλαμίνους ἀπτέρους καὶ ἀκόντια , ἐπὶ δὲ αἰγὸς δέρμα περὶ τοὺς ὤμους αἰωρεύμενον , περὶ δὲ τῇσι κεφαλῇσι πίλους πτεροῖσι περιεστεφανωμένους ·
The Lycians furnished fifty ships; they wore cuirasses and greaves, and carried cornel-wood bows and unfeathered arrows and javelins;


7.92.1
7621
ἐγχειρίδια δὲ καὶ δρέπανα εἶχον .
Goat-skins hung from their shoulders, and they wore on their heads caps crowned with feathers; they also had daggers and scimitars.


7.92.1
7622
Λύκιοι δὲ Τερμίλαι ἐκαλέοντο ἐκ Κρήτης γεγονότες , ἐπὶ δὲ Λύκου τοῦ Πανδίονος ἀνδρὸς Ἀθηναίου ἔσχον τὴν ἐπωνυμίην .
The Lycians are from Crete and were once called Termilae; they took their name from Lycus son of Pandion, an Athenian.


7.93.1
7623
Δωριέες δὲ οἱ ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης τριήκοντα παρείχοντο νέας , ἔχοντές τε Ἑλληνικὰ ὅπλα καὶ γεγονότες ἀπὸ Πελοποννήσου .
The Dorians of Asia furnished thirty ships; their armor was Greek; they are of Peloponnesian descent.


7.93.1
7624
Κᾶρες δὲ ἑβδομήκοντα παρείχοντο νέας , τὰ μὲν ἄλλα κατά περ Ἕλληνες ἐσταλμένοι , εἶχον δὲ καὶ δρέπανα καὶ ἐγχειρίδια .
The Carians furnished seventy ships; they had scimitars and daggers, but the rest of their equipment was Greek.


7.93.1
7625
οὗτοι δὲ οἵτινες πρότερον ἐκαλέοντο , ἐν τοῖσι πρώτοισι τῶν λόγων εἴρηται .
I have said in the beginning of my history what they were formerly called.


7.94.1
7626
Ἴωνες δὲ ἑκατὸν νέας παρείχοντο ἐσκευασμένοι ὡς Ἕλληνες .
The Ionians furnished a hundred ships; their equipment was like the Greek.


7.94.1
7627
Ἴωνες δὲ ὅσον μὲν χρόνον ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ οἴκεον τὴν νῦν καλεομένην Ἀχαιίην , καὶ πρὶν ἢ Δαναόν τε καὶ Ξοῦθον ἀπικέσθαι ἐς Πελοπόννησον , ὡς Ἕλληνες λέγουσι , ἐκαλέοντο Πελασγοὶ Αἰγιαλέες , ἐπὶ δὲ Ἴωνος τοῦ Ξούθου Ἴωνες .
These Ionians, as long as they were in the Peloponnese, dwelt in what is now called Achaia, and before Danaus and Xuthus came to the Peloponnese, as the Greeks say, they were called Aegialian Pelasgians. They were named Ionians after Ion the son of Xuthus.


7.95.1
7628
νησιῶται δὲ ἑπτακαίδεκα παρείχοντο νέας , ὡπλισμένοι ὡς Ἕλληνες , καὶ τοῦτο Πελασγικὸν ἔθνος ;
The islanders provided seventeen ships and were armed like Greeks; they were also of Pelasgian stock.


7.95.1
7629
ὕστερον δὲ Ἰωνικὸν ἐκλήθη κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον καὶ οἱ δυωδεκαπόλιες Ἴωνες οἱ ἀπ’ Ἀθηνέων .
It was later called Ionian for the same reason as were the Ionians of the twelve cities, who came from Athens.


7.95.1
7630
Αἰολέες δὲ ἑξήκοντα νέας παρείχοντο , ἐσκευασμένοι τε ὡς Ἕλληνες καὶ τὸ πάλαι καλεόμενοι Πελασγοί , ὡς Ἑλλήνων λόγος .
The Aeolians furnished sixty ships and were equipped like Greeks; formerly they were called Pelasgian, as the Greek story goes.


7.95.2
7631
Ἑλλησπόντιοι δὲ πλὴν Ἀβυδηνῶν ( Ἀβυδηνοῖσι γὰρ προσετέτακτο ἐκ βασιλέος κατὰ χώρην μένουσι φύλακας εἶναι τῶν γεφυρέων ) οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ οἱ ἐκ τοῦ Πόντου στρατευόμενοι παρείχοντο μὲν ἑκατὸν νέας , ἐσκευασμένοι δὲ ἦσαν ὡς Ἕλληνες .
Of the people of the Hellespont, the people of Abydos had been charged by the king to remain at home and guard the bridges;


7.95.2
7632
οὗτοι δὲ Ἰώνων καὶ Δωριέων ἄποικοι .
The rest of the people from Pontus who came with the army furnished a hundred ships and were equipped like Greeks. They were settlers from the Ionians and Dorians.


7.96.1
7633
ἐπεβάτευον δὲ ἐπὶ πασέων τῶν νεῶν Πέρσαι καὶ Μῆδοι καὶ Σαάκαι .
Persians and Medes and Sacae served as soldiers on all the ships.


7.96.1
7634
τούτων δὲ ἄριστα πλεούσας παρείχοντο νέας Φοίνικες καὶ Φοινίκων Σιδώνιοι .
The most seaworthy ships were furnished by the Phoenicians, and among them by the Sidonians.


7.96.1
7635
τούτοισι πᾶσι καὶ τοῖσι ἐς τὸν πεζὸν τεταγμένοισι αὐτῶν ἐπῆσαν ἑκάστοισι ἐπιχώριοι ἡγεμόνες , τῶν ἐγώ , οὐ γὰρ ἀναγκαίῃ ἐξέργομαι ἐς ἱστορίης λόγον , οὐ παραμέμνημαι .
All of these, as with those who were marshalled in the infantry, each had their native leaders, whose names I do not record, since it is not necessary for the purpose of my history.


7.96.2
7636
οὔτε γὰρ ἔθνεος ἑκάστου ἐπάξιοι ἦσαν οἱ ἡγεμόνες , ἔν τε ἔθνεϊ ἑκάστῳ ὅσαι περ πόλιες τοσοῦτοι καὶ ἡγεμόνες ἦσαν , εἵποντο δὲ ὡς οὐ στρατηγοὶ ἀλλ’ ὥσπερ οἱ ἄλλοι στρατευόμενοι δοῦλοι ·
The leaders of each nation are not worthy of mention, and every city of each nation had a leader of its own.


7.96.2
7637
ἐπεὶ στρατηγοί γε οἱ τὸ πᾶν ἔχοντες κράτος καὶ ἄρχοντες τῶν ἐθνέων ἑκάστων , ὅσοι αὐτῶν ἦσαν Πέρσαι , εἰρέαταί μοι .
These came not as generals but as slaves, like the rest of the expedition; I have already said who were the generals of supreme authority and the Persian commanders of each nation.


7.97.1
7638
τοῦ δὲ ναυτικοῦ ἐστρατήγεον Ἀριαβίγνης τε ὁ Δαρείου καὶ Πρηξάσπης ὁ Ἀσπαθίνεω καὶ Μεγάβαζος ὁ Μεγαβάτεω καὶ Ἀχαιμένης ὁ Δαρείου , τῆς μὲν Ἰάδος τε καὶ Καρικῆς στρατιῆς Ἀριαβίγνης ὁ Δαρείου τε παῖς καὶ τῆς Γοβρύεω θυγατρός ·
The admirals of the navy were Ariabignes son of Darius, Prexaspes son of Aspathines, Megabazus son of Megabates, and Achaemenes son of Darius.


7.97.1
7639
Αἰγυπτίων δὲ ἐστρατήγεε Ἀχαιμένης Ξέρξεω ἐὼν ἀπ’ ἀμφοτέρων ἀδελφεός , τῆς δὲ ἄλλης στρατιῆς ἐστρατήγεον οἱ δύο .
Ariabignes, son of Darius and Gobryas' daughter, was admiral of the Ionian and Carian fleet; the admiral of the Egyptians was Achaemenes, full brother of Xerxes; and the two others were admirals of the rest.


7.97.1
7640
τριηκόντεροι δὲ καὶ πεντηκόντεροι καὶ κέρκουροι καὶ ἱππαγωγὰ πλοῖα μακρὰ συνελθόντα ἐς τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἐφάνη τρισχίλια .
The ships of thirty and of fifty oars, the light galleys, and the great transports for horses came to a total of three thousand all together.


7.98.1
7641
τῶν δὲ ἐπιπλεόντων μετά γε τοὺς στρατηγοὺς οἵδε ἦσαν ὀνομαστότατοι , Σιδώνιος Τετράμνηστος Ἀνύσου , καὶ Τύριος Ματτὴν Σιρώμου , καὶ Ἀράδιος Μέρβαλος Ἀγβάλου , καὶ Κίλιξ Συέννεσις Ὠρομέδοντος , καὶ Λύκιος Κυβερνίσκος Σίκα , καὶ Κύπριοι Γόργος τε ὁ Χέρσιος καὶ Τιμῶναξ ὁ Τιμαγόρεω , καὶ Καρῶν Ἱστιαῖός τε ὁ Τύμνεω καὶ Πίγρης ὁ Ὑσσελδώμου , καὶ Δαμασίθυμος ὁ Κανδαύλεω .
After the admirals, the most famous of those on board were these: from  Sidon, Tetramnestus son of Anysus; from  Tyre, Matten son of Siromus; from  Aradus, Merbalus son of Agbalus; from  Cilicia, Syennesis son of Oromedon; from  Lycia, Cyberniscus son of Sicas; from  Cyprus, Gorgus son of Chersis and Timonax son of Timagoras; and from  Caria, Histiaeus son of Tymnes, Pigres son of Hysseldomus, and Damasithymus son of Candaules.


7.99.1
7642
τῶν μέν νυν ἄλλων οὐ παραμέμνημαι ταξιάρχων ὡς οὐκ ἀναγκαζόμενος , Ἀρτεμισίης δὲ τῆς μάλιστα θῶμα ποιεῦμαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα στρατευσαμένης γυναικός ·
I see no need to mention any of the other captains except Artemisia.


7.99.1
7643
ἥτις ἀποθανόντος τοῦ ἀνδρὸς αὐτή τε ἔχουσα τὴν τυραννίδα καὶ παιδὸς ὑπάρχοντος νεηνίεω ὑπὸ λήματός τε καὶ ἀνδρηίης ἐστρατεύετο , οὐδεμιῆς οἱ ἐούσης ἀναγκαίης .
I find it a great marvel that a woman went on the expedition against Hellas: after her husband died, she took over his tyranny, though she had a young son, and followed the army from youthful spirits and manliness, under no compulsion.


7.99.2
7644
οὔνομα μὲν δὴ ἦν αὐτῇ Ἀρτεμισίη , θυγάτηρ δὲ ἦν Λυγδάμιος , γένος δὲ ἐξ Ἁλικαρνησσοῦ τὰ πρὸς πατρός , τὰ μητρόθεν δὲ Κρῆσσα .
Artemisia was her name, and she was the daughter of Lygdamis; on her fathers' side she was of Halicarnassian lineage, and on her mothers' Cretan.


7.99.2
7645
ἡγεμόνευε δὲ Ἁλικαρνησσέων τε καὶ Κῴων καὶ Νισυρίων τε καὶ Καλυδνίων , πέντε νέας παρεχομένη .
She was the leader of the men of Halicarnassus and Cos and Nisyrus and Calydnos, and provided five ships.


7.99.3
7646
καὶ συναπάσης τῆς στρατιῆς , μετά γε τὰς Σιδωνίων , νέας εὐδοξοτάτας παρείχετο , πάντων τε τῶν συμμάχων γνώμας ἀρίστας βασιλέι ἀπεδέξατο .
Her ships were reputed to be the best in the whole fleet after the ships of Sidon, and she gave the king the best advice of all his allies.


7.99.3
7647
τῶν δὲ κατέλεξα πολίων ἡγεμονεύειν αὐτήν , τὸ ἔθνος ἀποφαίνω πᾶν ἐὸν Δωρικόν , Ἁλικαρνησσέας μὲν Τροιζηνίους , τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους Ἐπιδαυρίους .
The cities that I said she was the leader of are all of Dorian stock, as I can show, since the Halicarnassians are from Troezen, and the rest are from Epidaurus.


7.99.3
7648
ἐς μὲν τοσόνδε ὁ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς εἴρηται .
Here ends what I have said of the fleet.


7.100.1
7649
Ξέρξης δέ , ἐπεὶ ἠριθμήθη τε καὶ διετάχθη ὁ στρατός , ἐπεθύμησε αὐτός σφεας διεξελάσας θεήσασθαι ·
When his army had been numbered and marshalled, Xerxes desired to ride through and view it.


7.100.1
7650
μετὰ δὲ ἐποίεε ταῦτα , καὶ διεξελαύνων ἐπὶ ἅρματος παρὰ ἔθνος ἓν ἕκαστον ἐπυνθάνετο .
Then he did this; as he rode in a chariot past the men of each nation, he questioned them while his scribes wrote it all down,


7.100.1
7651
καὶ ἀπέγραφον οἱ γραμματισταί , ἕως ἐξ ἐσχάτων ἐς ἔσχατα ἀπίκετο καὶ τῆς ἵππου καὶ τοῦ πεζοῦ .
Until he had gone from one end to the other of the cavalry and infantry.


7.100.2
7652
ὡς δὲ ταῦτά οἱ ἐπεποίητο , τῶν νεῶν κατελκυσθεισέων ἐς θάλασσαν , ἐνθαῦτα ὁ Ξέρξης μετεκβὰς ἐκ τοῦ ἅρματος ἐς νέα Σιδωνίην ἵζετο ὑπὸ σκηνῇ χρυσέῃ καὶ παρέπλεε παρὰ τὰς πρῴρας τῶν νεῶν , ἐπειρωτῶν τε ἑκάστας ὁμοίως καὶ τὸν πεζὸν καὶ ἀπογραφόμενος .
After he had done this, the ships were drawn down and launched into the sea. Xerxes alighted from his chariot into a Sidonian ship and sat under a golden canopy while he was carried past the prows of the ships, questioning the men in the same way as the army and having the answers written down.


7.100.3
7653
τὰς δὲ νέας οἱ ναύαρχοι ἀναγαγόντες ὅσον τε τέσσερα πλέθρα ἀπὸ τοῦ αἰγιαλοῦ ἀνεκώχευον , τὰς πρῴρας ἐς γῆν τρέψαντες πάντες μετωπηδόν , καὶ ἐξοπλίσαντες τοὺς ἐπιβάτας ὡς ἐς πόλεμον .
The captains put out and anchored in line four hundred feet from the shore, with their prows turned landward and the marines armed for war;


7.100.3
7654
ὃ δ’ ἐντὸς τῶν πρωρέων πλέων ἐθηεῖτο καὶ τοῦ αἰγιαλοῦ .
Xerxes viewed them by passing between the prows and the land.


7.101.1
7655
ὡς δὲ καὶ ταύτας διεξέπλωσε καὶ ἐξέβη ἐκ τῆς νεός , μετεπέμψατο Δημάρητον τὸν Ἀρίστωνος συστρατευόμενον αὐτῷ ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , καλέσας δ’ αὐτὸν εἴρετο τάδε .
After he passed by all his fleet and disembarked from the ship, he sent for Demaratus son of Ariston, who was on the expedition with him against Hellas.


7.101.1
7656
" Δημάρητε , νῦν μοι σὲ ἡδύ τι ἐστὶ εἰρέσθαι τὰ θέλω .
He summoned him and said, “Demaratus, it is now my pleasure to ask you what I wish to know.


7.101.1
7657
σὺ εἶς Ἕλλην τε , καὶ ὡς ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι σεῦ τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων τῶν ἐμοὶ ἐς λόγους ἀπικνεομένων , πόλιος οὔτ’ ἐλαχίστης οὔτ’ ἀσθενεστάτης .
You are a Greek, and, as I am told both by you and by the other Greeks whom I have talked to, a man from neither the least nor the weakest of Greek cities.


7.101.2
7658
νῦν ὦν μοι τόδε φράσον , εἰ Ἕλληνες ὑπομενέουσι χεῖρας ἐμοὶ ἀνταειρόμενοι .
So tell me: will the Greeks offer battle and oppose me?


7.101.2
7659
οὐ γάρ , ὡς ἐγὼ δοκέω , οὐδ’ εἰ πάντες Ἕλληνες καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ οἱ πρὸς ἑσπέρης οἰκέοντες ἄνθρωποι συλλεχθείησαν , οὐκ ἀξιόμαχοι εἰσὶ ἐμὲ ἐπιόντα ὑπομεῖναι , μὴ ἐόντες ἄρθμιοι .
I think that even if all the Greeks and all the men of the western lands were assembled together, they are not powerful enough to withstand my attack, unless they are united.


7.101.3
7660
θέλω μέντοι καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ σεῦ , ὁκοῖόν τι λέγεις περὶ αὐτῶν , πυθέσθαι " .
Still I want to hear from you what you say of them.”


7.101.3
7661
ὃ μὲν ταῦτα εἰρώτα , ὁ δὲ ὑπολαβὼν ἔφη " βασιλεῦ , κότερα ἀληθείῃ χρήσωμαι πρὸς σὲ ἢ ἡδονῇ " ;
To this question Demaratus answered, “O king, should I speak the truth or try to please you?”


7.101.3
7662
ὁ δέ μιν ἀληθείῃ χρήσασθαι ἐκέλευε , φὰς οὐδέν οἱ ἀηδέστερον ἔσεσθαι ἢ πρότερον ἦν .
Xerxes bade him speak the truth and said that it would be no more unpleasant for him than before.


7.102.1
7663
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ἤκουσε Δημάρητος , ἔλεγε τάδε .
Demaratus heard this and said,


7.102.1
7664
" βασιλεῦ , ἐπειδὴ ἀληθείῃ διαχρήσασθαι πάντως κελεύεις ταῦτα λέγοντα τὰ μὴ ψευδόμενός τις ὕστερον ὑπὸ σεῦ ἁλώσεται , τῇ Ἑλλάδι πενίη μὲν αἰεί κοτε σύντροφος ἐστί , ἀρετὴ δὲ ἔπακτος ἐστί , ἀπό τε σοφίης κατεργασμένη καὶ νόμου ἰσχυροῦ ·
“O King, since you bid me by all means to speak the whole truth, and to say what you will not later prove to be false,


7.102.1
7665
τῇ διαχρεωμένη ἡ Ἑλλὰς τήν τε πενίην ἀπαμύνεται καὶ τὴν δεσποσύνην .
In Hellas poverty is always endemic, but courage is acquired as the fruit of wisdom and strong law; by use of this courage Hellas defends herself from poverty and tyranny.


7.102.2
7666
αἰνέω μέν νυν πάντας Ἕλληνας τοὺς περὶ ἐκείνους τοὺς Δωρικοὺς χώρους οἰκημένους , ἔρχομαι δὲ λέξων οὐ περὶ πάντων τούσδε τοὺς λόγους ἀλλὰ περὶ Λακεδαιμονίων μούνων , πρῶτα μὲν ὅτι οὐκ ἔστι ὅκως κοτὲ σοὺς δέξονται λόγους δουλοσύνην φέροντας τῇ Ἑλλάδι , αὖτις δὲ ὡς ἀντιώσονταί τοι ἐς μάχην καὶ ἢν οἱ ἄλλοι Ἕλληνες πάντες τὰ σὰ φρονέωσι .
Now I praise all the Greeks who dwell in those Dorian lands, yet I am not going to speak these words about all of them, but only about the Lacedaemonians. First, they will never accept conditions from you that bring slavery upon  Hellas; and second, they will meet you in battle even if all the other Greeks are on your side.


7.102.3
7667
ἀριθμοῦ δὲ πέρι , μή πύθῃ ὅσοι τινὲς ἐόντες ταῦτα ποιέειν οἷοί τε εἰσί ·
Do not ask me how many these men are who can do this;


7.102.3
7668
ἤν τε γὰρ τύχωσι ἐξεστρατευμένοι χίλιοι , οὗτοι μαχήσονταί τοι , ἤν τε ἐλάσσονες τούτων ἤν τε καὶ πλεῦνες " .
They will fight with you whether they have an army of a thousand men, or more than that, or less.”


7.103.1
7669
ταῦτα ἀκούσας Ξέρξης γελάσας ἔφη " Δημάρητε , οἷον ἐφθέγξαο ἔπος , ἄνδρας χιλίους στρατιῇ τοσῇδε μαχήσεσθαι .
When he heard this, Xerxes smiled and said, “What a strange thing to say, Demaratus, that a thousand men would fight with so great an army!


7.103.1
7670
ἄγε εἰπέ μοι ·
Come now, tell me this:


7.103.1
7671
σὺ φῂς τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν βασιλεὺς αὐτὸς γενέσθαι ·
you say that you were king of these men.


7.103.1
7672
σὺ ὦν ἐθελήσεις αὐτίκα μάλα πρὸς ἄνδρας δέκα μάχεσθαι ;
Are you willing right now to fight with ten men?


7.103.1
7673
καίτοι εἰ τὸ πολιτικὸν ὑμῖν πᾶν ἐστι τοιοῦτον οἷον σὺ διαιρέεις , σέ γε τὸν κείνων βασιλέα πρέπει πρὸς τὸ διπλήσιον ἀντιτάσσεσθαι κατὰ νόμους τοὺς ὑμετέρους .
Yet if your state is entirely as you define it, you as their king should by right encounter twice as many according to your laws.


7.103.2
7674
εἰ γὰρ κείνων ἕκαστος δέκα ἀνδρῶν τῆς στρατιῆς τῆς ἐμῆς ἀντάξιος ἐστί , σὲ δέ γε δίζημαι εἴκοσι εἶναι ἀντάξιον , καὶ οὕτω μὲν ὀρθοῖτ’ ἂν ὁ λόγος ὁ παρὰ σέο λεγόμενος ·
If each of them is a match for ten men of my army, then it is plain to me that you must be a match for twenty;


7.103.2
7675
εἰ δὲ τοιοῦτοί τε ἐόντες καὶ μεγάθεα τοσοῦτοι , ὅσοι σύ τε καὶ οἳ παρ’ ἐμὲ φοιτῶσι Ἑλλήνων ἐς λόγους αὐχέετε τοσοῦτον , ὅρα μὴ μάτην κόμπος ὁ λόγος οὗτος εἰρημένος ᾖ .
in this way you would prove that what you say is true. But if you Greeks who so exalt yourselves are just like you and the others who come to speak with me, and are also the same size, then beware lest the words you have spoken be only idle boasting.


7.103.3
7676
ἐπεὶ φέρε ἴδω παντὶ τῷ οἰκότι ·
Let us look at it with all reasonableness:


7.103.3
7677
κῶς ἂν δυναίατο χίλιοι ἢ καὶ μύριοι ἢ καὶ πεντακισμύριοι , ἐόντες γε ἐλεύθεροι πάντες ὁμοίως καὶ μὴ ὑπ’ ἑνὸς ἀρχόμενοι , στρατῷ τοσῷδε ἀντιστῆναι ;
how could a thousand, or ten thousand, or even fifty thousand men, if they are all equally free and not under the rule of one man, withstand so great an army as mine?


7.103.3
7678
ἐπεί τοι πλεῦνες περὶ ἕνα ἕκαστον γινόμεθα ἢ χίλιοι , ἐόντων ἐκείνων πέντε χιλιάδων .
If you Greeks are five thousand, we still would be more than a thousand to one.


7.103.4
7679
ὑπὸ μὲν γὰρ ἑνὸς ἀρχόμενοι κατὰ τρόπον τὸν ἡμέτερον γενοίατ’ ἄν , δειμαίνοντες τοῦτον , καὶ παρὰ τὴν ἑωυτῶν φύσιν ἀμείνονες , καὶ ἴοιεν ἀναγκαζόμενοι μάστιγι ἐς πλεῦνας ἐλάσσονες ἐόντες ·
If they were under the rule of one man according to our custom, they might out of fear of him become better than they naturally are,


7.103.4
7680
ἀνειμένοι δὲ ἐς τὸ ἐλεύθερον οὐκ ἂν ποιέοιεν τούτων οὐδέτερα .
and under compulsion of the lash they might go against greater numbers of inferior men; but if they are allowed to go free they would do neither.


7.103.4
7681
δοκέω δὲ ἔγωγε καὶ ἀνισωθέντας πλήθεϊ χαλεπῶς ἂν Ἕλληνας Πέρσῃσι μούνοισι μάχεσθαι .
I myself think that even if they were equal in numbers it would be hard for the Greeks to fight just against the Persians.


7.103.5
7682
ἀλλὰ παρ’ ἡμῖν μὲν μούνοισι τοῦτο ἐστὶ τὸ σὺ λέγεις , ἔστι γε μὲν οὐ πολλὸν ἀλλὰ σπάνιον ·
What you are talking about is found among us alone, and even then it is not common but rare;


7.103.5
7683
εἰσὶ γὰρ Περσέων τῶν ἐμῶν αἰχμοφόρων οἳ ἐθελήσουσι Ἑλλήνων ἀνδράσι τρισὶ ὁμοῦ μάχεσθαι ·
there are some among my Persian spearmen who will gladly fight with three Greeks at once.


7.103.5
7684
τῶν σὺ ἐὼν ἄπειρος πολλὰ φλυηρέεις " .
You have no knowledge of this and are spouting a lot of nonsense.”


7.104.1
7685
πρὸς ταῦτα Δημάρητος λέγει " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἀρχῆθεν ἠπιστάμην ὅτι ἀληθείῃ χρεώμενος οὐ φίλα τοι ἐρέω ·
To this Demaratus answered, “O king I knew from the first that the truth would be unwelcome to you.


7.104.1
7686
σὺ δ’ ἐπεὶ ἠνάγκασας λέγειν τῶν λόγων τοὺς ἀληθεστάτους , ἔλεγον τὰ κατήκοντα Σπαρτιήτῃσι .
But since you compelled me to speak as truly as I could, I have told you how it stands with the Spartans.


7.104.2
7687
καίτοι ὡς ἐγὼ τυγχάνω τὰ νῦν τάδε ἐστοργὼς ἐκείνους , αὐτὸς μάλιστα ἐξεπίστεαι , οἵ με τιμήν τε καὶ γέρεα ἀπελόμενοι πατρώια ἄπολίν τε καὶ φυγάδα πεποιήκασι , πατὴρ δὲ σὸς ὑποδεξάμενος βίον τέ μοι καὶ οἶκον ἔδωκε .
You yourself best know what love I bear them: they have robbed me of my office and the privileges of my house, and made me a cityless exile;


7.104.2
7688
οὔκων οἰκός ἐστι ἄνδρα τὸν σώφρονα εὐνοίην φαινομένην διωθέεσθαι , ἀλλὰ στέργειν μάλιστα .
your father received me and gave me a house and the means to live on. It is not reasonable for a sensible man to reject goodwill when it appears; rather he will hold it in great affection.


7.104.3
7689
ἐγὼ δὲ οὔτε δέκα ἀνδράσι ὑπίσχομαι οἷός τε εἶναι μάχεσθαι οὔτε δυοῖσι , ἑκών τε εἶναι οὐδ’ ἂν μουνομαχέοιμι .
I myself do not promise that I can fight with ten men or with two,


7.104.3
7690
εἰ δὲ ἀναγκαίη εἴη ἢ μέγας τις ὁ ἐποτρύνων ἀγών , μαχοίμην ἂν πάντων ἥδιστα ἑνὶ τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν οἳ Ἑλλήνων ἕκαστος φησὶ τριῶν ἄξιος εἶναι .
and I would not even willingly fight with one; yet if it were necessary, or if some great contest spurred me, I would most gladly fight with one of those men who claim to be each a match for three Greeks.


7.104.4
7691
ὣς δὲ καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι κατὰ μὲν ἕνα μαχόμενοι οὐδαμῶν εἰσι κακίονες ἀνδρῶν , ἁλέες δὲ ἄριστοι ἀνδρῶν ἁπάντων .
So is it with the Lacedaemonians; fighting singly they are as brave as any man living, and together they are the best warriors on earth.


7.104.4
7692
ἐλεύθεροι γὰρ ἐόντες οὐ πάντα ἐλεύθεροι εἰσί ·
They are free, yet not wholly free:


7.104.4
7693
ἔπεστι γάρ σφι δεσπότης νόμος , τὸν ὑποδειμαίνουσι πολλῷ ἔτι μᾶλλον ἢ οἱ σοὶ σέ .
law is their master, whom they fear much more than your men fear you.


7.104.5
7694
ποιεῦσι γῶν τὰ ἂν ἐκεῖνος ἀνώγῃ ·
They do whatever it bids;


7.104.5
7695
ἀνώγει δὲ τ- αὐτὸ αἰεί , οὐκ ἐῶν φεύγειν οὐδὲν πλῆθος ἀνθρώπων ἐκ μάχης , ἀλλὰ μένοντας ἐν τῇ τάξι ἐπικρατέειν ἢ ἀπόλλυσθαι .
and its bidding is always the same, that they must never flee from the battle before any multitude of men, but must abide at their post and there conquer or die.


7.104.5
7696
σοὶ δὲ εἰ φαίνομαι ταῦτα λέγων φλυηρέειν , τ- ἄλλα σιγᾶν θέλω τὸ λοιπόν ·
If I seem to you to speak foolishness when I say this, then let me hereafter hold my peace;


7.104.5
7697
νῦν τε ἀναγκασθεὶς ἔλεξα .
it is under constraint that I have now spoken.


7.104.5
7698
γένοιτο μέντοι κατὰ νόον τοι , βασιλεῦ "
But may your wish be fulfilled, King.”


7.105.1
7699
ὃ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἀμείψατο , Ξέρξης δὲ ἐς γέλωτά τε ἔτρεψε καὶ οὐκ ἐποιήσατο ὀργὴν οὐδεμίαν , ἀλλ’ ἠπίως αὐτὸν ἀπεπέμψατο .
Thus Demaratus answered. Xerxes made a joke of the matter and showed no anger, but sent him away kindly.


7.105.1
7700
τούτῳ δὲ ἐς λόγους ἐλθὼν Ξέρξης , καὶ ὕπαρχον ἐν τῷ Δορίσκῳ τούτῳ καταστήσας Μασκάμην τὸν Μεγαδόστεω , τὸν δὲ ὑπὸ Δαρείου σταθέντα καταπαύσας , ἐξήλαυνε τὸν στρατὸν διὰ τῆς Θρηίκης ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
After he had conversed with Demaratus, and appointed Mascames son of Megadostes governor of this Doriscus, deposing the governor Darius had appointed, Xerxes marched his army through Thrace towards Hellas.


7.106.1
7701
κατέλιπε δὲ ἄνδρα τοιόνδε Μασκάμην γενόμενον , τῷ μούνῳ Ξέρξης δῶρα πέμπεσκε ὡς ἀριστεύοντι πάντων ὅσους αὐτὸς κατέστησε ἢ Δαρεῖος ὑπάρχους , πέμπεσκε δὲ ἀνὰ πᾶν ἔτος ·
Xerxes left behind this Mascames, who so conducted himself that to him alone Xerxes always sent gifts, as being the most valiant of all the governors that he or Darius appointed;


7.106.1
7702
ὣς δὲ καὶ Ἀρτοξέρξης ὁ Ξέρξεω τοῖσι Μασκαμείοισι ἐκγόνοισι .
he sent these gifts every year, and so did Artaxerxes son of Xerxes to Mascames' descendants.


7.106.1
7703
κατέστασαν γὰρ ἔτι πρότερον ταύτης τῆς ἐλάσιος ὕπαρχοι ἐν τῇ Θρηίκῃ καὶ τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου πανταχῇ .
Before this march, governors had been appointed everywhere in Thrace and on the Hellespont.


7.106.2
7704
οὗτοι ὦν πάντες οἵ τε ἐκ Θρηίκης καὶ τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου , πλὴν τοῦ ἐν Δορίσκῳ , ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων ὕστερον ταύτης τῆς στρατηλασίης ἐξαιρέθησαν ·
All of these in Thrace and the Hellespont, except the governor of Doriscus, were after this expedition captured by the Greeks;


7.106.2
7705
τὸν δὲ ἐν Δορίσκῳ Μασκάμην οὐδαμοί κω ἐδυνάσθησαν ἐξελεῖν πολλῶν πειρησαμένων .
but no one could ever drive out Mascames in Doriscus, though many tried.


7.106.2
7706
διὰ τοῦτο δή οἱ τὰ δῶρα πέμπεται παρὰ τοῦ βασιλεύοντος αἰεὶ ἐν Πέρσῃσι .
For this reason gifts are sent by the successive kings of Persia.


7.107.1
7707
τῶν δὲ ἐξαιρεθέντων ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων οὐδένα βασιλεὺς Ξέρξης ἐνόμισε εἶναι ἄνδρα ἀγαθὸν εἰ μὴ Βόγην μοῦνον τὸν ἐξ Ἠιόνος , τοῦτον δὲ αἰνέων οὐκ ἐπαύετο , καὶ τοὺς περιεόντας αὐτοῦ ἐν Πέρσῃσι παῖδας ἐτίμα μάλιστα , ἐπεὶ καὶ ἄξιος αἴνου μεγάλου ἐγένετο Βόγης ·
The only one of those who were driven out by the Greeks whom king Xerxes considered a valiant man was Boges, from whom they took Eion.


7.107.1
7708
ὃς ἐπειδὴ ἐπολιορκέετο ὑπὸ Ἀθηναίων καὶ Κίμωνος τοῦ Μιλτιάδεω , παρεὸν αὐτῷ ὑπόσπονδον ἐξελθεῖν καὶ νοστῆσαι ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην , οὐκ ἠθέλησε , μὴ δειλίῃ δόξειε περιεῖναι βασιλέι , ἀλλὰ διεκαρτέρεε ἐς τὸ ἔσχατον .
He never ceased praising this man, and gave very great honor to his sons who were left alive in Persia; indeed Boges proved himself worthy of all praise. When he was besieged by the Athenians under Cimon son of Miltiades, he could have departed under treaty from Eion and returned to Asia, but he refused, lest the king think that he had saved his life out of cowardice; instead he resisted to the last.


7.107.2
7709
ὡς δ’ οὐδὲν ἔτι φορβῆς ἐνῆν ἐν τῷ τείχεϊ , συννήσας πυρὴν μεγάλην ἔσφαξε τὰ τέκνα καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα καὶ τὰς παλλακὰς καὶ τοὺς οἰκέτας καὶ ἔπειτα ἐσέβαλε ἐς τὸ πῦρ , μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τὸν χρυσὸν ἅπαντα τὸν ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεος καὶ τὸν ἄργυρον ἔσπειρε ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχεος ἐς τὸν Στρυμόνα , ποιήσας δὲ ταῦτα ἑωυτὸν ἐσέβαλε ἐς τὸ πῦρ .
When there was no food left within his walls, he piled up a great pyre and slew his children and wife and concubines and servants and cast them into the fire;


7.107.2
7710
οὕτω μὲν οὗτος δικαίως αἰνέεται ἔτι καὶ ἐς τόδε ὑπὸ Περσέων .
after that, he took all the gold and silver from the city and scattered it from the walls into the Strymon; after he had done this, he cast himself into the fire. Thus he is justly praised by the Persians to this day.


7.108.1
7711
Ξέρξης δὲ ἐκ τοῦ Δορίσκου ἐπορεύετο ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , τοὺς δὲ αἰεὶ γινομένους ἐμποδὼν συστρατεύεσθαι ἠνάγκαζε ·
From Doriscus Xerxes went on his way towards Hellas, compelling all that he met to go with his army.


7.108.1
7712
ἐδεδούλωτο γάρ , ὡς καὶ πρότερόν μοι δεδήλωται , ἡ μέχρι Θεσσαλίης πᾶσα καὶ ἦν ὑπὸ βασιλέα δασμοφόρος , Μεγαβάζου τε καταστρεψαμένου καὶ ὕστερον Μαρδονίου .
As I have shown earlier, all the country as far as Thessaly had been enslaved and was tributary to the king, by the conquests of Megabazus and Mardonius after him.


7.108.2
7713
παραμείβετο δὲ πορευόμενος ἐκ Δορίσκου πρῶτα μὲν τὰ Σαμοθρηίκια τείχεα , τῶν ἐσχάτη πεπόλισται πρὸς ἑσπέρης πόλις τῇ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Μεσαμβρίη .
On his road from Doriscus he first passed the Samothracian fortresses; of these, the city built farthest to the west is called Mesambria.


7.108.2
7714
ἔχεται δὲ ταύτης Θασίων πόλις Στρύμη , διὰ δὲ σφέων τοῦ μέσου Λίσος ποταμὸς διαρρέει , ὃς τότε οὐκ ἀντέσχε τὸ ὕδωρ παρέχων τῷ Ξέρξεω στρατῷ ἀλλ’ ἐπέλιπε .
Next to it is the Thasian city of Stryme; between them runs the river Lisus, which now could not furnish water enough for Xerxes' army, but was exhausted.


7.108.3
7715
ἡ δὲ χώρη αὕτη πάλαι μὲν ἐκαλέετο Γαλλαϊκή , νῦν δὲ Βριαντική ·
All this region was once called Gallaic, but it is now called Briantic;


7.108.3
7716
ἔστι μέντοι τῷ δικαιοτάτῳ τῶν λόγων καί αὕτη Κικόνων .
however, by rights it also belongs to the Ciconians.


7.109.1
7717
διαβὰς δὲ τοῦ Λίσου ποταμοῦ τὸ ῥέεθρον ἀπεξηρασμένον πόλιας Ἑλληνίδας τάσδε παραμείβετο , Μαρώνειαν Δίκαιαν Ἄβδηρα .
After he had crossed the dried-up bed of the river Lisus, he passed by the Greek cities of Maronea, Dicaea, and Abdera.


7.109.1
7718
ταύτας τε δὴ παρεξήιε καὶ κατὰ ταύτας λίμνας ὀνομαστὰς τάσδε , Μαρωνείης μὲν μεταξὺ καὶ Στρύμης κειμένην Ἰσμαρίδα , κατὰ δὲ Δίκαιαν Βιστονίδα , ἐς τὴν ποταμοὶ δύο ἐσιεῖσι τὸ ὕδωρ , Τραῦός τε καὶ Κόμψαντος .
He passed by these, and along certain well-known lakes near them: the Ismarid lake that lies between Maronea and Stryme, and near Dicaea the Bistonian lake, into which the rivers Travus and Compsantus discharge.


7.109.1
7719
κατὰ δὲ Ἄβδηρα λίμνην μὲν οὐδεμίαν ἐοῦσαν ὀνομαστὴν παραμείψατο Ξέρξης , ποταμὸν δὲ Νέστον ῥέοντα ἐς θάλασσαν .
Near Abdera Xerxes passed no well-known lake, but crossed the river Nestus where it flows into the sea.


7.109.2
7720
μετὰ δὲ ταύτας τὰς χώρας ἰὼν τὰς ἠπειρώτιδας πόλις παρήιε , τῶν ἐν μιῇ λίμνη ἐοῦσα τυγχάνει ὡσεὶ τριήκοντα σταδίων μάλιστά κῃ τὴν περίοδον , ἰχθυώδης τε καὶ κάρτα ἁλμυρή ·
From these regions he passed by the cities of the mainland, one of which has near it a lake of about thirty stadia in circuit, full of fish and very salty;


7.109.2
7721
ταύτην τὰ ὑποζύγια μοῦνα ἀρδόμενα ἀνεξήρηνε .
this was drained dry by watering the beasts of burden alone.


7.109.2
7722
τῇ δὲ πόλι ταύτῃ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Πίστυρος .
This city is called Pistyrus.


7.110.1
7723
ταύτας μὲν δὴ τὰς πόλιας τὰς παραθαλασσίας τε καὶ Ἑλληνίδας ἐξ εὐωνύμου χειρὸς ἀπέργων παρεξήιε ·
Xerxes marched past these Greek cities of the coast, keeping them on his left.


7.110.1
7724
ἔθνεα δὲ Θρηίκων δι’ ὧν τῆς χώρης ὁδὸν ἐποιέετο τοσάδε , Παῖτοι Κίκονες Βίστονες Σαπαῖοι Δερσαῖοι Ἠδωνοὶ Σάτραι .
The Thracian tribes through whose lands he journeyed were the Paeti, Cicones, Bistones, Sapaei, Dersaei, Edoni, and Satrae.


7.110.1
7725
τούτων οἱ μὲν παρὰ θάλασσαν κατοικημένοι ἐν τῇσι νηυσὶ εἵποντο ·
Of these, the ones who dwelt by the sea followed his army on shipboard;


7.110.1
7726
οἱ δὲ αὐτῶν τὴν μεσόγαιαν οἰκέοντες καταλεχθέντες τε ὑπ’ ἐμεῦ , πλὴν Σατρέων , οἱ ἄλλοι πάντες πεζῇ ἀναγκαζόμενοι εἵποντο .
the ones living inland, whose names I have recorded, were forced to join with his land army, all of them except the Satrae.


7.111.1
7727
σάτραι δὲ οὐδενός κω ἀνθρώπων ὑπήκοοι ἐγένοντο , ὅσον ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν , ἀλλὰ διατελεῦσι τὸ μέχρι ἐμεῦ αἰεὶ ἐόντες ἐλεύθεροι μοῦνοι Θρηίκων ·
The Satrae, as far as we know, have never yet been subject to any man;


7.111.1
7728
οἰκέουσί τε γὰρ ὄρεα ὑψηλά , ἴδῃσί τε παντοίῃσι καὶ χιόνι συνηρεφέα , καὶ εἰσὶ τὰ πολέμια ἄκροι .
they alone of the Thracians have continued living in freedom to this day; they dwell on high mountains covered with forests of all kinds and snow, and they are excellent warriors.


7.111.2
7729
οὗτοι οἱ Διονύσου τὸ μαντήιον εἰσὶ ἐκτημένοι ·
It is they who possess the place of divination sacred to Dionysus.


7.111.2
7730
τὸ δὲ μαντήιον τοῦτο ἔστι μὲν ἐπὶ τῶν ὀρέων τῶν ὑψηλοτάτων , Βησσοὶ δὲ τῶν Σατρέων εἰσὶ οἱ προφητεύοντες τοῦ ἱροῦ , πρόμαντις δὲ ἡ χρέωσα κατά περ ἐν Δελφοῖσι , καὶ οὐδὲν ποικιλώτερον .
This place is in their highest mountains; the Bessi, a clan of the Satrae, are the prophets of the shrine; there is a priestess who utters the oracle, as at Delphi; it is no more complicated here than there.


7.112.1
7731
παραμειψάμενος δὲ ὁ Ξέρξης τὴν εἰρημένην , δεύτερα τούτων παραμείβετο τείχεα τὰ Πιέρων , τῶν ἐνὶ Φάγρης ἐστὶ οὔνομα καὶ ἑτέρῳ Πέργαμος .
After passing through the aforementioned land, Xerxes next passed the fortresses of the Pierians, one called Phagres and the other Pergamus.


7.112.1
7732
ταύτῃ μὲν δὴ παρ’ αὐτὰ τὰ τείχεα τὴν ὁδὸν ἐποιέετο , ἐκ δεξιῆς χειρὸς τὸ Πάγγαιον ὄρος ἀπέργων , ἐὸν μέγα τε καὶ ὑψηλόν , ἐν τῷ χρύσεά τε καὶ ἀργύρεα ἔνι μέταλλα , τὰ νέμονται Πίερές τε καὶ Ὀδόμαντοι καὶ μάλιστα Σάτραι .
By going this way he marched right under their walls, keeping on his right the great and high Pangaean range, where the Pierians and Odomanti and especially the Satrae have gold and silver mines.


7.113.1
7733
ὑπεροικέοντας δὲ τὸ Πάγγαιον πρὸς βορέω ἀνέμου Παίονας Δόβηράς τε καὶ Παιόπλας παρεξιὼν ἤιε πρὸς ἑσπέρην , ἐς ὃ ἀπίκετο ἐπὶ ποταμόν τε Στρυμόνα καὶ πόλιν Ἠιόνα , τῆς ἔτι ζωὸς ἐὼν ἦρχε Βόγης τοῦ περ ὀλίγῳ πρότερον τούτων λόγον ἐποιεύμην .
Marching past the Paeonians, Doberes, and Paeoplae, who dwell beyond and northward of the Pangaean mountains, he kept going westwards, until he came to the river Strymon and the city of  Eion; its governor was that Boges, then still alive, whom I mentioned just before this.


7.113.2
7734
ἡ δὲ γῆ αὕτη ἡ περὶ τὸ Πάγγαιον ὄρος καλέεται Φυλλίς , κατατείνουσα τὰ μὲν πρὸς ἑσπέρην ἐπὶ ποταμὸν Ἀγγίτην ἐκδιδόντα ἐς τὸν Στρυμόνα , τὰ δὲ πρὸς μεσαμβρίην τείνουσα ἐς αὐτὸν τὸν Στρυμόνα ·
All this region about the Pangaean range is called Phyllis; it stretches westwards to the river Angites, which issues into the Strymon, and southwards to the Strymon itself;


7.113.2
7735
ἐς τὸν οἱ Μάγοι ἐκαλλιερέοντο σφάζοντες ἵππους λευκούς .
at this river the Magi sought good omens by sacrificing white horses.


7.114.1
7736
φαρμακεύσαντες δὲ ταῦτα ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν καὶ ἄλλα πολλὰ πρὸς τούτοισι ἐν Ἐννέα ὁδοῖσι τῇσι Ἠδωνῶν ἐπορεύοντο κατὰ τὰς γεφύρας , τὸν Στρυμόνα εὑρόντες ἐζευγμένον .
After using these enchantments and many others besides on the river, they passed over it at the Nine Ways in Edonian country, by the bridges which they found thrown across the Strymon.


7.114.1
7737
Ἐννέα δὲ ὁδοὺς πυνθανόμενοι τὸν χῶρον τοῦτον καλέεσθαι , τοσούτους ἐν αὐτῷ παῖδάς τε καὶ παρθένους ἀνδρῶν τῶν ἐπιχωρίων ζώοντας κατώρυσσον .
When they learned that Nine Ways was the name of the place, they buried alive that number of boys and maidens, children of the local people.


7.114.2
7738
Περσικὸν δὲ τὸ ζώοντας κατορύσσειν , ἐπεὶ καὶ Ἄμηστριν τὴν Ξέρξεω γυναῖκα πυνθάνομαι γηράσασαν δὶς ἑπτὰ Περσέων παῖδας ἐόντων ἐπιφανέων ἀνδρῶν ὑπὲρ ἑωυτῆς τῷ ὑπὸ γῆν λεγομένῳ εἶναι θεῷ ἀντιχαρίζεσθαι κατορύσσουσαν .
To bury people alive is a Persian custom; I have learned by inquiry that when Xerxes' wife Amestris reached old age, she buried twice seven sons of notable Persians as an offering on her own behalf to the fabled god beneath the earth.


7.115.1
7739
ὡς δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ Στρυμόνος ἐπορεύετο ὁ στρατός , ἐνθαῦτα πρὸς ἡλίου δυσμέων ἐστὶ αἰγιαλὸς ἐν τῷ οἰκημένην Ἄργιλον πόλιν Ἑλλάδα παρεξήιε ·
Journeying from the Strymon, the army passed by Argilus, a Greek town standing on a stretch of coast further westwards;


7.115.1
7740
αὕτη δὲ καὶ ἡ κατύπερθε ταύτης καλέεται Βισαλτίη .
the territory of this town and that which lies inland of it are called Bisaltia.


7.115.2
7741
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ κόλπον τὸν ἐπὶ Ποσιδηίου ἐξ ἀριστερῆς χειρὸς ἔχων ἤιε διὰ Συλέος πεδίου καλεομένου , Στάγειρον πόλιν Ἑλλάδα παραμειβόμενος , καὶ ἀπίκετο ἐς Ἄκανθον , ἅμα ἀγόμενος τούτων ἕκαστον τῶν ἐθνέων καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸ Πάγγαιον ὄρος οἰκεόντων , ὁμοίως καὶ τῶν πρότερον κατέλεξα , τοὺς μὲν παρὰ θάλασσαν ἔχων οἰκημένους ἐκ νηυσὶ στρατευομένους , τοὺς δ’ ὑπὲρ θαλάσσης πεζῇ ἑπομένους .
From there, keeping on his left hand the gulf off Poseideion, Xerxes traversed the plain of Syleus (as they call it), passing by the Greek town of Stagirus, and came to Acanthus. He took along with him all these tribes and those that dwelt about the Pangaean range, just as he did those previously mentioned, the men of the coast serving in his fleet and the inland men in his land army.


7.115.3
7742
τὴν δὲ ὁδὸν ταύτην , τῇ βασιλεὺς Ξέρξης τὸν στρατὸν ἤλασε , οὔτε συγχέουσι Θρήικες οὔτ’ ἐπισπείρουσι σέβονταί τε μεγάλως τὸ μέχρι ἐμεῦ .
The entire road along which king Xerxes led his army the Thracians neither break up nor sow, but they hold it in great reverence to this day.


7.116.1
7743
ὡς δὲ ἄρα ἐς τὴν Ἄκανθον ἀπίκετο , ξεινίην τε ὁ Ξέρξης τοῖσι Ἀκανθίοισι προεῖπε καὶ ἐδωρήσατο σφέας ἐσθῆτι Μηδικῇ ἐπαίνεέ τε , ὁρέων καὶ αὐτοὺς προθύμους ἐόντας ἐς τὸν πόλεμον καὶ τὸ ὄρυγμα ἀκούων .
When Xerxes came to Acanthus, he declared the Acanthians his guests and friends, and gave them Median clothing, praising them for the zeal with which he saw them furthering his campaign, and for what he heard of the digging of the canal.


7.117.1
7744
ἐν Ἀκάνθῳ δὲ ἐόντος Ξέρξεω συνήνεικε ὑπὸ νούσου ἀποθανεῖν τὸν ἐπεστεῶτα τῆς διώρυχος Ἀρταχαίην , δόκιμον ἐόντα παρὰ Ξέρξῃ καὶ γένος Ἀχαιμενίδην , μεγάθεΐ τε μέγιστον ἐόντα Περσέων ( ἀπὸ γὰρ πέντε πηχέων βασιληίων ἀπέλειπε τέσσερας δακτύλους ) φωνέοντά τε μέγιστον ἀνθρώπων , ὥστε Ξέρξην συμφορὴν ποιησάμενον μεγάλην ἐξενεῖκαί τε αὐτὸν κάλλιστα καὶ θάψαι ·
While Xerxes was at Acanthus, it happened that Artachaees, overseer of the digging of the canal, died of an illness.


7.117.1
7745
ἐτυμβοχόεε δὲ πᾶσα ἡ στρατιή .
He was high in Xerxes' favor, an Achaemenid by lineage, and the tallest man in Persia, lacking four finger-breadths of five royal cubits in stature, and his voice was the loudest on earth. For this reason Xerxes mourned him greatly and gave him a funeral and burial of great pomp, and the whole army poured libations on his tomb.


7.117.2
7746
τούτῳ δὲ τῷ Ἀρταχαίῃ θύουσι Ἀκάνθιοι ἐκ θεοπροπίου ὡς ἥρωι , ἐπονομάζοντες τὸ οὔνομα .
The Acanthians hold Artachaees a hero, and sacrifice to him, calling upon his name. This they do at the command of an oracle.


7.118.1
7747
βασιλεὺς μὲν δὴ Ξέρξης ἀπολομένου Ἀρταχαίεω ἐποιέετο συμφορήν .
King Xerxes, then, mourned for the death of Artachaees.


7.118.1
7748
οἱ δὲ ὑποδεκόμενοι Ἑλλήνων τὴν στρατιὴν καὶ δειπνίζοντες Ξέρξην ἐς πᾶν κακοῦ ἀπίκατο , οὕτω ὥστε ἀνάστατοι ἐκ τῶν οἴκων ἐγίνοντο ·
But the Greeks who received Xerxes' army and entertained the king himself were brought to such a degree of misery, that they were driven from house and home.


7.118.1
7749
ὅκου Θασίοισι ὑπὲρ τῶν ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ πολίων τῶν σφετερέων δεξαμένοισι τὴν Ξέρξεω στρατιὴν καὶ δειπνίσασι Ἀντίπατρος ὁ Ὀργέος ἀραιρημένος , τῶν ἀστῶν ἀνὴρ δόκιμος ὅμοια τῷ μάλιστα , ἀπέδεξε ἐς τὸ δεῖπνον τετρακόσια τάλαντα ἀργυρίου τετελεσμένα .
Witness the case of the Thasians, who received and feasted Xerxes' army on behalf of their towns on the mainland; Antipatrus son of Orgeus, as notable a man as any of his townsmen, chosen by them for this task, rendered them an account of four hundred silver talents expended on the dinner.


7.119.1
7750
ὣς δὲ παραπλησίως καὶ ἐν τῇσι ἄλλῃσι πόλισι οἱ ἐπεστεῶτες ἀπεδείκνυσαν τὸν λόγον .
Similar accounts were returned by the officers in the other towns.


7.119.1
7751
τὸ γὰρ δεῖπνον τοιόνδε τι ἐγίνετο , οἷα ἐκ πολλοῦ χρόνου προειρημένον καὶ περὶ πολλοῦ ποιευμένων ·
Now the dinner, about which a great deal of fuss had been made and for the preparation of which orders had been given long ago, proceeded as I will tell.


7.119.2
7752
τοῦτο μέν , ὡς ἐπύθοντο τάχιστα τῶν κηρύκων τῶν περιαγγελλόντων , δασάμενοι σῖτον ἐν τῇσι πόλισι οἱ ἀστοὶ ἄλευρά τε καὶ ἄλφιτα ἐποίευν πάντες ἐπὶ μῆνας συχνούς ·
As soon as the townsmen had word from the herald's proclamation, they divided corn among themselves in their cities and all of them for many months ground it to wheat and barley meal;


7.119.2
7753
τοῦτο δὲ κτήνεα ἐσίτευον ἐξευρίσκοντες τιμῆς τὰ κάλλιστα , ἔτρεφόν τε ὄρνιθας χερσαίους καὶ λιμναίους ἔν τε οἰκήμασι καὶ λάκκοισι , ἐς ὑποδοχὰς τοῦ στρατοῦ ·
moreover, they fed the finest beasts that money could buy, and kept landfowl and waterfowl in cages and ponds, for the entertaining of the army.


7.119.2
7754
τοῦτο δὲ χρύσεά τε καὶ ἀργύρεα ποτήριά τε καὶ κρητῆρας ἐποιεῦντο καὶ τ- ἄλλα ὅσα ἐπὶ τράπεζαν τιθέαται πάντα .
They also made gold and silver cups and bowls and all manner of service for the table.


7.119.3
7755
ταῦτα μὲν αὐτῷ τε βασιλέι καὶ τοῖσι ὁμοσίτοισι μετ’ ἐκείνου ἐπεποίητο , τῇ δὲ ἄλλῃ στρατιῇ τὰ ἐς φορβὴν μοῦνα τασσόμενα .
These things were provided for the king himself and those that ate with him.


7.119.3
7756
ὅκως δὲ ἀπίκοιτο ἡ στρατιή , σκηνὴ μὲν ἔσκε πεπηγυῖα ἑτοίμη ἐς τὴν αὐτὸς σταθμὸν ποιεέσκετο Ξέρξης , ἡ δὲ ἄλλη στρατιὴ ἔσκε ὑπαίθριος .
For the rest of the army they provided only food. At the coming of the army, there was always a tent ready for Xerxes to take his rest in, while the men camped out in the open air.


7.119.4
7757
ὡς δὲ δείπνου ἐγίνετο ὥρη , οἱ μὲν δεκόμενοι ἔχεσκον πόνον , οἳ δὲ ὅκως πλησθέντες νύκτα αὐτοῦ ἀγάγοιεν , τῇ ὑστεραίῃ τήν τε σκηνὴν ἀνασπάσαντες καὶ τὰ ἔπιπλα πάντα λαβόντες οὕτω ἀπελαύνεσκον , λείποντες οὐδὲν ἀλλὰ φερόμενοι .
When the hour came for dinner, the real trouble for the hosts began. When they had eaten their fill and passed the night there, the army tore down the tent on the next day and marched off with all the movables, leaving nothing but carrying all with them.


7.120.1
7758
ἔνθα δὴ Μεγακρέοντος ἀνδρὸς Ἀβδηρίτεω ἔπος εὖ εἰρημένον ἐγένετο , ὃς συνεβούλευσε Ἀβδηρίτῃσι πανδημεί , αὐτοὺς καὶ γυναῖκας , ἐλθόντας ἐς τὰ σφέτερα ἱρὰ ἵζεσθαι ἱκέτας τῶν θεῶν παραιτεομένους καὶ τὸ λοιπόν σφι ἀπαμύνειν τῶν ἐπιόντων κακῶν τὰ ἡμίσεα , τῶν τε παροιχομένων ἔχειν σφι μεγάλην χάριν , ὅτι βασιλεὺς Ξέρξης οὐ δὶς ἑκάστης ἡμέρης ἐνόμισε σῖτον αἱρέεσθαι ·
It was then that a very apt saying was uttered by one Megacreon of  Abdera. He advised his townsmen, men and women alike, to gather at their temples, and there in all humility to entreat the gods to defend them in the future from half of every threatened ill. They should also, he said, thank the gods heartily for their previous show of favor, for it was Xerxes' custom to take a meal only once a day. Otherwise they would have been commanded to furnish a breakfast similar to the dinner.


7.120.2
7759
παρέχειν γὰρ ἂν Ἀβδηρίτῃσι , εἰ καὶ ἄριστον προείρητο ὅμοια τῷ δείπνῳ παρασκευάζειν , ἢ μὴ ὑπομένειν Ξέρξην ἐπιόντα ἢ καταμείναντας κάκιστα πάντων ἀνθρώπων διατριβῆναι .
The people of  Abdera would then have had no choice but to flee before Xerxes' coming, or to perish most miserably if they awaited him.


7.121.1
7760
οἳ μὲν δὴ πιεζόμενοι ὅμως τὸ ἐπιτασσόμενον ἐπετέλεον .
So the townsmen, oppressed as they were, nevertheless did as they were commanded.


7.121.1
7761
Ξέρξης δὲ ἐκ τῆς Ἀκάνθου , ἐντειλάμενος τοῖσι στρατηγοῖσι τοῦ ναυτικοῦ στρατοῦ ὑπομένειν ἐν Θέρμῃ , ἀπῆκε ἀπ’ ἑωυτοῦ πορεύεσθαι τὰς νέας , Θέρμῃ δὲ τῇ ἐν τῷ Θερμαίῳ κόλπῳ οἰκημένῃ , ἀπ’ ἧς καὶ ὁ κόλπος οὗτος τὴν ἐπωνυμίην ἔχει ·
Upon leaving Acanthus, Xerxes sent his ships on their course away from him, giving orders to his generals that the fleet should await him at Therma, the town on the Thermaic gulf which gives the gulf its name,


7.121.1
7762
ταύτῃ γὰρ ἐπυνθάνετο συντομώτατον εἶναι .
for this, he learned, was his shortest way.


7.121.2
7763
μέχρι μὲν γὰρ Ἀκάνθου ὧδε τεταγμένος ὁ στρατὸς ἐκ Δορίσκου τὴν ὁδὸν ἐποιέετο ·
The order of the army's march, from Doriscus to Acanthus, had been such as I will show.


7.121.2
7764
τρεῖς μοίρας ὁ Ξέρξης δασάμενος πάντα τὸν πεζὸν στρατόν , μίαν αὐτέων ἔταξε παρὰ θάλασσαν ἰέναι ὁμοῦ τῷ ναυτικῷ ·
Dividing his entire land army into three parts, Xerxes appointed one of them to march beside his fleet along the coast.


7.121.3
7765
ταύτης μὲν δὴ ἐστρατήγεον Μαρδόνιός τε καὶ Μασίστης , ἑτέρη δὲ τεταγμένη ἤιε τοῦ στρατοῦ τριτημορὶς τὴν μεσόγαιαν , τῆς ἐστρατήγεον Τριτανταίχμης τε καὶ Γέργις ·
Mardonius and Masistes were the generals of this segment, while another third of the army marched, as appointed, further inland under Tritantaechmes and Gergis.


7.121.3
7766
ἡ δὲ τρίτη τῶν μοιρέων , μετ’ ἧς ἐπορεύετο αὐτὸς Ξέρξης , ἤιε μὲν τὸ μέσον αὐτῶν , στρατηγοὺς δὲ παρείχετο Σμερδομένεά τε καὶ Μεγάβυζον .
The third part, with which Xerxes himself went, marched between the two, and its generals were Smerdomenes and Megabyzus.


7.122.1
7767
ὁ μέν νυν ναυτικὸς στρατὸς ὡς ἀπείθη ὑπὸ Ξέρξεω καὶ διεξέπλωσε τὴν διώρυχα τὴν ἐν τῷ Ἄθῳ γενομένην , διέχουσαν δὲ ἐς κόλπον ἐν τῷ Ἄσσα τε πόλις καὶ Πίλωρος καὶ Σίγγος καὶ Σάρτη οἴκηνται , ἐνθεῦτεν , ὡς καὶ ἐκ τουτέων τῶν πολίων στρατιὴν παρέλαβε , ἔπλεε ἀπιέμενος ἐς τὸν Θερμαῖον κόλπον , κάμπτων δὲ Ἄμπελον τὴν Τορωναίην ἄκρην παραμείβετο Ἑλληνίδας γε τάσδε πόλις , ἐκ τῶν νέας τε καὶ στρατιὴν παρελάμβανε , Τορώνην Γαληψὸν Σερμύλην Μηκύβερναν Ὄλυνθον .
Now when the fleet had left Xerxes, it sailed through the  Athos canal which reached to the gulf in which are located the towns of  Assa, Pilorus, Singus, and Sarte. The fleet took on board troops from all these cities and then headed for the Thermaic gulf. Then rounding Ampelus, the headland of  Torone, it passed the Greek towns of  Torone, Galepsus, Sermyle, Mecyberna, and  Olynthus, all of which gave them ships and men.


7.123.1
7768
ἡ μέν νυν χώρη αὕτη Σιθωνίη καλέεται , ὁ δὲ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς ὁ Ξέρξεω συντάμνων ἀπ’ Ἀμπέλου ἄκρης ἐπὶ Καναστραίην ἄκρην , τὸ δὴ πάρης τῆς Παλλήνης ἀνέχει μάλιστα , ἐνθεῦτεν νέας τε καὶ στρατιὴν παρελάμβανε ἐκ Ποτιδαίης καὶ Ἀφύτιος καὶ Νέης πόλιος καὶ Αἰγῆς καὶ Θεράμβω καὶ Σκιώνης καὶ Μένδης καὶ Σάνης ·
This country is called Sithonia. The fleet held a straight course from the headland of Ampelus to the Canastraean headland, where Pallene runs farthest out to sea, and received ships and men from the towns of what is now Pallene but was formerly called Phlegra, namely, Potidaea, Aphytis, Neapolis, Aege, Therambus, Scione, Mende, and Sane.


7.123.1
7769
αὗται γὰρ εἰσὶ αἱ τὴν νῦν Παλλήνην πρότερον δὲ Φλέγρην καλεομένην νεμόμεναι .
These towns are the ones that occupy the land now called Pallene, which was formerly called Phlegra.


7.123.2
7770
παραπλέων δὲ καὶ ταύτην τὴν χώρην ἔπλεε ἐς τὸ προειρημένον , παραλαμβάνων στρατιὴν καὶ ἐκ τῶν προσεχέων πολίων τῇ Παλλήνῃ , ὁμουρεουσέων δὲ τῷ Θερμαίῳ κόλπῳ , τῇσι οὐνόματα ἐστὶ τάδε , Λίπαξος Κώμβρεια Αἷσα Γίγωνος Κάμψα Σμίλα Αἴνεια ·
Sailing along this coast they made for the appointed place, taking troops from the towns adjacent to Pallene and near the Thermaic gulf, of which the names are Lipaxus, Combrea, Aesa, Gigonus, Campsa, Smila, Aenea;


7.123.2
7771
ἡ δε τουτέων χώρη Κροσσαίη ἔτι καὶ ἐς τόδε καλέεται .
the territory of these cities is called Crossaea to this day.


7.123.3
7772
ἀπὸ δὲ Αἰνείης , ἐς τὴν ἐτελεύτων καταλέγων τὰς πόλις , ἀπὸ ταύτης ἤδη ἐς αὐτόν τε τὸν Θερμαῖον κόλπον ἐγίνετο τῷ ναυτικῷ στρατῷ ὁ πλόος καὶ γῆν τὴν Μυγδονίην , πλέων δὲ ἀπίκετο ἔς τε τὴν προειρημένην Θέρμην καὶ Σίνδον τε πόλιν καὶ Χαλέστρην ἐπὶ τὸν Ἄξιον ποταμόν , ὃς οὐρίζει χώρην τὴν Μυγδονίην τε καὶ Βοττιαιίδα , τῆς ἔχουσι τὸ παρὰ θάλασσαν στεινὸν χωρίον πόλιες Ἴχναι τε καὶ Πέλλα .
From Aenea, the last-named in my list of the towns, the course of the fleet lay from the Thermaic gulf itself and the Mygdonian territory until its voyage ended at  Therma, the place appointed, and the towns of Sindus and Chalestra, where it came to the river  Axius; this is the boundary, between the Mygdonian and the Bottiaean territory, in which are located the towns of Ichnae and  Pella on the narrow strip of coast.


7.124.1
7773
ὁ μὲν δὴ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς αὐτοῦ περὶ Ἄξιον ποταμὸν καὶ πόλιν Θέρμην καὶ τὰς μεταξὺ πόλιας τούτων περιμένων Βασιλέα ἐστρατοπεδεύετο , Ξέρξης δὲ καὶ ὁ πεζὸς στρατὸς ἐπορεύετο ἐκ τῆς Ἀκάνθου τὴν μεσόγαιαν τάμνων τῆς ὁδοῦ , βουλόμενος ἐς τὴν Θέρμην ἀπικέσθαι ·
So the fleet lay there off the river Axius and the city of Therma and the towns between them, awaiting the king.


7.124.1
7774
ἐπορεύετο δὲ διὰ τῆς Παιονικῆς καὶ Κρηστωνικῆς ἐπὶ ποταμὸν Χείδωρον , ὃς ἐκ Κρηστωναίων ἀρξάμενος ῥέει διὰ Μυγδονίης χώρης καὶ ἐξιεῖ παρὰ τὸ ἕλος τὸ ἐπ’ Ἀξίῳ ποταμῷ .
But Xerxes and his land army marched from Acanthus by the straightest inland course, making for Therma. Their way lay through the Paeonian and the Crestonaean country to the river Cheidorus, which, rising in the Crestonaean land, flows through the Mygdonian country and issues by the marshes of the Axius.


7.125.1
7775
πορευομένῳ δὲ ταύτῃ λέοντές οἱ ἐπεθήκαντο τῇσι σιτοφόροισι καμήλοισι .
As Xerxes marched by this route, lions attacked the camels which carried his provisions;


7.125.1
7776
καταφοιτέοντες γὰρ οἱ λέοντες τὰς νύκτας καὶ λείποντες τὰ σφέτερα ἤθεα ἄλλου μὲν οὐδενὸς ἅπτοντο οὔτε ὑποζυγίου οὔτε ἀνθρώπου , οἳ δὲ τὰς καμήλους ἐκεράιζον μούνας .
nightly they would come down out of their lairs and made havoc of the camels alone, seizing nothing else, man or beast of burden.


7.125.1
7777
θωμάζω δὲ τὸ αἴτιον , ὅ τι κοτὲ ἦν τῶν ἄλλων τὸ ἀναγκάζον ἀπεχομένους τοὺς λέοντας τῇσι καμήλοισι ἐπιτίθεσθαι , τὸ μήτε πρότερον ὀπώπεσαν θηρίον μήτ’ ἐπεπειρέατο αὐτοῦ .
I wonder what prevented the lions from touching anything but the camels, creatures which they had not seen and had no knowledge of until then.


7.126.1
7778
εἰσὶ δὲ κατὰ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία καὶ λέοντες πολλοὶ καὶ βόες ἄγριοι , τῶν τὰ κέρεα ὑπερμεγάθεα ἐστὶ τὰ ἐς Ἕλληνας φοιτέοντα .
In these parts there are many lions and wild oxen, whose horns are those very long ones which are brought into Hellas.


7.126.1
7779
οὖρος δὲ τοῖσι λέουσι ἐστὶ ὅ τε δι’ Ἀβδήρων ῥέων ποταμὸς Νέστος καὶ ὁ δι’ Ἀκαρνανίης ῥέων Ἀχελῷος ·
The boundary of the lions' country is the river Nestus which flows through Abdera and the river Achelous which flows through Acarnania;


7.126.1
7780
οὔτε γὰρ τὸ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ τοῦ Νέστου οὐδαμόθι πάσης τῆς ἔμπροσθε Εὐρώπης ἴδοι τις ἂν λέοντα , οὔτε πρὸς ἑσπέρης τοῦ Ἀχελῴου ἐν τῇ ἐπιλοίπῳ ἠπείρῳ , ἀλλ’ ἐν τῇ μεταξὺ τούτων τῶν ποταμῶν γίνονται .
neither to the east of the Nestus anywhere in the nearer part of Europe, nor to the west of the Achelous in the rest of the mainland, is any lion to be seen, but they are found in the country between those rivers.


7.127.1
7781
ὡς δὲ ἐς τὴν Θέρμην ἀπίκετο ὁ Ξέρξης , ἵδρυσε αὐτοῦ τὴν στρατιήν .
When he had arrived at Therma, Xerxes quartered his army there.


7.127.1
7782
ἐπέσχε δὲ ὁ στρατὸς αὐτοῦ στρατοπεδευόμενος τὴν παρὰ θάλασσαν χώρην τοσήνδε , ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ Θέρμης πόλιος καὶ τῆς Μυγδονίης μέχρι Λυδίεώ τε ποταμοῦ καὶ Ἁλιάκμονος , οἳ οὐρίζουσι γῆν τὴν Βοττιαιίδα τε καὶ Μακεδονίδα , ἐς τ- αὐτὸ ῥέεθρον τὸ ὕδωρ συμμίσγοντες .
Its encampment by the sea covered all the space from Therma and the Mygdonian country to the rivers Lydias and Haliacmon, which unite their waters in one stream and so make the border between the Bottiaean and the Macedonian territory.


7.127.2
7783
ἐστρατοπεδεύοντο μὲν δὴ ἐν τούτοισι τοῖσι χωρίοισι οἱ βάρβαροι , τῶν δὲ καταλεχθέντων τούτων ποταμῶν ἐκ Κρηστωναίων ῥέων Χείδωρος μοῦνος οὐκ ἀντέχρησε τῇ στρατιῇ πινόμενος ἀλλ’ ἐπέλιπε .
In this place the foreigners lay encamped; of the rivers just mentioned, the Cheidorus, which flows from the Crestonaean country, was the only one which could not suffice for the army's drinking but was completely drained by it.


7.128.1
7784
Ξέρξης δὲ ὁρέων ἐκ τῆς Θέρμης ὄρεα τὰ Θεσσαλικά , τόν τε Ὄλυμπον καὶ τὴν Ὄσσαν , μεγάθεΐ τε ὑπερμήκεα ἐόντα , διὰ μέσου τε αὐτῶν αὐλῶνα στεινὸν πυνθανόμενος εἶναι δι’ οὗ ῥέει ὁ Πηνειός , ἀκούων τε ταύτῃ εἶναι ὁδὸν ἐς Θεσσαλίην φέρουσαν , ἐπεθύμησε πλώσας θεήσασθαι τὴν ἐκβολὴν τοῦ Πηνειοῦ , ὅτι τὴν ἄνω ὁδὸν ἔμελλε ἐλᾶν διὰ Μακεδόνων τῶν κατύπερθε οἰκημένων ἔστε Περραιβοὺς παρὰ Γόννον πόλιν ·
When Xerxes saw from Therma the very great height of the Thessalian mountains Olympus and Ossa and learned that the Peneus flows through them in a narrow pass, which was the way that led into Thessaly,


7.128.1
7785
ταύτῃ γὰρ ἀσφαλέστατον ἐπυνθάνετο εἶναι .
he desired to view the mouth of the Peneus because he intended to march by the upper road through the highland people of Macedonia to the country of the Perrhaebi and the town of Gonnus; this, it was told him, was the safest way.


7.128.2
7786
ὡς δὲ ἐπεθύμησε , καὶ ἐποίεε ταῦτα ·
He did exactly as he desired.


7.128.2
7787
ἐσβὰς ἐς Σιδωνίην νέα , ἐς τήν περ ἐσέβαινε αἰεὶ ὅκως τι ἐθέλοι τοιοῦτο ποιῆσαι , ἀνέδεξε σημήιον καὶ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ἀνάγεσθαι , καταλιπὼν αὐτοῦ τὸν πεζὸν στρατόν .
He embarked on a Sidonian ship which he always used when he had some such business in hand, and hoisted his signal for the rest also to put out to sea, leaving his land army where it was.


7.128.2
7788
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπίκετο καὶ ἐθεήσατο Ξέρξης τὴν ἐκβολὴν τοῦ Πηνειοῦ , ἐν θώματι μεγάλῳ ἐνέσχετο , καλέσας δὲ τοὺς κατηγεμόνας τῆς ὁδοῦ εἴρετο εἰ τὸν ποταμὸν ἐστὶ παρατρέψαντα ἑτέρῃ ἐς θάλασσαν ἐξαγαγεῖν .
Great wonder took him when he came and viewed the mouth of the Peneus, and calling his guides, he asked them if it were possible to turn the river from its course and lead it into the sea by another way.


7.129.1
7789
τὴν δὲ Θεσσαλίην λόγος ἐστὶ τὸ παλαιὸν εἶναι λίμνην , ὥστε γε συγκεκληιμένην πάντοθεν ὑπερμήκεσι ὄρεσι .
Thessaly, as tradition has it, was in old times a lake enclosed all round by high mountains.


7.129.1
7790
τὰ μὲν γὰρ αὐτῆς πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ ἔχοντα τό τε Πήλιον ὄρος καὶ ἡ Ὄσσα ἀποκληίει συμμίσγοντα τὰς ὑπωρείας ἀλλήλοισι , τὰ δὲ πρὸς βορέω ἀνέμου Ὄλυμπος , τὰ δὲ πρὸς ἑσπέρην Πίνδος , τὰ δὲ πρὸς μεσαμβρίην τε καὶ ἄνεμον νότον ἡ Ὄθρυς ·
On its eastern side it is fenced in by the joining of the lower parts of the mountains Pelion and Ossa, to the north by Olympus, to the west by Pindus, towards the south and the southerly wind by Othrys.


7.129.1
7791
τὸ μέσον δὲ τούτων τῶν λεχθέντων ὀρέων ἡ Θεσσαλίη ἐστὶ ἐοῦσα κοίλη .
In the middle, then, of this ring of mountains, lies the vale of Thessaly.


7.129.2
7792
ὥστε ὦν ποταμῶν ἐς αὐτὴν καὶ ἄλλων συχνῶν ἐσβαλλόντων , πέντε δὲ τῶν δοκίμων μάλιστα τῶνδε , Πηνειοῦ καὶ Ἀπιδανοῦ καὶ Ὀνοχώνου καὶ Ἐνιπέος καὶ Παμίσου , οἳ μέν νυν ἐς τὸ πεδίον τοῦτο συλλεγόμενοι ἐκ τῶν ὀρέων τῶν περικληιόντων τὴν Θεσσαλίην ὀνομαζόμενοι δι’ ἑνὸς αὐλῶνος καὶ τούτου στεινοῦ ἔκροον ἔχουσι ἐς θάλασσαν , προσυμμίσγοντες τὸ ὕδωρ πάντες ἐς τ- αὐτό ·
A number of rivers pour into this vale, the most notable of which are Peneus, Apidanus, Onochonus, Enipeus, Pamisus. These five, while they flow towards their meeting place from the mountains which surround  Thessaly, have their several names, until their waters all unite and issue into the sea by one narrow passage.


7.129.3
7793
ἐπεὰν δὲ συμμιχθέωσι τάχιστα , ἐνθεῦτεν ἤδη ὁ Πηνειὸς τῷ οὐνόματι κατακρατέων ἀνωνύμους τοὺς ἄλλους εἶναι ποιέει .
As soon as they are united, the name of the Peneus prevails, making the rest nameless.


7.129.3
7794
τὸ δὲ παλαιὸν λέγεται , οὐκ ἐόντος κω τοῦ αὐλῶνος καὶ διεκρόου τούτου , τοὺς ποταμοὺς τούτους , καὶ πρὸς τοῖσι ποταμοῖσι τούτοισι τὴν Βοιβηίδα λίμνην , οὔτε ὀνομάζεσθαι κατά περ νῦν ῥέειν τε οὐδὲν ἧσσον ἢ νῦν , ῥέοντας δὲ ποιέειν τὴν Θεσσαλίην πᾶσαν πέλαγος .
In ancient days, it is said, there was not yet this channel and outfall, but those rivers and the Boebean lake, which was not yet named, had the same volume of water as now, and thereby turned all Thessaly into a sea.


7.129.4
7795
αὐτοὶ μέν νυν Θεσσαλοί φασι Ποσειδέωνα ποιῆσαι τὸν αὐλῶνα δι’ οὗ ῥέει ὁ Πηνειός , οἰκότα λέγοντες ·
Now the Thessalians say that Poseidon made the passage by which the Peneus flows.


7.129.4
7796
ὅστις γὰρ νομίζει Ποσειδέωνα τὴν γῆν σείειν καὶ τὰ διεστεῶτα ὑπὸ σεισμοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ τούτου ἔργα εἶναι , κἂν ἐκεῖνο ἰδὼν φαίη Ποσειδέωνα ποιῆσαι ·
This is reasonable, for whoever believes that Poseidon is the shaker of the earth and that rifts made by earthquakes are the work of that god will conclude, upon seeing that passage, that it is of Poseidon's making.


7.129.4
7797
ἔστι γὰρ σεισμοῦ ἔργον , ὡς ἐμοὶ φαίνεται εἶναι , ἡ διάστασις τῶν ὀρέων .
It was manifest to me that it must have been an earthquake which forced the mountains apart.


7.130.1
7798
οἱ δὲ κατηγεόμενοι , εἰρομένου Ξέρξεω εἰ ἔστι ἄλλη ἔξοδος ἐς θάλασσαν τῷ Πηνειῷ , ἐξεπιστάμενοι ἀτρεκέως εἶπον " βασιλεῦ , ποταμῷ τούτῳ οὐκ ἔστι ἄλλη ἐξήλυσις ἐς θάλασσαν κατήκουσα , ἀλλ’ ἥδε αὐτή ·
Xerxes asked his guides if there were any other outlet for the Peneus into the sea, and they, with their full knowledge of the matter, answered him:


7.130.1
7799
ὄρεσι γὰρ περιεστεφάνωται πᾶσα Θεσσαλίη " .
“The river, O king, has no other way into the sea, but this alone.


7.130.1
7800
Ξέρξην δὲ λέγεται εἰπεῖν πρὸς ταῦτα " σοφοὶ ἄνδρες εἰσὶ Θεσσαλοί .
This is so because there is a ring of mountains around the whole of Thessaly.”


7.130.2
7801
ταῦτ’ ἄρα πρὸ πολλοῦ ἐφυλάξαντο γνωσιμαχέοντες καὶ τ- ἄλλα καὶ ὅτι χώρην ἄρα εἶχον εὐαίρετόν τε καὶ ταχυάλωτον .
Upon hearing this Xerxes said: “These Thessalians are wise men;


7.130.2
7802
τὸν γὰρ ποταμὸν πρῆγμα ἂν ἦν μοῦνον ἐπεῖναι σφέων ἐπὶ τὴν χώρην , χώματι ἐκ τοῦ αὐλῶνος ἐκβιβάσαντα καὶ παρατρέψαντα δι’ ὧν νῦν ῥέει ῥεέθρων , ὥστε Θεσσαλίην πᾶσαν ἔξω τῶν ὀρέων ὑπόβρυχα γενέσθαι " .
this, then, was the primary reason for their precaution long before when they changed to a better mind, for they perceived that their country would be easily and speedily conquerable. It would only have been necessary to let the river out over their land by barring the channel with a dam and to turn it from its present bed so that the whole of Thessaly, with the exception of the mountains, might be under water.”


7.130.3
7803
ταῦτα δὲ ἔχοντα ἔλεγε ἐς τοὺς Ἀλεύεω παῖδας , ὅτι πρῶτοι Ἑλλήνων ἐόντες Θεσσαλοὶ ἔδοσαν ἑωυτοὺς βασιλέι , δοκέων ὁ Ξέρξης ἀπὸ παντός σφεας τοῦ ἔθνεος ἐπαγγέλλεσθαι φιλίην .
This he said with regard in particular to the sons of Aleues, the Thessalians who were the first Greeks to surrender themselves to the king.


7.130.3
7804
εἴπας δὲ ταῦτα καὶ θεησάμενος ἀπέπλεε ἐς τὴν Θέρμην .
Xerxes supposed that when they offered him friendship they spoke for the whole of their nation. After delivering this speech and seeing what he had come to see, he sailed back to Therma.


7.131.1
7805
ὁ μὲν δὴ περὶ Πιερίην διέτριβε ἡμέρας συχνάς ·
Xerxes stayed for many days in the region of Pieria


7.131.1
7806
τὸ γὰρ δὴ ὄρος τὸ Μακεδονικὸν ἔκειρε τῆς στρατιῆς τριτημορίς , ἵνα ταύτῃ διεξίῃ ἅπασα ἡ στρατιὴ ἐς Περραιβούς .
while a third part of his army was clearing a road over the Macedonian mountains so that the whole army might pass by that way to the Perrhaebian country.


7.131.1
7807
οἱ δὲ δὴ κήρυκες οἱ ἀποπεμφθέντες ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἐπὶ γῆς αἴτησιν ἀπίκατο οἳ μὲν κεινοί , οἳ δὲ φέροντες γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ .
Now it was that the heralds who had been sent to Hellas to demand earth, some empty-handed, some bearing earth and water, returned.


7.132.1
7808
τῶν δὲ δόντων ταῦτα ἐγένοντο οἵδε , Θεσσαλοὶ Δόλοπες Ἐνιῆνες Περραιβοὶ Λοκροὶ Μάγνητες Μηλιέες Ἀχαιοὶ οἱ Φθιῶται καὶ Θηβαῖοι καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι Βοιωτοὶ πλὴν Θεσπιέων τε καὶ Πλαταιέων .
Among those who paid that tribute were the Thessalians, Dolopes, Enienes, Perrhaebians, Locrians, Magnesians, Melians, Achaeans of  Phthia, Thebans, and all the Boeotians except the men of  Thespiae and  Plataea.


7.132.2
7809
ἐπὶ τούτοισι οἱ Ἕλληνες ἔταμον ὅρκιον οἱ τῷ βαρβάρῳ πόλεμον ἀειράμενοι ·
Against all of these the Greeks who declared war with the foreigner entered into a sworn agreement,


7.132.2
7810
τὸ δὲ ὅρκιον ὧδε εἶχε , ὅσοι τῷ Πέρσῃ ἔδοσαν σφέας αὐτοὺς Ἕλληνες ἐόντες μὴ ἀναγκασθέντες , καταστάντων σφι εὖ τῶν πρηγμάτων , τούτους δεκατεῦσαι τῷ ἐν Δελφοῖσι θεῷ .
which was this: that if they should be victorious, they would dedicate to the god of Delphi the possessions of all Greeks who had of free will surrendered themselves to the Persians.


7.132.2
7811
τὸ μὲν δὴ ὅρκιον ὧδε εἶχε τοῖσι Ἕλλησι .
Such was the agreement sworn by the Greeks.


7.133.1
7812
ἐς δὲ Ἀθήνας καὶ Σπάρτην οὐκ ἀπέπεμψε Ξέρξης ἐπὶ γῆς αἴτησιν κήρυκας τῶνδε εἵνεκα ·
To Athens and Sparta Xerxes sent no heralds to demand earth, and this he did for the following reason.


7.133.1
7813
πρότερον Δαρείου πέμψαντος ἐπ’ αὐτὸ τοῦτο , οἳ μὲν αὐτῶν τοὺς αἰτέοντας ἐς τὸ βάραθρον οἳ δ’ ἐς φρέαρ ἐμβαλόντες ἐκέλευον γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ ἐκ τούτων φέρειν παρὰ βασιλέα .
When Darius had previously sent men with this same purpose, those who made the request were cast at the one city into the Pit and at the other into a well, and bidden to obtain their earth and water for the king from these locations.


7.133.2
7814
τούτων μὲν εἵνεκα οὐκ ἔπεμψε Ξέρξης τοὺς αἰτήσοντας ·
For this reason Xerxes sent no demand to these cities.


7.133.2
7815
ὅ τι δὲ τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι ταῦτα ποιήσασι τοὺς κήρυκας συνήνεικε ἀνεθέλητον γενέσθαι , οὐκ ἔχω εἶπαί τι , πλὴν ὅτι σφέων ἡ χώρη καὶ ἡ πόλις ἐδηιώθη .
What calamity befell the Athenians for dealing in this way with the heralds I cannot say, save that their land and their city were laid waste.


7.133.2
7816
ἀλλὰ τοῦτο οὐ διὰ ταύτην τὴν αἰτίην δοκέω γενέσθαι .
I think, however, that there was another reason for this, and not the aforesaid.


7.134.1
7817
τοῖσι δὲ ὦν Λακεδαιμονίοισι μῆνις κατέσκηψε Ταλθυβίου τοῦ Ἀγαμέμνονος κήρυκος .
Be that as it may, the anger of Talthybius, Agamemnon's herald, fell upon the Lacedaemonians.


7.134.1
7818
ἐν γὰρ Σπάρτῃ ἐστὶ Ταλθυβίου ἱρόν , εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ ἀπόγονοι Ταλθυβιάδαι καλεόμενοι , τοῖσι αἱ κηρυκηίαι αἱ ἐκ Σπάρτης πᾶσαι γέρας δέδονται .
At Sparta there is a shrine of Talthybius and descendants of Talthybius called Talthybiadae, who have the special privilege of conducting all embassies from Sparta.


7.134.2
7819
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοῖσι Σπαρτιήτῃσι καλλιερῆσαι θυομένοισι οὐκ ἐδύνατο ·
Now there was a long period after the incident I have mentioned above during which the Spartans were unable to obtain good omens from sacrifice.


7.134.2
7820
τοῦτο δ’ ἐπὶ χρόνον συχνὸν ἦν σφι .
The Lacedaemonians were grieved and dismayed by this and frequently called assemblies, making a proclamation inviting some Lacedaemonian to give his life for Sparta.


7.134.2
7821
ἀχθομένων δὲ καὶ συμφορῇ χρεωμένων Λακεδαιμονίων , ἁλίης τε πολλάκις συλλεγομένης καὶ κήρυγμα τοιόνδε ποιευμένων , εἴ τις βούλοιτο Λακεδαιμονίων πρὸ τῆς Σπάρτης ἀποθνήσκειν , Σπερθίης τε ὁ Ἀνηρίστου καὶ Βοῦλις ὁ Νικόλεω , ἄνδρες Σπαρτιῆται φύσι τε γεγονότες εὖ καὶ χρήμασι ἀνήκοντες ἐς τὰ πρῶτα , ἐθελονταὶ ὑπέδυσαν ποινὴν τῖσαι Ξέρξῃ τῶν Δαρείου κηρύκων τῶν ἐν Σπάρτῃ ἀπολομένων .
Then two Spartans of noble birth and great wealth, Sperthias son of Aneristus and Bulis son of Nicolaus, undertook of their own free will to make atonement to Xerxes for Darius' heralds who had been killed at Sparta.


7.134.3
7822
οὕτω Σπαρτιῆται τούτους ὡς ἀποθανευμένους ἐς Μήδους ἀπέπεμψαν .
Thereupon the Spartans sent these men to Media for execution.


7.135.1
7823
αὕτη τε ἡ τόλμα τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν θώματος ἀξίη καὶ τάδε πρὸς τούτοισι τὰ ἔπεα .
Worthy of admiration was these men's deed of daring, and so also were their sayings.


7.135.1
7824
πορευόμενοι γὰρ ἐς Σοῦσα ἀπικνέονται παρὰ Ὑδάρνεα ·
On their way to Susa, they came to Hydarnes.


7.135.1
7825
ὁ δὲ Ὑδάρνης ἦν μὲν γένος Πέρσης , στρατηγὸς δὲ τῶν παραθαλασσίων ἀνθρώπων τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ ·
Hydarnes was, on the one hand, a Persian by birth and, at the same time, was general of the coast of Asia.


7.135.1
7826
ὅς σφεας ξείνια προθέμενος ἱστία , ξεινίζων δὲ εἴρετο τάδε .
He entertained and feasted them as his guests, and as they sat at his board, he asked:


7.135.2
7827
" ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , τί δὴ φεύγετε βασιλέι φίλοι γενέσθαι ;
“Lacedaemonians, why do you shun the king's friendship?


7.135.2
7828
ὁρᾶτε γὰρ ὡς ἐπίσταται βασιλεὺς ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς τιμᾶν , ἐς ἐμέ τε καὶ τὰ ἐμὰ πρήγματα ἀποβλέποντες .
You can judge from what you see of me and my condition how well the king can honor men of worth.


7.135.2
7829
οὕτω δὲ καὶ ὑμεῖς εἰ δοίητε ὑμέας αὐτοὺς βασιλέι , δεδόξωσθε γὰρ πρὸς αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες εἶναι ἀγαθοί , ἕκαστος ἂν ὑμέων ἄρχοι γῆς Ἑλλάδος δόντος βασιλέος " .
So might it be with you if you would but put yourselves in the king's hands, being as you are of proven worth in his eyes, and every one of you might by his commission be a ruler of Hellas.”


7.135.3
7830
πρὸς ταῦτα ὑπεκρίναντο τάδε .
To this the Spartans answered:


7.135.3
7831
" Ὕδαρνες , οὐκ ἐξ ἴσου γίνεται ἡ συμβουλίη ἡ ἐς ἡμέας τείνουσα .
“Your advice to us, Hydarnes, is not completely sound;


7.135.3
7832
τοῦ μὲν γὰρ πεπειρημένος συμβουλεύεις , τοῦ δὲ ἄπειρος ἐών ·
one half of it rests on knowledge, but the other on ignorance.


7.135.3
7833
τὸ μὲν γὰρ δοῦλος εἶναι ἐξεπίστεαι , ἐλευθερίης δὲ οὔκω ἐπειρήθης , οὔτ’ εἰ ἔστι γλυκὺ οὔτ’ εἰ μή .
You know well how to be a slave, but you, who have never tasted freedom, do not know whether it is sweet or not.


7.135.3
7834
εἰ γὰρ αὐτῆς πειρήσαιο , οὐκ ἂν δόρασι συμβουλεύοις ἡμῖν περὶ αὐτῆς μάχεσθαι , ἀλλὰ καὶ πελέκεσι " .
Were you to taste of it, not with spears you would counsel us to fight for it, no, but with axes.”


7.136.1
7835
ταῦτα μὲν Ὑδάρνεα ἀμείψαντο .
This was their answer to Hydarnes.


7.136.1
7836
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὡς ἀνέβησαν ἐς Σοῦσα καὶ βασιλέι ἐς ὄψιν ἦλθον , πρῶτα μὲν τῶν δορυφόρων κελευόντων καὶ ἀνάγκην σφι προσφερόντων προσκυνέειν βασιλέα προσπίπτοντας , οὐκ ἔφασαν ὠθεόμενοι ὑπ’ αὐτῶν ἐπὶ κεφαλὴν ποιήσειν ταῦτα οὐδαμά ·
From there they came to Susa, into the king's presence, and when the guards commanded and would have compelled them to fall down and bow to the king, they said they would never do that.


7.136.1
7837
οὔτε γὰρ σφίσι ἐν νόμῳ εἶναι ἄνθρωπον προσκυνέειν οὔτε κατὰ ταῦτα ἥκειν .
This they would refuse even if they were thrust down headlong, for it was not their custom, said they, to bow to mortal men, nor was that the purpose of their coming.


7.136.1
7838
ὡς δὲ ἀπεμαχέσαντο τοῦτο , δεύτερά σφι λέγουσι τάδε καὶ λόγου τοιοῦδε ἐχόμενα " ὦ βασιλεῦ Μήδων , ἔπεμψαν ἡμέας Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀντὶ τῶν ἐν Σπάρτῃ ἀπολομένων κηρύκων ποινὴν ἐκείνων τίσοντας , " λέγουσι δὲ αὐτοῖσι ταῦτα Ξέρξης ὑπὸ μεγαλοφροσύνης οὐκ ἔφη ὅμοιος ἔσεσθαι Λακεδαιμονίοισι ·
Having averted that, they next said, "O king of the Medes, the Lacedaemonians have sent us to pay the penalty for the death of the heralds who were killed in Sparta."


7.136.2
7839
κείνους μὲν γὰρ συγχέαι τὰ πάντων ἀνθρώπων νόμιμα ἀποκτείναντας κήρυκας , αὐτὸς δὲ τὰ ἐκείνοισι ἐπιπλήσσει ταῦτα οὐ ποιήσειν , οὐδὲ ἀνταποκτείνας ἐκείνους ἀπολύσειν Λακεδαιμονίους τῆς αἰτίης .
“The Lacedaemonians have sent us, O king of the Medes, in requital for the slaying of your heralds at  Sparta, to make atonement for their death,” and more to that effect. To this Xerxes, with great magnanimity, replied that he would not imitate the Lacedaemonians. “You,” said he, “made havoc of all human law by slaying heralds, but I will not do that for which I censure you, nor by putting you in turn to death will I set the Lacedaemonians free from this guilt.”


7.137.1
7840
οὕτω ἡ Ταλθυβίου μῆνις καὶ ταῦτα ποιησάντων Σπαρτιητέων ἐπαύσατο τὸ παραυτίκα , καίπερ ἀπονοστησάντων ἐς Σπάρτην Σπερθίεώ τε καὶ Βούλιος .
This conduct on the part of the Spartans succeeded for a time in allaying the anger of Talthybius, in spite of the fact that Sperthias and Bulis returned to Sparta.


7.137.1
7841
χρόνῳ δὲ μετέπειτα πολλῷ ἐπηγέρθη κατὰ τὸν Πελοποννησίων καὶ Ἀθηναίων πόλεμον , ὡς λέγουσι Λακεδαιμόνιοι .
Long after that, however, it rose up again in the war between the Peloponnesians and Athenians, as the Lacedaemonians say.


7.137.1
7842
τοῦτο μοι ἐν τοῖσι θειότατον φαίνεται γενέσθαι .
That seems to me to be an indication of something divine.


7.137.2
7843
ὅτι μὲν γὰρ κατέσκηψε ἐς ἀγγέλους ἡ Ταλθυβίου μῆνις οὐδὲ ἐπαύσατο πρὶν ἢ ἐξῆλθε , τὸ δίκαιον οὕτω ἔφερε ·
It was just that the wrath of Talthybius descended on ambassadors, nor abated until it was satisfied.


7.137.2
7844
τὸ δὲ συμπεσεῖν ἐς τοὺς παῖδας τῶν ἀνδρῶν τούτων τῶν ἀναβάντων πρὸς βασιλέα διὰ τὴν μῆνιν , ἐς Νικόλαν τε τὸν Βούλιος καὶ ἐς Ἀνήριστον τὸν Σπερθίεω , ὃς εἷλε Ἁλιέας τοὺς ἐκ Τίρυνθος ὁλκάδι καταπλώσας πλήρεϊ ἀνδρῶν , δῆλον ὦν μοι ὅτι θεῖον ἐγένετο τὸ πρῆγμα ἐκ τῆς μήνιος ·
The venting of it, however, on the sons of those men who went up to the king to appease it, namely on Nicolas son of Bulis and Aneristus son of Sperthias (that Aneristus who landed a merchant ships crew at the Tirynthian settlement of Halia and took it), makes it plain to me that this was the divine result of Talthybius' anger.


7.137.3
7845
οἳ γὰρ πεμφθέντες ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων ἄγγελοι ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην , προδοθέντες δὲ ὑπὸ Σιτάλκεω τοῦ Τήρεω Θρηίκων βασιλέος καὶ Νυμφοδώρου τοῦ Πύθεω ἀνδρὸς Ἀβδηρίτεω , ἥλωσαν κατὰ Βισάνθην τὴν ἐν Ἑλλησπόντῳ , καὶ ἀπαχθέντες ἐς τὴν Ἀττικὴν ἀπέθανον ὑπὸ Ἀθηναίων , μετὰ δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ Ἀριστέας ὁ Ἀδειμάντου Κορίνθιος ἀνήρ .
These two had been sent by the Lacedaemonians as ambassadors to Asia, and betrayed by the Thracian king Sitalces son of Tereus and Nymphodorus son of Pytheas of Abdera, they were made captive at Bisanthe on the Hellespont,


7.137.3
7846
ταῦτα μέν νυν πολλοῖσι ἔτεσι ὕστερον ἐγένετο τοῦ βασιλέος στόλου , ἐπάνειμι δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν πρότερον λόγον .
and carried away to Attica, where the Athenians put them, and with them Aristeas son of Adimantus, a Corinthian, to death.


7.138.1
7847
ἡ δὲ στρατηλασίη ἡ βασιλέος οὔνομα μὲν εἶχε ὡς ἐπ’ Ἀθήνας ἐλαύνει , κατίετο δὲ ἐς πᾶσαν τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
The professed intent of the king's march was to attack Athens, but in truth all Hellas was his aim.


7.138.1
7848
πυνθανόμενοι δὲ ταῦτα πρὸ πολλοῦ οἱ Ἕλληνες οὐκ ἐν ὁμοίῳ πάντες ἐποιεῦντο .
This the Greeks had long since learned, but not all of them regarded the matter alike.


7.138.2
7849
οἱ μὲν γὰρ αὐτῶν δόντες γῆν καὶ ὕδωρ τῷ Πέρσῃ εἶχον θάρσος ὡς οὐδὲν πεισόμενοι ἄχαρι πρὸς τοῦ βαρβάρου ·
Those of them who had paid the tribute of earth and water to the Persian were of good courage, thinking that the foreigner would do them no harm,


7.138.2
7850
οἱ δὲ οὐ δόντες ἐν δείματι μεγάλῳ κατέστασαν , ἅτε οὔτε νεῶν ἐουσέων ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι ἀριθμὸν ἀξιομάχων δέκεσθαι τὸν ἐπιόντα , οὔτε βουλομένων τῶν πολλῶν ἀντάπτεσθαι τοῦ πολέμου , μηδιζόντων δὲ προθύμως .
but they who had refused tribute were afraid, since there were not enough ships in Hellas to do battle with their invader; furthermore, the greater part of them had no stomach for grappling with the war, but were making haste to side with the Persian.


7.139.1
7851
ἐνθαῦτα ἀναγκαίῃ ἐξέργομαι γνώμην ἀποδέξασθαι ἐπίφθονον μὲν πρὸς τῶν πλεόνων ἀνθρώπων , ὅμως δὲ τῇ γέ μοι φαίνεται εἶναι ἀληθὲς οὐκ ἐπισχήσω .
Here I am forced to declare an opinion which will be displeasing to most, but I will not refrain from saying what seems to me to be true.


7.139.2
7852
εἰ Ἀθηναῖοι καταρρωδήσαντες τὸν ἐπιόντα κίνδυνον ἐξέλιπον τὴν σφετέρην , ἢ καὶ μὴ ἐκλιπόντες ἀλλὰ μείναντες ἔδοσαν σφέας αὐτοὺς Ξέρξῃ , κατὰ τὴν θάλασσαν οὐδαμοὶ ἂν ἐπειρῶντο ἀντιούμενοι βασιλέι .
Had the Athenians been panic-struck by the threatened peril and left their own country, or had they not indeed left it but remained and surrendered themselves to Xerxes, none would have attempted to withstand the king by sea.


7.139.2
7853
εἰ τοίνυν κατὰ τὴν θάλασσαν μηδεὶς ἠντιοῦτο Ξέρξῃ , κατά γε ἂν τὴν ἤπειρον τοιάδε ἐγίνετο ·
What would have happened on land if no one had resisted the king by sea is easy enough to determine.


7.139.3
7854
εἰ καὶ πολλοὶ τειχέων κιθῶνες ἦσαν ἐληλαμένοι διὰ τοῦ Ἰσθμοῦ Πελοποννησίοισι , προδοθέντες ἂν Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὑπὸ τῶν συμμάχων οὐκ ἑκόντων ἀλλ’ ὑπ’ ἀναγκαίης , κατὰ πόλις ἁλισκομένων ὑπὸ τοῦ ναυτικοῦ στρατοῦ τοῦ βαρβάρου , ἐμουνώθησαν , μουνωθέντες δὲ ἂν καὶ ἀποδεξάμενοι ἔργα μεγάλα ἀπέθανον γενναίως .
Although the Peloponnesians had built not one but many walls across the Isthmus for their defense, they would nevertheless have been deserted by their allies (these having no choice or free will in the matter, but seeing their cities taken one by one by the foreign fleet), until at last they would have stood alone. They would then have put up quite a fight and perished nobly.


7.139.4
7855
ἢ ταῦτα ἂν ἔπαθον , ἢ πρὸ τοῦ ὁρῶντες ἂν καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους Ἕλληνας μηδίζοντας ὁμολογίῃ ἂν ἐχρήσαντο πρὸς Ξέρξην .
Such would have been their fate.


7.139.4
7856
καὶ οὕτω ἂν ἐπ’ ἀμφότερα ἡ Ἑλλὰς ἐγίνετο ὑπὸ Πέρσῃσι .
Perhaps, however, when they saw the rest of Hellas siding with the enemy, they would have made terms with Xerxes.


7.139.4
7857
τὴν γὰρ ὠφελίην τὴν τῶν τειχέων τῶν διὰ τοῦ Ἰσθμοῦ ἐληλαμένων οὐ δύναμαι πυθέσθαι ἥτις ἂν ἦν , βασιλέος ἐπικρατέοντος τῆς θαλάσσης .
In either case Hellas would have been subdued by the Persians, for I cannot see what advantage could accrue from the walls built across the isthmus, while the king was master of the seas.


7.139.5
7858
νῦν δὲ Ἀθηναίους ἄν τις λέγων σωτῆρας γενέσθαι τῆς Ἑλλάδος οὐκ ἂν ἁμαρτάνοι τὸ ἀληθές .
As it is, to say that the Athenians were the saviors of Hellas is to hit the truth.


7.139.5
7859
οὗτοι γὰρ ἐπὶ ὁκότερα τῶν πρηγμάτων ἐτράποντο , ταῦτα ῥέψειν ἔμελλε ·
It was the Athenians who held the balance; whichever side they joined was sure to prevail.


7.139.5
7860
ἑλόμενοι δὲ τὴν Ἑλλάδα περιεῖναι ἐλευθέρην , τοῦτο τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν πᾶν τὸ λοιπόν , ὅσον μὴ ἐμήδισε , αὐτοὶ οὗτοι ἦσαν οἱ ἐπεγείραντες καὶ βασιλέα μετά γε θεοὺς ἀνωσάμενοι .
Choosing that Greece should preserve her freedom, the Athenians roused to battle the other Greek states which had not yet gone over to the Persians and, after the gods, were responsible for driving the king off.


7.139.6
7861
οὐδὲ σφέας χρηστήρια φοβερὰ ἐλθόντα ἐκ Δελφῶν καὶ ἐς δεῖμα βαλόντα ἔπεισε ἐκλιπεῖν τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἀλλὰ καταμείναντες ἀνέσχοντο τὸν ἐπιόντα ἐπὶ τὴν χώρην δέξασθαι .
Nor were they moved to desert  Hellas by the threatening oracles which came from  Delphi and sorely dismayed them, but they stood firm and had the courage to meet the invader of their country.


7.140.1
7862
πέμψαντες γὰρ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐς Δελφοὺς θεοπρόπους χρηστηριάζεσθαι ἦσαν ἕτοιμοι ·
The Athenians had sent messages to Delphi asking that an oracle be given them,


7.140.1
7863
καί σφι ποιήσασι περὶ τὸ ἱρὸν τὰ νομιζόμενα , ὡς ἐς τὸ μέγαρον ἐσελθόντες ἵζοντο , χρᾷ ἡ Πυθίη , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Ἀριστονίκη , τάδε .
and when they had performed all due rites at the temple and sat down in the inner hall, the priestess, whose name was Aristonice, gave them this answer:


7.140.2
7864
ὦ μέλεοι , τί κάθησθε ;
"Wretches, why do you linger here?


7.140.2
7865
λιπὼν φεῦγ’ ἔσχατα γαίης δώματα καὶ πόλιος τροχοειδέος ἄκρα κάρηνα .
Rather flee from your houses and city, Flee to the ends of the earth from the circle embattled of Athens!"


7.140.2
7866
οὔτε γὰρ ἡ κεφαλὴ μένει ἔμπεδον οὔτε τὸ σῶμα , οὔτε πόδες νέατοι οὔτ’ ὦν χέρες , οὔτε τι μέσσης λείπεται , ἀλλ’ ἄζηλα πέλει ·
"The head will not remain in its place, nor in the body,  / Nor the feet beneath, nor the hands, nor the parts between; / But all is ruined,


7.140.2
7867
κατὰ γάρ μιν ἐρείπει πῦρ τε καὶ ὀξὺς Ἄρης , Συριηγενὲς ἅρμα διώκων .
for fire and the headlong god of war speeding in a Syrian chariot will bring you low."


7.140.3
7868
πολλὰ δὲ κ- ἄλλʼ ἀπολεῖ πυργώματα κ- οὐ τὸ σὸν οἶον , πολλοὺς δ’ ἀθανάτων νηοὺς μαλερῷ πυρὶ δώσει , οἵ που νῦν ἱδρῶτι ῥεούμενοι ἑστήκασι , δείματι παλλόμενοι , κατὰ δ’ ἀκροτάτοις ὀρόφοισι αἷμα μέλαν κέχυται , προϊδὸν κακότητος ἀνάγκας .
"Many a fortress too, not yours alone, will he shatter; Many a shrine of the gods will he give to the flame for devouring; Sweating for fear they stand, and quaking for dread of the enemy, Running with gore are their roofs, foreseeing the stress of their sorrow;


7.140.3
7869
ἀλλ’ ἴτον ἐξ ἀδύτοιο , κακοῖς δ’ ἐπικίδνατε θυμόν .
Therefore I bid you depart from the sanctuary. Have courage to lighten your evil."


7.141.1
7870
ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες οἱ τῶν Ἀθηναίων θεοπρόποι συμφορῇ τῇ μεγίστῃ ἐχρέωντο .
When the Athenian messengers heard that, they were very greatly dismayed, and gave themselves up for lost by reason of the evil foretold.


7.141.1
7871
προβάλλουσι δὲ σφέας αὐτοὺς ὑπὸ τοῦ κακοῦ τοῦ κεχρησμένου , Τίμων ὁ Ἀνδροβούλου , τῶν Δελφῶν ἀνὴρ δόκιμος ὅμοια τῷ μάλιστα , συνεβούλευέ σφι ἱκετηρίην λαβοῦσι δεύτερα αὖτις ἐλθόντας χρᾶσθαι τῷ χρηστηρίῳ ὡς ἱκέτας .
Then Timon son of Androbulus, as notable a man as any Delphian, advised them to take boughs of supplication and in the guise of suppliants, approach the oracle a second time.


7.141.2
7872
πειθομένοισι δὲ ταῦτα τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι καὶ λέγουσι " ὦναξ , χρῆσον ἡμῖν ἄμεινόν τι περὶ τῆς πατρίδος , αἰδεσθεὶς τὰς ἱκετηρίας τάσδε τάς τοι ἥκομεν φέροντες , ἢ οὔ τοι ἄπιμεν ἐκ τοῦ ἀδύτου , ἀλλ’ αὐτοῦ τῇδε μενέομεν ἔστ’ ἂν καὶ τελευτήσωμεν , " ταῦτα δὲ λέγουσι ἡ πρόμαντις χρᾷ δεύτερα τάδε .
The Athenians did exactly this; “Lord,” they said, “regard mercifully these suppliant boughs which we bring to you, and give us some better answer concerning our country. Otherwise we will not depart from your temple, but remain here until we die.” Thereupon the priestess gave them this second oracle:


7.141.3
7873
οὐ δύναται Παλλὰς Δί’ Ὀλύμπιον ἐξιλάσασθαι λισσομένη πολλοῖσι λόγοις καὶ μήτιδι πυκνῇ .
"Vainly does Pallas strive to appease great Zeus of Olympus; Words of entreaty are vain, and so too cunning counsels of wisdom.


7.141.3
7874
σοὶ δὲ τόδ’ αὖτις ἔπος ἐρέω ἀδάμαντι πελάσσας .
Nevertheless I will speak to you again of strength adamantine.


7.141.3
7875
τῶν ἄλλων γὰρ ἁλισκομένων ὅσα Κέκροπος οὖρος ἐντὸς ἔχει κευθμών τε Κιθαιρῶνος ζαθέοιο , τεῖχος Τριτογενεῖ ξύλινον διδοῖ εὐρύοπα Ζεύς μοῦνον ἀπόρθητον τελέθειν , τὸ σὲ τέκνα τ’ ὀνήσει .
All will be taken and lost that the sacred border of Cecrops Holds in keeping today, and the dales divine of Cithaeron; Yet a wood-built wall will by Zeus all-seeing be granted To the Trito-born, a stronghold for you and your children."


7.141.4
7876
μηδὲ σύ γ’ ἱπποσύνην τε μένειν καὶ πεζὸν ἰόντα πολλὸν ἀπ’ ἠπείρου στρατὸν ἥσυχος , ἀλλ’ ὑποχωρεῖν νῶτον ἐπιστρέψας ·
"Await not the host of horse and foot coming from Asia, Nor be still, but turn your back and withdraw from the foe.


7.141.4
7877
ἔτι τοι ποτε κ- ἀντίος ἔσσῃ .
Truly a day will come when you will meet him face to face.


7.141.4
7878
ὦ θείη Σαλαμίς , ἀπολεῖς δὲ σὺ τέκνα γυναικῶν ἤ που σκιδναμένης Δημήτερος ἢ συνιούσης .
Divine Salamis, you will bring death to women's sons When the corn is scattered, or the harvest gathered in."


7.142.1
7879
ταῦτα σφι ἠπιώτερα γὰρ τῶν προτέρων καὶ ἦν καὶ ἐδόκεε εἶναι , συγγραψάμενοι ἀπαλλάσσοντο ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας .
This answer seemed to be and really was more merciful than the first, and the envoys, writing it down, departed for Athens.


7.142.1
7880
ὡς δὲ ἀπελθόντες οἱ θεοπρόποι ἀπήγγελλον ἐς τὸν δῆμον , γνῶμαι καὶ ἄλλαι πολλαὶ γίνονται διζημένων τὸ μαντήιον καὶ αἵδε συνεστηκυῖαι μάλιστα .
When the messengers had left Delphi and laid the oracle before the people, there was much inquiry concerning its meaning, and among the many opinions which were uttered, two contrary ones were especially worthy of note.


7.142.1
7881
τῶν πρεσβυτέρων ἔλεγον μετεξέτεροι δοκέειν σφίσι τὸν θεὸν τὴν ἀκρόπολιν χρῆσαι περιέσεσθαι .
Some of the elder men said that the gods' answer signified that the acropolis should be saved, for in old time the acropolis of Athens had been fenced by a thorn hedge,


7.142.1
7882
ἡ γὰρ ἀκρόπολις τὸ πάλαι τῶν Ἀθηναίων ῥηχῷ ἐπέφρακτο .
which, by their interpretation, was the wooden wall.


7.142.2
7883
οἳ μὲν δὴ κατὰ τὸν φραγμὸν συνεβάλλοντο τοῦτο τὸ ξύλινον τεῖχος εἶναι , οἳ δ’ αὖ ἔλεγον τὰς νέας σημαίνειν τὸν θεόν , καὶ ταύτας παραρτέεσθαι ἐκέλευον τὰ ἄλλα ἀπέντας .
But others supposed that the god was referring to their ships, and they were for doing nothing but equipping these.


7.142.2
7884
τοὺς ὦν δὴ τὰς νέας λέγοντας εἶναι τὸ ξύλινον τεῖχος ἔσφαλλε τὰ δύο τὰ τελευταῖα ῥηθέντα ὑπὸ τῆς Πυθίης , ὦ θείη Σαλαμίς , ἀπολεῖς δὲ σὺ τέκνα γυναικῶν ἤ που σκιδναμένης Δημήτερος ἢ συνιούσης .
Those who believed their ships to be the wooden wall were disabled by the two last verses of the oracle: "Divine Salamis, you will bring death to women's sons When the corn is scattered, or the harvest gathered in."


7.142.3
7885
κατὰ ταῦτα τὰ ἔπεα συνεχέοντο αἱ γνῶμαι τῶν φαμένων τὰς νέας τὸ ξύλινον τεῖχος εἶναι ·
These verses confounded the opinion of those who said that their ships were the wooden wall,


7.142.3
7886
οἱ γὰρ χρησμολόγοι ταύτῃ ταῦτα ἐλάμβανον , ὡς ἀμφὶ Σαλαμῖνα δεῖ σφεας ἑσσωθῆναι ναυμαχίην παρασκευασαμένους .
for the readers of oracles took the verses to mean that they should offer battle by sea near Salamis and be there overthrown.


7.143.1
7887
ἦν δὲ τῶν τις Ἀθηναίων ἀνὴρ ἐς πρώτους νεωστὶ παριών , τῷ οὔνομα μὲν ἦν Θεμιστοκλέης , παῖς δὲ Νεοκλέος ἐκαλέετο .
Now there was a certain Athenian, by name and title Themistocles son of Neocles, who had lately risen to be among their chief men.


7.143.1
7888
οὗτος ὡνὴρ οὐκ ἔφη πᾶν ὀρθῶς τοὺς χρησμολόγους συμβάλλεσθαι , λέγων τοιάδε ·
He claimed that the readers of oracles had incorrectly interpreted the whole of the oracle and reasoned that if the verse really pertained to the Athenians, it would have been formulated in less mild language, calling Salamis “cruel” rather than “divine”


7.143.1
7889
εἰ ἐς Ἀθηναίους εἶχε τὸ ἔπος εἰρημένον ἐόντως , οὐκ ἂν οὕτω μιν δοκέειν ἠπίως χρησθῆναι , ἀλλὰ ὧδε " ὦ σχετλίη Σαλαμίς " ἀντὶ τοῦ " ὦ θείη Σαλαμίς , " εἴ πέρ γε ἔμελλον οἱ οἰκήτορες ἀμφ’ αὐτῇ τελευτήσειν ·
seeing that its inhabitants were to perish.


7.143.2
7890
ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἐς τοὺς πολεμίους τῷ θεῷ εἰρῆσθαι τὸ χρηστήριον συλλαμβάνοντι κατὰ τὸ ὀρθόν , ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἐς Ἀθηναίους ·
Correctly understood, the gods' oracle was spoken not of the Athenians but of their enemies,


7.143.2
7891
παρασκευάζεσθαι ὦν αὐτοὺς ὡς ναυμαχήσοντας συνεβούλευε , ὡς τούτου ἐόντος τοῦ ξυλίνου τείχεος .
and his advice was that they should believe their ships to be the wooden wall and so make ready to fight by sea.


7.143.3
7892
ταύτῃ Θεμιστοκλέος ἀποφαινομένου Ἀθηναῖοι ταῦτα σφίσι ἔγνωσαν αἱρετώτερα εἶναι μᾶλλον ἢ τὰ τῶν χρησμολόγων , οἳ οὐκ ἔων ναυμαχίην ἀρτέεσθαι , τὸ δὲ σύμπαν εἰπεῖν οὐδὲ χεῖρας ἀνταείρεσθαι , ἀλλὰ ἐκλιπόντας χώρην τὴν Ἀττικὴν ἄλλην τινὰ οἰκίζειν .
When Themistocles put forward this interpretation, the Athenians judged him to be a better counsellor than the readers of oracles, who would have had them prepare for no sea fight, and, in short, offer no resistance at all, but leave  Attica and settle in some other country.


7.144.1
7893
ἑτέρη τε Θεμιστοκλέι γνώμη ἔμπροσθε ταύτης ἐς καιρὸν ἠρίστευσε , ὅτε Ἀθηναίοισι γενομένων χρημάτων μεγάλων ἐν τῷ κοινῷ , τὰ ἐκ τῶν μετάλλων σφι προσῆλθε τῶν ἀπὸ Λαυρείου , ἔμελλον λάξεσθαι ὀρχηδὸν ἕκαστος δέκα δραχμάς ·
The advice of Themistocles had prevailed on a previous occasion.


7.144.1
7894
τότε Θεμιστοκλέης ἀνέγνωσε Ἀθηναίους τῆς διαιρέσιος ταύτης παυσαμένους νέας τούτων τῶν χρημάτων ποιήσασθαι διηκοσίας ἐς τὸν πόλεμον , τὸν πρὸς Αἰγινήτας λέγων .
The revenues from the mines at Laurium had brought great wealth into the Athenians' treasury, and when each man was to receive ten drachmae for his share, Themistocles persuaded the Athenians to make no such division but to use the money to build two hundred ships for the war, that is, for the war with Aegina.


7.144.2
7895
οὗτος γὰρ ὁ πόλεμος συστὰς ἔσωσε ἐς τὸ τότε τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἀναγκάσας θαλασσίους γενέσθαι Ἀθηναίους .
This was in fact the war the outbreak of which saved Hellas by compelling the Athenians to become seamen.


7.144.2
7896
αἳ δὲ ἐς τὸ μὲν ἐποιήθησαν οὐκ ἐχρήσθησαν , ἐς δέον δὲ οὕτω τῇ Ἑλλάδι ἐγένοντο .
The ships were not used for the purpose for which they were built, but later came to serve Hellas in her need.


7.144.2
7897
αὗταί τε δὴ αἱ νέες τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι προποιηθεῖσαι ὑπῆρχον , ἑτέρας τε ἔδεε προσναυπηγέεσθαι .
These ships, then, had been made and were already there for the Athenians' service, and now they had to build yet others.


7.144.3
7898
ἔδοξέ τέ σφι μετὰ τὸ χρηστήριον βουλευομένοισι ἐπιόντα ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα τὸν βάρβαρον δέκεσθαι τῇσι νηυσὶ πανδημεί , τῷ θεῷ πειθομένους , ἅμα Ἑλλήνων τοῖσι βουλομένοισι .
In their debate after the giving of the oracle they accordingly resolved that they would put their trust in the god and meet the foreign invader of  Hellas with the whole power of their fleet, ships and men, and with all other Greeks who were so minded.


7.145.1
7899
τὰ μὲν δὴ χρηστήρια ταῦτα τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι ἐγεγόνεε .
These oracles, then, had been given to the Athenians.


7.145.1
7900
συλλεγομένων δὲ ἐς τ- αὐτὸ τῶν περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα Ἑλλήνων τῶν τὰ ἀμείνω φρονεόντων καὶ διδόντων σφίσι λόγον καὶ πίστιν , ἐνθαῦτα ἐδόκεε βουλευομένοισι αὐτοῖσι πρῶτον μὲν χρημάτων πάντων καταλλάσσεσθαι τάς τε ἔχθρας καὶ τοὺς κατ’ ἀλλήλους ἐόντας πολέμους ·
All the Greeks who were concerned about the general welfare of Hellas met in conference and exchanged guarantees.


7.145.1
7901
ἦσαν δὲ πρὸς τινὰς καὶ ἄλλους ἐγκεκρημένοι ,ὁ δὲ ὦν μέγιστος Ἀθηναίοισί τε καὶ Αἰγινήτῃσι .
They resolved in debate to make an end of all their feuds and wars against each other, whatever the cause from which they arose; among others that were in course at that time, the greatest was the war between the Athenians and the Aeginetans.


7.145.2
7902
μετὰ δὲ πυνθανόμενοι Ξέρξην σὺν τῷ στρατῷ εἶναι ἐν Σάρδισι , ἐβουλεύσαντο κατασκόπους πέμπειν ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην τῶν βασιλέος πρηγμάτων , ἐς Ἄρος τε ἀγγέλους ὁμαιχμίην συνθησομένους πρὸς τὸν Πέρσην , καὶ ἐς Σικελίην ἄλλους πέμπειν παρὰ Γέλωνα τὸν Δεινομένεος ἔς τε Κέρκυραν κελεύσοντας βοηθέειν τῇ Ἑλλάδι καὶ ἐς Κρήτην ἄλλους , φρονήσαντες εἴ κως ἕν τε γένοιτο τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν καὶ εἰ συγκύψαντες τ- αὐτὸ πρήσσοιεν πάντες , ὡς δεινῶν ἐπιόντων ὁμοίως πᾶσι Ἕλλησι .
Presently, learning that Xerxes was at Sardis with his army, they planned to send men into Asia to spy out the king's doings and to despatch messengers, some to Argos, who should make the Argives their brothers in arms against the Persian, some to Gelon son of Dinomenes in Sicily, some to Corcyra, praying aid for Hellas, and some to Crete.


7.145.2
7903
τὰ δὲ Γέλωνος πρήγματα μεγάλα ἐλέγετο εἶναι , οὐδαμῶν Ἑλληνικῶν τῶν οὐ πολλὸν μέζω .
This they did in the hope that since the danger threatened all Greeks alike, all of Greek blood might unite and work jointly for one common end. Now the power of Gelon was said to be very great, surpassing by far any power in Hellas.


7.146.1
7904
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα σφι ἔδοξε , καταλυσάμενοι τὰς ἔχθρας πρῶτα μὲν κατασκόπους πέμπουσι ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην ἄνδρας τρεῖς .
Being so resolved and having composed their quarrels, they first sent three men as spies into Asia.


7.146.1
7905
οἳ δὲ ἀπικόμενοί τε ἐς Ξάρδις καὶ καταμαθόντες τὴν βασιλέος στρατιήν , ὡς ἐπάιστοι ἐγένοντο , βασανισθέντες ὑπὸ τῶν στρατηγῶν τοῦ πεζοῦ στρατοῦ ἀπήγοντο ὡς ἀπολεόμενοι .
These came to Sardis and took note of the king's army. They were discovered, however, and after examination by the generals of the land army, they were led away for execution.


7.146.2
7906
καὶ τοῖσι μὲν κατεκέκριτο θάνατος , Ξέρξης δὲ ὡς ἐπύθετο ταῦτα , μεμφθεὶς τῶν στρατηγῶν τὴν γνώμην πέμπει τῶν τινας δορυφόρων , ἐντειλάμενος , ἢν καταλάβωσι τοὺς κατασκόπους ζῶντας , ἄγειν παρ’ ἑωυτόν .
They were condemned to die, but when Xerxes heard of it, he blamed the judgment of his generals and sent some of his guards, charging them to bring the spies before him if they should be found alive.


7.146.3
7907
ὡς δὲ ἔτι περιεόντας αὐτοὺς κατέλαβον καὶ ἦγον ἐς ὄψιν τὴν βασιλέος , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν πυθόμενος ἐπ’ οἷσι ἦλθον , ἐκέλευε σφέας τοὺς δορυφόρους περιάγοντας ἐπιδείκνυσθαι πάντα τε τὸν πεζὸν στρατὸν καὶ τὴν ἵππον , ἐπεὰν δὲ ταῦτα θηεύμενοι ἔωσι πλήρεες , ἀποπέμπειν ἐς τὴν ἂν αὐτοὶ ἐθέλωσι χώρην ἀσινέας .
They were found still living and brought into the king's presence; then Xerxes, having inquired of them the purpose of their coming, ordered his guards to lead them around and show them his whole army. When the spies had seen all to their heart's content, they were to send them away unharmed to whatever country they pleased.


7.147.1
7908
ἐπιλέγων δὲ τὸν λόγον τόνδε ταῦτα ἐνετέλλετο , ὡς εἰ μὲν ἀπώλοντο οἱ κατάσκοποι , οὔτ’ ἂν τὰ ἑωυτοῦ πρήγματα προεπύθοντο οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐόντα λόγου μέζω , οὔτ’ ἄν τι τοὺς πολεμίους μέγα ἐσίναντο , ἄνδρας τρεῖς ἀπολέσαντες ·
The reason alleged for his command was this: had the spies been put to death, the Greeks would not so soon have learned the unspeakable greatness of his power, and the Persians would have done their enemy no great harm by putting three men to death.


7.147.1
7909
νοστησάντων δὲ τούτων ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα δοκέειν ἔφη ἀκούσαντας τοὺς Ἕλληνας τὰ ἑωυτοῦ πρήγματα πρὸ τοῦ στόλου τοῦ γινομένου παραδώσειν σφέας τὴν ἰδίην ἐλευθερίην , καὶ οὕτω οὐδὲ δεήσειν ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς στρατηλατέοντας πρήγματα ἔχειν .
Xerxes said that if they should return to Hellas, the Greeks would hear of his power and would surrender their peculiar freedom before the expedition with the result that there would be no need to march against them.


7.147.2
7910
οἶκε δὲ αὐτοῦ αὕτη ἡ γνώμη τῇ γε ἄλλῃ .
This was like that other saying of Xerxes.


7.147.2
7911
ἐὼν γὰρ ἐν Ἀβύδῳ ὁ Ξέρξης εἶδε πλοῖα ἐκ τοῦ Πόντου σιταγωγὰ διεκπλώοντα τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον , ἔς τε Αἴγιναν καὶ Πελοπόννησον κομιζόμενα .
When he was at Abydos and saw ships laden with corn sailing out of the Pontus through the Hellespont on their way to Aegina and the Peloponnese.


7.147.2
7912
οἱ μὲν δὴ πάρεδροι αὐτοῦ ὡς ἐπύθοντο πολέμια εἶναι τὰ πλοῖα , ἕτοιμοι ἦσαν αἱρέειν αὐτά , ἐσβλέποντες ἐς τὸν βασιλέα ὁκότε παραγγελέει .
His counsellors, perceiving that they were enemy ships, were for taking them, and looked to the king for orders to do so.


7.147.3
7913
ὁ δὲ Ξέρξης εἴρετο αὐτοὺς ὅκῃ πλέοιεν ·
Xerxes, however, asked them where the ships were sailing,


7.147.3
7914
οἳ δὲ εἶπαν " ἐς τοὺς σοὺς πολεμίους , ὦ δέσποτα , σῖτον ἄγοντες " .
and they answered: “To your enemies, Sire, carrying corn.”


7.147.3
7915
ὁ δὲ ὑπολαβὼν ἔφη " οὐκῶν καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐκεῖ πλέομεν ἔνθα περ οὗτοι , τοῖσί τε ἄλλοισι ἐξηρτυμένοι καὶ σίτῳ ;
Xerxes then answered, “And are not we too sailing to the same places as they, with corn among all our other provisions?


7.147.3
7916
τί δῆτα ἀδικέουσι οὗτοι ἡμῖν σιτία παρακομίζοντες " ;
What wrong are they doing us in carrying food there?”


7.148.1
7917
οἱ μέν νυν κατάσκοποι οὕτω θεησάμενοί τε καὶ ἀποπεμφθέντες ἐνόστησαν ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην , οἱ δὲ συνωμόται Ἑλλήνων ἐπὶ τῷ Πέρσῃ μετὰ τὴν ἀπόπεμψιν τῶν κατασκόπων δεύτερα ἔπεμπον ἐς Ἄργος ἀγγέλους .
So the spies were sent back after they had seen all and returned to  Europe. After sending the spies, those of the Greeks who had sworn alliance against the Persian next sent messengers to  Argos.


7.148.2
7918
Ἀργεῖοι δὲ λέγουσι τὰ κατ’ ἑωυτοὺς γενέσθαι ὧδε .
Now this is what the Argives say of their own part in the matter. They were informed from the first that the foreigner was stirring up war against Hellas.


7.148.2
7919
πυθέσθαι γὰρ αὐτίκα κατ’ ἀρχὰς τὰ ἐκ τοῦ βαρβάρου ἐγειρόμενα ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , πυθόμενοι δέ , καὶ μαθόντες ὡς σφέας οἱ Ἕλληνες πειρήσονται παραλαμβάνοντες ἐπὶ τὸν Πέρσην , πέμψαι θεοπρόπους ἐς Δελφοὺς τὸν θεὸν ἐπειρησομένους ὥς σφι μέλλει ἄριστον ποιέουσι γενέσθαι ·
When they learned that the Greeks would attempt to gain their aid against the Persian, they sent messengers to Delphi to inquire of the god how it would be best for them to act,


7.148.2
7920
νεωστὶ γὰρ σφέων τεθνάναι ἑξακισχιλίους ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ Κλεομένεος τοῦ Ἀναξανδρίδεω ·
for six thousand of them had been lately slain by a Lacedaemonian army and Cleomenes son of Anaxandrides its general.


7.148.2
7921
τῶν δὴ εἵνεκα πέμπειν .
For this reason, they said, the messengers were sent.


7.148.3
7922
τὴν δὲ Πυθίην ἐπειρωτῶσι αὐτοῖσι ἀνελεῖν τάδε .
The priestess gave this answer to their question:


7.148.3
7923
ἐχθρὲ περικτιόνεσσι , φίλ’ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσιν , εἴσω τὸν προβόλαιον ἔχων πεφυλαγμένος ἧσο καὶ κεφαλὴν πεφύλαξο ·
"Hated by your neighbors, dear to the immortals, / Crouch with a lance in rest, like a warrior fenced in his armor, / Guarding your head from the blow,


7.148.3
7924
κάρη δὲ τὸ σῶμα σαώσει .
and the head will shelter the body."


7.148.3
7925
ταῦτα μὲν τὴν Πυθίην χρῆσαι πρότερον ·
This answer had already been uttered by the priestess.


7.148.3
7926
μετὰ δὲ ὡς ἐλθεῖν τοὺς ἀγγέλους ἐς δὴ τὸ Ἄργος , ἐπελθεῖν ἐπὶ τὸ βουλευτήριον καὶ λέγειν τὰ ἐντεταλμένα .
Afterwards the envoys arrived in Argos and entered the council chamber to speak as they were charged.


7.148.4
7927
τοὺς δὲ πρὸς τὰ λεγόμενα ὑποκρίνασθαι ὡς ἕτοιμοι εἰσὶ Ἀργεῖοι ποιέειν ταῦτα , τριήκοντα ἔτεα εἰρήνην σπεισάμενοι Λακεδαιμονίοισι καὶ ἡγεόμενοι κατὰ τὸ ἥμισυ πάσης τῆς συμμαχίης .
Then the Argives answered to what had been said that they would do as was asked of them if they might first make a thirty years peace with Lacedaemonia and if the command of half the allied power were theirs.


7.148.4
7928
καίτοι κατά γε τὸ δίκαιον γίνεσθαι τὴν ἡγεμονίην ἑωυτῶν ·
It was their right to have the full command,


7.148.4
7929
ἀλλ’ ὅμως σφίσι ἀποχρᾶν κατὰ τὸ ἥμισυ ἡγεομένοισι .
but they would nevertheless be content with half.


7.149.1
7930
ταῦτα μὲν λέγουσι τὴν βουλὴν ὑποκρίνασθαι , καίπερ ἀπαγορεύοντός σφι τοῦ χρηστηρίου μὴ ποιέεσθαι τὴν πρὸς τοὺς Ἕλληνας συμμαχίην ·
This, they say, was the answer of their council, although the oracle forbade them to make the alliance with the Greeks;


7.149.1
7931
σπουδὴν δὲ ἔχειν σπονδὰς γενέσθαι τριηκοντοέτιδας καίπερ τὸ χρηστήριον φοβεόμενοι , ἵνα δή σφι οἱ παῖδες ἀνδρωθέωσι ἐν τούτοισι τοῖσι ἔτεσι ·
furthermore, they, despite their fear of the oracle, were eager to secure a thirty years treaty so that their children might have time in those years to grow to be men.


7.149.1
7932
μὴ δὲ σπονδέων ἐουσέων ἐπιλέγεσθαι , ἢν ἄρα σφέας καταλάβῃ πρὸς τῷ γεγονότι κακῷ ἄλλο πταῖσμα πρὸς τὸν Πέρσην , μὴ τὸ λοιπὸν ἔωσι Λακεδαιμονίων ὑπήκοοι .
If there were to be no such treaty — so they reasoned — then, if after the evil that had befallen them the Persian should deal them yet another blow, it was to be feared that they would be at the Lacedaemonians' mercy.


7.149.2
7933
τῶν δὲ ἀγγέλων τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς Σπάρτης πρὸς τὰ ῥηθέντα ἐκ τῆς βουλῆς ἀμείψασθαι τοῖσιδε ·
Then those of the envoys who were Spartans replied to the demands of the council, saying that they would refer the question of the truce to their own government at home;


7.149.2
7934
περὶ μὲν σπονδέων ἀνοίσειν ἐς τοὺς πλεῦνας , περὶ δὲ ἡγεμονίης αὐτοῖσι ἐντετάλθαι ὑποκρίνασθαι , καὶ δὴ λέγειν , σφίσι μὲν εἶναι δύο βασιλέας , Ἀργείοισι δὲ ἕνα ·
as for the command, however, they themselves had been commissioned to say that the Spartans had two kings, and the Argives but one.


7.149.2
7935
οὔκων δυνατὸν εἶναι τῶν ἐκ Σπάρτης οὐδέτερον παῦσαι τῆς ἡγεμονίης , μετὰ δὲ δύο τῶν σφετέρων ὁμόψηφον τὸν Ἀργεῖον εἶναι κωλύειν οὐδέν .
Now it was impossible to deprive either Spartan of his command, but there was nothing to prevent the Argive from having the same right of voting as their two had.


7.149.3
7936
οὕτω δὴ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι φασὶ οὐκ ἀνασχέσθαι τῶν Σπαρτιητέων τὴν πλεονεξίην , ἀλλ’ ἑλέσθαι μᾶλλον ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων ἄρχεσθαι ἤ τι ὑπεῖξαι Λακεδαιμονίοισι , προειπεῖν τε τοῖσι ἀγγέλοισι πρὸ δύντος ἡλίου ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι ἐκ τῆς Ἀργείων χώρης , εἰ δὲ μή , περιέψεσθαι ὡς πολεμίους .
At that, say the Argives, they decided that the Spartans' covetousness was past all bearing and that it was better to be ruled by the foreigners than give way to the Lacedaemonians. They then bade the envoys depart from the land of  Argos before sunset, for they would otherwise be treated as enemies.


7.150.1
7937
αὐτοὶ μὲν Ἀργεῖοι τοσαῦτα τούτων πέρι λέγουσι ·
Such is the Argives' account of this matter,


7.150.1
7938
ἔστι δὲ ἄλλος λόγος λεγόμενος ἀνὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ὡς Ξέρξης ἔπεμψε κήρυκα ἐς Ἄργος πρότερον ἤ περ ὁρμῆσαι στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ·
but there is another story told in Hellas, namely that before Xerxes set forth on his march against Hellas, he sent a herald to Argos,


7.150.2
7939
ἐλθόντα δὲ τοῦτον λέγεται εἰπεῖν " ἄνδρες Ἀργεῖοι , βασιλεὺς Ξέρξης τάδε ὑμῖν λέγει .
who said on his coming (so the story goes), “Men of Argos, this is the message to you from King Xerxes.


7.150.2
7940
ἡμεῖς νομίζομεν Πέρσην εἶναι ἀπ’ οὗ ἡμεῖς γεγόναμεν παῖδα Περσέος τοῦ Δανάης , γεγονότα ἐκ τῆς Κηφέος θυγατρὸς Ἀνδρομέδης .
Perses our forefather had, as we believe, Perseus son of Danae for his father, and Andromeda daughter of Cepheus for his mother;


7.150.2
7941
οὕτω ἂν ὦν εἴημεν ὑμέτεροι ἀπόγονοι .
if that is so, then we are descended from your nation.


7.150.2
7942
οὔτε ὦν ἡμέας οἰκὸς ἐπὶ τοὺς ἡμετέρους προγόνους στρατεύεσθαι , οὔτε ὑμέας ἄλλοισι τιμωρέοντας ἡμῖν ἀντιξόους γίνεσθαι , ἀλλὰ παρ’ ὑμῖν αὐτοῖσι ἡσυχίην ἔχοντας κατῆσθαι .
In all right and reason we should therefore neither march against the land of our forefathers, nor should you become our enemies by aiding others or do anything but abide by yourselves in peace.


7.150.2
7943
ἢν γὰρ ἐμοὶ γένηται κατὰ νόον , οὐδαμοὺς μέζονας ὑμέων ἄξω " .
If all goes as I desire, I will hold none in higher esteem than you.”


7.150.3
7944
ταῦτα ἀκούσαντας Ἀργείους λέγεται πρῆγμα ποιήσασθαι , καὶ παραχρῆμα μὲν οὐδὲν ἐπαγγελλομένους μεταιτέειν , ἐπεὶ δὲ σφέας παραλαμβάνειν τοὺς Ἕλληνας , οὕτω δὴ ἐπισταμένους ὅτι οὐ μεταδώσουσι τῆς ἀρχῆς Λακεδαιμόνιοι μεταιτέειν , ἵνα ἐπὶ προφάσιος ἡσυχίην ἄγωσι .
The Argives were strongly moved when they heard this, and although they made no promise immediately and demanded no share, they later, when the Greeks were trying to obtain their support, did make the claim, because they knew that the Lacedaemonians would refuse to grant it, and that they would thus have an excuse for taking no part in the war.


7.151.1
7945
συμπεσεῖν δὲ τούτοισι καὶ τόνδε τὸν λόγον λέγουσι τινὲς Ἑλλήνων πολλοῖσι ἔτεσι ὕστερον γενόμενον τούτων .
This is borne out, some of the Greeks say, by the tale of a thing which happened many years afterwards.


7.151.1
7946
τυχεῖν ἐν Σούσοισι τοῖσι Μεμνονίοισι ἐόντας ἑτέρου πρήγματος εἵνεκα ἀγγέλους Ἀθηναίων Καλλίην τε τὸν Ἱππονίκου καὶ τοὺς μετὰ τούτου ἀναβάντας , Ἀργείους δὲ τὸν αὐτὸν τοῦτον χρόνον πέμψαντας καὶ τούτους ἐς Σοῦσα ἀγγέλους εἰρωτᾶν Ἀρτοξέρξεα τὸν Ξέρξεω εἴ σφι ἔτι ἐμμένει ἐθέλουσι τὴν πρὸς Ξέρξην φιλίην συνεκεράσαντο , ἢ νομιζοίατο πρὸς αὐτοῦ εἶναι πολέμιοι ·
It happened that while Athenian envoys, Callias son of Hipponicus, and the rest who had come up with him, were at Susa, called the Memnonian, about some other business, the Argives also had at this same time sent envoys to Susa,


7.151.1
7947
βασιλέα δὲ Ἀρτοξέρξεα μάλιστα ἐμμένειν φάναι , καὶ οὐδεμίαν νομίζειν πόλιν Ἄργεος φιλιωτέρην .
asking of Xerxes' son Artoxerxes whether the friendship which they had forged with Xerxes still held good, as they desired, or whether he considered them as his enemies. Artoxerxes responded to this that it did indeed hold good and that he believed no city to be a better friend to him than Argos.”


7.152.1
7948
εἰ μέν νυν Ξέρξης τε ἀπέπεμψε ταῦτα λέγοντα κήρυκα ἐς Ἄργος καὶ Ἀργείων ἄγγελοι ἀναβάντες ἐς Σοῦσα ἐπειρώτων Ἀρτοξέρξεα περὶ φιλίης , οὐκ ἔχω ἀτρεκέως εἰπεῖν , οὐδέ τινα γνώμην περὶ αὐτῶν ἀποφαίνομαι ἄλλην γε ἢ τήν περ αὐτοὶ Ἀργεῖοι λέγουσι ·
Now, whether it is true that Xerxes sent a herald with such a message to  Argos, and that the Argive envoys came up to  Susa and questioned Artoxerxes about their friendship, I cannot say with exactness, nor do I now declare that I consider anything true except what the Argives themselves say.


7.152.2
7949
ἐπίσταμαι δὲ τοσοῦτο ὅτι εἰ πάντες ἄνθρωποι τὰ οἰκήια κακὰ ἐς μέσον συνενείκαιεν ἀλλάξασθαι βουλόμενοι τοῖσι πλησίοισι , ἐγκύψαντες ἂν ἐς τὰ τῶν πέλας κακὰ ἀσπασίως ἕκαστοι αὐτῶν ἀποφεροίατο ὀπίσω τὰ ἐσενεικαίατο .
This, however, I know full well, namely if all men should carry their own private troubles to market for barter with their neighbors, there would not be a single one who, when he had looked into the troubles of other men, would not be glad to carry home again what he had brought.


7.152.3
7950
οὕτω δὲ οὐδ’ Ἀργείοισι αἴσχιστα πεποίηται .
The conduct of the Argives was accordingly not utterly shameful.


7.152.3
7951
ἐγὼ δὲ ὀφείλω λέγειν τὰ λεγόμενα , πείθεσθαί γε μὲν οὐ παντάπασι ὀφείλω , καί μοι τοῦτο τὸ ἔπος ἐχέτω ἐς πάντα λόγον ·
As for myself, although it is my business to set down that which is told me, to believe it is none at all of my business. This I ask the reader to hold true for the whole of my history,


7.152.3
7952
ἐπεὶ καὶ ταῦτα λέγεται , ὡς ἄρα Ἀργεῖοι ἦσαν οἱ ἐπικαλεσάμενοι τὸν Πέρσην ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἐπειδή σφι πρὸς τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους κακῶς ἡ αἰχμὴ ἑστήκεε , πᾶν δὴ βουλόμενοι σφίσι εἶναι πρὸ τῆς παρεούσης λύπης .
for there is another tale current, according to which it would seem that it was the Argives who invited the Persian into Hellas, because the war with the Lacedaemonians was going badly, and they would prefer anything to their present distresses.


7.153.1
7953
τὰ μὲν περὶ Ἀργείων εἴρηται ·
Such is the end of the story of the Argives.


7.153.1
7954
ἐς δὲ τὴν Σικελίην ἄλλοι τε ἀπίκατο ἄγγελοι ἀπὸ τῶν συμμάχων συμμίξοντες Γέλωνι καὶ δὴ καὶ ἀπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων Σύαγρος .
As for Sicily, envoys were sent there by the allies to hold converse with Gelon, Syagrus from Lacedaemon among them.


7.153.1
7955
τοῦ δὲ Γέλωνος τούτου πρόγονος , οἰκήτωρ ὁ ἐν Γέλῃ , ἦν ἐκ νήσου Τήλου τῆς ἐπὶ Τριοπίῳ κειμένης ·
The ancestor of this Gelon, who settled at Gela, was from the island of Telos which lies off Triopium.


7.153.1
7956
ὃς κτιζομένης Γέλης ὑπὸ Λινδίων τε τῶν ἐκ Ῥόδου καὶ Ἀντιφήμου οὐκ ἐλείφθη .
When the founding of Gela by Antiphemus and the Lindians of Rhodes was happening, he would not be left behind.


7.153.2
7957
ἀνὰ χρόνον δὲ αὐτοῦ οἱ ἀπόγονοι γενόμενοι ἱροφάνται τῶν χθονίων θεῶν διετέλεον ἐόντες , Τηλίνεω ἑνός τευ τῶν προγόνων κτησαμένου τρόπῳ τοιῷδε .
His descendants in time became and continue to be priests of the goddesses of the underworld; this office had been won, as I will show, by Telines, one of their forefathers.


7.153.2
7958
ἐς Μακτώριον πόλιν τὴν ὑπὲρ Γέλης οἰκημένην ἔφυγον ἄνδρες Γελῴων στάσι ἑσσωθέντες ·
There were certain Geloans who had been worsted in party strife and had been banished to the town of Mactorium, inland of Gela.


7.153.3
7959
τούτους ὦν ὁ Τηλίνης κατήγαγε ἐς Γέλην , ἔχων οὐδεμίαν ἀνδρῶν δύναμιν ἀλλὰ ἱρὰ τούτων τῶν θεῶν ·
These men Telines brought to Gela with no force of men but only the holy instruments of the goddesses worship to aid him.


7.153.3
7960
ὅθεν δὲ αὐτὰ ἔλαβε ἢ αὐτὸς ἐκτήσατο , τοῦτο δὲ οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν ·
From where he got these, and whether or not they were his own invention, I cannot say;


7.153.3
7961
τούτοισι δ’ ὦν πίσυνος ἐὼν κατήγαγε , ἐπ’ ᾧ τε οἱ ἀπόγονοι αὐτοῦ ἱροφάνται τῶν θεῶν ἔσονται .
however that may be, it was in reliance upon them that he restored the exiles, on the condition that his descendants should be ministering priests of the goddesses.


7.153.4
7962
θῶμά μοι ὦν καὶ τοῦτο γέγονε πρὸς τὰ πυνθάνομαι , κατεργάσασθαι Τηλίνην ἔργον τοσοῦτον ·
Now it makes me marvel that Telines should have achieved such a feat,


7.153.4
7963
τὰ τοιαῦτα γὰρ ἔργα οὐ πρὸς τοῦ ἅπαντος ἀνδρὸς νενόμικα γίνεσθαι , ἀλλὰ πρὸς ψυχῆς τε ἀγαθῆς καὶ ῥώμης ἀνδρηίης ·
for I have always supposed that such feats cannot be performed by any man but only by such as have a stout heart and manly strength.


7.153.4
7964
ὁ δὲ λέγεται πρὸς τῆς Σικελίης τῶν οἰκητόρων τὰ ὑπεναντία τούτων πεφυκέναι θηλυδρίης τε καὶ μαλακώτερος ἀνὴρ .
Telines, however, is reported by the dwellers in Sicily to have had a soft and effeminate disposition.


7.154.1
7965
οὗτος μέν νυν ἐκτήσατο τοῦτο τὸ γέρας ·
At the death of Cleandrus son of Pantares, who had been tyrant of Gela for seven years, and had been slain by a man of that city named Sabyllus,


7.154.1
7966
Κλεάνδρου δὲ τοῦ Παντάρεος τελευτήσαντος τὸν βίον , ὃς ἐτυράννευσε μὲν Γέλης ἑπτὰ ἔτεα , ἀπέθανε δὲ ὑπὸ Σαβύλλου ἀνδρὸς Γελῴου , ἐνθαῦτα ἀναλαμβάνει τὴν μουναρχίην Ἱπποκράτης Κλεάνδρου ἐὼν ἀδελφεός .
the sovereignty passed to Cleandrus' brother Hippocrates.


7.154.1
7967
ἔχοντος δὲ Ἱπποκράτεος τὴν τυραννίδα , ὁ Γέλων ἐὼν Τηλίνεω τοῦ ἱροφάντεω ἀπόγονος , πολλῶν μετ’ ἄλλων καὶ Αἰνησιδήμου τοῦ Παταίκου G? ὃς ἦν δορυφόρος Ἱπποκράτεος .
While Hippocrates was tyrant, Gelon, a descendant of the ministering priest Telines, was one of Hippocrates' guard, as were Aenesidemus son of Pataecus and many others.


7.154.2
7968
μετὰ δὲ οὐ πολλὸν χρόνον δι’ ἀρετὴν ἀπεδέχθη πάσης τῆς ἵππου εἶναι ἵππαρχος ·
In no long time he was appointed for his worth to be captain of the entire cavalry,


7.154.2
7969
πολιορκέοντος γὰρ Ἱπποκράτεος Καλλιπολίτας τε καὶ Ναξίους καὶ Ζαγκλαίους τε καὶ Λεοντίνους καὶ πρὸς Συρηκοσίους τε καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων συχνούς , ἀνὴρ ἐφαίνετο ἐν τούτοισι τοῖσι πολέμοισι ἐὼν ὁ Γέλων λαμπρότατος .
for his performance had been preeminent while he served under Hippocrates in the assaults against Callipolis, Naxos, Zancle, Leontini, Syracuse, and many other of the foreigners' towns.


7.154.2
7970
τῶν δὲ εἶπον πολίων τουτέων πλὴν Συρηκουσέων οὐδεμία διέφυγε δουλοσύνην πρὸς Ἱπποκράτεος ·
None of these cities, with the exception of Syracuse, escaped enslavement by Hippocrates; the Syracusans were defeated in battle on the river Elorus.


7.154.3
7971
Συρηκοσίους δὲ Κορίνθιοί τε καὶ Κερκυραῖοι ἐρρύσαντο μάχῃ ἐσσωθέντας ἐπὶ ποταμῷ Ἐλώρῳ , ἐρρύσαντο δὲ οὗτοι ἐπὶ τοῖσιδε καταλλάξαντες , ἐπ’ ᾧ τε Ἱπποκράτεϊ Καμάριναν Συρηκοσίους παραδοῦναι .
They were, however, rescued by the Corinthians and Corcyraeans,


7.154.3
7972
Συρηκοσίων δὲ ἦν Καμάρινα τὸ ἀρχαῖον .
who made a peace for them on the condition that the Syracusans should deliver up to Hippocrates Camarina, which had formerly been theirs.


7.155.1
7973
ὡς δὲ καὶ Ἱπποκράτεα τυραννεύσαντα ἴσα ἔτεα τῷ ἀδελφεῷ Κλεάνδρῳ κατέλαβε ἀποθανεῖν πρὸς πόλι Ὕβλῃ στρατευσάμενον ἐπὶ τοὺς Σικελούς , οὕτω δὴ ὁ Γέλων τῷ λόγῳ τιμωρέων τοῖσι Ἱπποκράτεος παισὶ Εὐκλείδῃ τε καὶ Κλεάνδρῳ , οὐ βουλομένων τῶν πολιητέων κατηκόων ἔτι εἶναι , τῷ ἔργῳ , ὡς ἐπεκράτησε μάχῃ τῶν Γελῴων , ἦρχε αὐτὸς ἀποστερήσας τοὺς Ἱπποκράτεος παῖδας .
When Hippocrates, too, after reigning the same number of years as his brother Cleandrus, came to his end near the town of Hybla — from where he had marched against the Sicels — then Gelon made a pretence of serving the cause of Hippocrates' sons Euclides and Cleandrus, whose rule the citizens would no longer bear. When he had defeated the men of  Gela, however, he deposed the sons of Hippocrates and held sway himself.


7.155.2
7974
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο τὸ εὕρημα τοὺς γαμόρους καλεομένους τῶν Συρηκοσίων ἐκπεσόντας ὑπό τε τοῦ δήμου καὶ τῶν σφετέρων δούλων , καλεομένων δὲ Κυλλυρίων , ὁ Γέλων καταγαγὼν τούτους ἐκ Κασμένης πόλιος ἐς τὰς Συρηκούσας ἔσχε καὶ ταύτας ·
After this stroke of good fortune, Gelon brought back from the town of Casmena to Syracuse both the so-called landed gentry of Syracuse, who had been driven into exile by the common people, and their slaves, the Cyllyrians.


7.155.2
7975
ὁ γὰρ δῆμος ὁ τῶν Συρηκοσίων ἐπιόντι Γέλωνι παραδιδοῖ τὴν πόλιν καὶ ἑωυτόν .
He then took possession of that city also, for the Syracusan common people surrendered themselves and it to Gelon at his coming.


7.156.1
7976
ὁ δὲ ἐπείτε παρέλαβε τὰς Συρηκούσας , Γέλης μὲν ἐπικρατέων λόγον ἐλάσσω ἐποιέετο , ἐπιτρέψας αὐτὴν Ἱέρωνι ἀδελφεῷ ἑωυτοῦ , ὁ δὲ τὰς Συρηκούσας ἐκράτυνε , καὶ ἦσάν οἱ πάντα αἱ Συρήκουσαι ·
When he had made  Syracuse his own, he took less account of his rule over  Gela, which he gave in charge to his brother Hiero; over  Syracuse he reigned, and all his care was for  Syracuse.


7.156.2
7977
αἳ δὲ παραυτίκα ἀνά τ’ ἔδραμον καὶ ἔβλαστον .
Straightway that city grew and became great,


7.156.2
7978
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ Καμαριναίους ἅπαντας ἐς τὰς Συρηκούσας ἀγαγὼν πολιήτας ἐποίησε , Καμαρίνης δὲ τὸ ἄστυ κατέσκαψε , τοῦτο δὲ Γελῴων ὑπερημίσεας τῶν ἀστῶν τ- αὐτὸ τοῖσι Καμαριναίοισι ἐποίησε ·
for not only did Gelon bring all the people of Camarina to Syracuse and give them its citizenship, razing the township of Camarina, but he did the same thing to more than half of the townsmen of Gela, and


7.156.2
7979
Μεγαρέας τε τοὺς ἐν Σικελίῃ , ὡς πολιορκεόμενοι ἐς ὁμολογίην προσεχώρησαν , τοὺς μὲν αὐτῶν παχέας , ἀειραμένους τε πόλεμον αὐτῷ καὶ προσδοκῶντας ἀπολέεσθαι διὰ τοῦτο , ἀγαγὼν ἐς τὰς Συρηκούσας πολιήτας ἐποίησε ·
when the Megarians in Sicily surrendered to him on terms after a siege, he took the wealthier of them, who had made war on him and expected to be put to death for this, and brought them to Syracuse to be citizens there.


7.156.2
7980
τὸν δὲ δῆμον τῶν Μεγαρέων οὐκ ἐόντα μεταίτιον τοῦ πολέμου τούτου οὐδὲ προσδεκόμενον κακὸν οὐδὲν πείσεσθαι , ἀγαγὼν καὶ τούτους ἐς τὰς Συρηκούσας ἀπέδοτο ἐπ’ ἐξαγωγῇ ἐκ Σικελίης .
As for the common people of Megara, who had had no hand in the making of that war and expected that no harm would be done them, these too he brought to Syracuse and sold them for slaves to be taken out of Sicily.


7.156.3
7981
τ- αὐτὸ δὲ τοῦτο καὶ Εὐβοέας τοὺς ἐν Σικελίῃ ἐποίησε διακρίνας .
He dealt in a similar way with the Euboeans of Sicily,


7.156.3
7982
ἐποίεε δὲ ταῦτα τούτους ἀμφοτέρους νομίσας δῆμον εἶναι συνοίκημα ἀχαριτώτατον .
making the same distinction. The reason for his treating the people of both places in this way was that he held the common people to be exceedingly disagreeable to live with.


7.157.1
7983
τοιούτῳ μὲν τρόπῳ τύραννος ἐγεγόνεε μέγας ὁ Γέλων ·
By these means Gelon had grown to greatness as a tyrant,


7.157.1
7984
τότε δ’ ὡς οἱ ἄγγελοι τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἀπίκατο ἐς τὰς Συρηκούσας , ἐλθόντες αὐτῷ ἐς λόγους ἔλεγον τάδε .
and now, when the Greek envoys had come to Syracuse, they had audience with him and spoke as follows:


7.157.1
7985
" ἔπεμψαν ἡμέας Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ οἱ τούτων σύμμαχοι παραλαμψομένους σε πρὸς τὸν βάρβαρον ·
“The Lacedaemonians and their allies have sent us to win your aid against the foreigner,


7.157.1
7986
τὸν γὰρ ἐπιόντα ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πάντως κου πυνθάνεαι , ὅτι Πέρσης ἀνὴρ μέλλει , ζεύξας τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον καὶ ἐπάγων πάντα τὸν ἠῷον στρατὸν ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης , στρατηλατήσειν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , πρόσχημα μὲν ποιεύμενος ὡς ἐπ’ Ἀθήνας ἐλαύνει , ἐν νόῳ δὲ ἔχων πᾶσαν τὴν Ἑλλάδα ὑπ’ ἑωυτῷ ποιήσασθαι .
for it cannot be, we think, that you have no knowledge of the Persian invader of Hellas, how he proposes to bridge the Hellespont and lead all the hosts of the east from Asia against us, making an open show of marching against Athens, but actually with intent to subdue all Hellas to his will.


7.157.2
7987
σὺ δὲ δυνάμιός τε γὰρ ἥκεις μεγάλως καὶ μοῖρά τοι τῆς Ἑλλάδος οὐκ ἐλαχίστη μέτα ἄρχοντί γε Σικελίης , βοήθεέ τε τοῖσι ἐλευθεροῦσι τὴν Ἑλλάδα καὶ συνελευθέρου .
Now you are rich in power, and as lord of Sicily you rule what is not the least part of Hellas;


7.157.2
7988
ἁλὴς μὲν γὰρ γενομένη πᾶσα ἡ Ἑλλὰς χεὶρ μεγάλη συνάγεται , καὶ ἀξιόμαχοι γινόμεθα τοῖσι ἐπιοῦσι ·
therefore, we beg of you, send help to those who are going to free Hellas, and aid them in so doing. The uniting of all those of Greek stock entails the mustering of a mighty host able to meet our invaders in the field.


7.157.2
7989
ἢν δὲ οἳ μὲν ἡμέων καταπροδιδῶσι οἳ δὲ μὴ θέλωσι τιμωρέειν , τὸ δὲ ὑγιαῖνον τῆς Ἑλλάδος ᾖ ὀλίγον , τοῦτο δὲ ἤδη δεινὸν γίνεται μὴ πέσῃ πᾶσα ἡ Ἑλλάς .
If, however, some of us play false and others will not come to our aid, while the sound part of Hellas is but small, then it is to be feared that all Greek lands alike will be destroyed.


7.157.3
7990
μὴ γὰρ ἐλπίσῃς , ἢν ἡμέας καταστρέψηται ὁ Πέρσης μάχῃ κρατήσας , ὡς οὐκὶ ἥξει παρὰ σέ γε , ἀλλὰ πρὸ τούτου φύλαξαι ·
Do not for a moment think that if the Persian defeats us in battle and subdues us, he will leave you unassailed, but rather look well to yourself before that day comes.


7.157.3
7991
βοηθέων γὰρ ἡμῖν σεωυτῷ τιμωρέεις .
Aid us, and you champion your own cause;


7.157.3
7992
τῷ δὲ εὖ βουλευθέντι πρήγματι τελευτὴ ὡς τὸ ἐπίπαν χρηστὴ ἐθέλει ἐπιγίνεσθαι " .
in general a well-laid plan leads to a happy issue.”


7.158.1
7993
οἳ μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεγον , Γέλων δὲ πολλὸς ἐνέκειτο λέγων τοιάδε .
This is what they said, and Gelon, speaking very vehemently, said in response to this:


7.158.1
7994
" ἄνδρες Ἕλληνες , λόγον ἔχοντες πλεονέκτην ἐτολμήσατε ἐμὲ σύμμαχον ἐπὶ τὸν βάρβαρον παρακαλέοντες ἐλθεῖν ·
“Men of Hellas, it is with a self-seeking plea that you have dared to come here and invite me to be your ally against the foreigners; yet what of yourselves?


7.158.2
7995
αὐτοὶ δὲ ἐμεῦ πρότερον δεηθέντος βαρβαρικοῦ στρατοῦ συνεπάψασθαι , ὅτε μοι πρὸς Καρχηδονίους νεῖκος συνῆπτο , ἐπισκήπτοντός τε τὸν Δωριέος τοῦ Ἀναξανδρίδεω πρὸς Ἐγεσταίων φόνον ἐκπρήξασθαι , ὑποτείνοντός τε τὰ ἐμπόρια συνελευθεροῦν ἀπ’ ὧν ὑμῖν μεγάλαι ὠφελίαι τε καὶ ἐπαυρέσιες γεγόνασι , οὔτε ἐμεῦ εἵνεκα ἤλθετε βοηθήσοντες οὔτε τὸν Δωριέος φόνον ἐκπρηξόμενοι , τό τε κατ’ ὑμέας τάδε ἅπαντα ὑπὸ βαρβάροισι νέμεται .
When I was at odds with the Carchedonians, and asked you to be my comrades against a foreign army, and when I desired that you should avenge the slaying of Dorieus son of Anaxandrides on the men of  Egesta, and when I promised to free those trading ports from which great advantage and profit have accrued to you, — then neither for my sake would you come to aid nor to avenge the slaying of Dorieus. Because of your position in these matters, all these lands lie beneath the foreigners' feet.


7.158.3
7996
ἀλλὰ εὖ γὰρ ἡμῖν καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ ἄμεινον κατέστη .
Let that be; for all ended well, and our state was improved.


7.158.3
7997
νῦν δὲ ἐπειδὴ περιελήλυθε ὁ πόλεμος καὶ ἀπῖκται ἐς ὑμέας , οὕτω δὴ Γέλωνος μνῆστις γέγονε .
But now that the war has come round to you in your turn, it is time for remembering Gelon!


7.158.4
7998
ἀτιμίης δὲ πρὸς ὑμέων κυρήσας οὐκ ὁμοιώσομαι ὑμῖν , ἀλλ’ ἕτοιμος εἰμὶ βοηθέειν παρεχόμενος διηκοσίας τε τριήρεας καὶ δισμυρίους ὁπλίτας καὶ δισχιλίην ἵππον καὶ δισχιλίους τοξότας καὶ δισχιλίους σφενδονήτας καὶ δισχιλίους ἱπποδρόμους ψιλούς ·
Despite the fact that you slighted me, I will not make an example of you;


7.158.4
7999
σῖτόν τε ἁπάσῃ τῇ Ἑλλήνων στρατιῇ , ἔστ’ ἂν διαπολεμήσωμεν , ὑποδέκομαι παρέξειν .
I am ready to send to your aid two hundred triremes, twenty thousand men-at-arms, two thousand horsemen, two thousand archers, two thousand slingers, and two thousand light-armed men to run with horsemen. I also pledge to furnish provisions for the whole Greek army until we have made an end of the war.


7.158.5
8000
ἐπὶ δὲ λόγῳ τοιῷδε τάδε ὑπίσχομαι , ἐπ’ ᾧ στρατηγός τε καὶ ἡγεμὼν τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἔσομαι πρὸς τὸν βάρβαρον .
All this, however, I promise on one condition, that I shall be general and leader of the Greeks against the foreigner.


7.158.5
8001
ἐπ’ ἄλλῳ δὲ λόγῳ οὔτ’ ἂν αὐτὸς ἔλθοιμι οὔτ’ ἂν ἄλλους πέμψαιμι " .
On no other condition will I come myself or send others.”


7.159.1
8002
ταῦτα ἀκούσας οὔτε ἠνέσχετο ὁ Σύαγρος εἶπέ τε τάδε .
When Syagrus heard that, he could not contain himself;


7.159.1
8003
" ἦ κε μέγ’ οἰμώξειε ὁ Πελοπίδης Ἀγαμέμνων πυθόμενος Σπαρτιήτας τὴν ἡγεμονίην ἀπαραιρῆσθαι ὑπὸ Γέλωνός τε καὶ Συρηκοσίων .
“In truth,” he cried, “loudly would Agamemnon son of Pelops lament, when hearing that the Spartans had been bereft of their command by Gelon and his Syracusans!


7.159.1
8004
ἀλλὰ τούτου μὲν τοῦ λόγου μηκέτι μνησθῇς , ὅκως τὴν ἡγεμονίην τοι παραδώσομεν , ἀλλ’ εἰ μὲν βούλεαι βοηθέειν τῇ Ἑλλάδι , ἴσθι ἀρξόμενος ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων ·
No, rather, put the thought out of your minds that we will give up the command to you. If it is your will to aid Hellas, know that you must obey the Lacedaemonians;


7.159.1
8005
εἰ δ’ ἄρα μὴ δικαιοῖς ἄρχεσθαι , σὺ δὲ μηδὲ βοήθεε " .
but if, as I think, you are too proud to obey, then send no aid.”


7.160.1
8006
πρὸς ταῦτα ὁ Γέλων , ἐπειδὴ ὥρα ἀπεστραμμένους τοὺς λόγους τοῦ Συάγρου , τὸν τελευταῖόν σφι τόνδε ἐξέφαινε λόγον .
Thereupon Gelon, seeing how unfriendly Syagrus' words were, for the last time declared his opinion to them:


7.160.1
8007
" ὦ ξεῖνε Σπαρτιῆτα , ὀνείδεα κατιόντα ἀνθρώπῳ φιλέει ἐπανάγειν τὸν θυμόν ·
“My Spartan friend, the hard words that a man hears are likely to arouse his anger;


7.160.1
8008
σὺ μέντοι ἀποδεξάμενος ὑβρίσματα ἐν τῷ λόγῳ οὔ με πείσεις ἀσχήμονα ἐν τῇ ἀμοιβῇ γενέσθαι .
but for all the arrogant tenor of your speech you will not move me to make an unseemly answer.


7.160.2
8009
ὅκου δὲ ὑμεῖς οὕτω περιέχεσθε τῆς ἡγεμονίης , οἰκὸς καὶ ἐμὲ μᾶλλον ὑμέων περιέχεσθαι , στρατιῆς τε ἐόντα πολλαπλησίης ἡγεμόνα καὶ νεῶν πολλὸν πλεύνων .
When you set such store by the command, it is but reasonable that it should be still more important to me since I am the leader of an army many times greater than yours and more ships by far.


7.160.2
8010
ἀλλ’ ἐπείτε ὑμῖν ὁ λόγος οὕτω προσάντης κατίσταται , ἡμεῖς τι ὑπείξομεν τοῦ ἀρχαίου λόγου ·
But seeing that your response to me is so haughty, we will make some concession in our original condition.


7.160.2
8011
εἰ τοῦ μὲν πεζοῦ ὑμεῖς ἡγέοισθε , τοῦ δὲ ναυτικοῦ ἐγώ .
It might be that you should command the army, and I the fleet;


7.160.2
8012
εἰ δὲ ὑμῖν ἡδονὴ τοῦ κατὰ θάλασσαν ἡγεμονεύειν , τοῦ πεζοῦ ἐγὼ θέλω .
or if it is your pleasure to lead by sea, then I am ready to take charge of the army.


7.160.2
8013
καὶ ἢ τούτοισι ὑμέας χρεόν ἐστι ἀρέσκεσθαι ἢ ἀπιέναι συμμάχων τοιῶνδε ἐρήμους " .
With that you will surely be content, unless you want to depart from here without such allies as we are.”


7.161.1
8014
Γέλων μὲν δὴ ταῦτα προετείνετο , φθάσας δὲ ὁ Ἀθηναίων ἄγγελος τὸν Λακεδαιμονίων ἀμείβετό μιν τοῖσιδε .
Such was Gelon's offer, and the Athenian envoy answered him before the Lacedaemonian could speak.


7.161.1
8015
" ὦ βασιλεῦ Συρηκοσίων , οὐκ ἡγεμόνος δεομένη ἡ Ἑλλὰς ἀπέπεμψε ἡμέας πρὸς σέ , ἀλλὰ στρατιῆς .
“King of the Syracusans,” he said, “Hellas sends us to you to ask not for a leader but for an army.


7.161.1
8016
σὺ δὲ ὅκως μὲν στρατιὴν πέμψεις μὴ ἡγεύμενος τῆς Ἑλλάδος οὐ προφαίνεις , ὡς δὲ στρατηγήσεις αὐτῆς γλίχεαι .
You however, say no word of sending an army without the condition of your being the leader of Hellas; it is the command alone that you desire.


7.161.2
8017
ὅσον μέν νυν παντὸς τοῦ Ἑλλήνων στρατοῦ ἐδέεο ἡγέεσθαι , ἐξήρκεε ἡμῖν τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι ἡσυχίην ἄγειν , ἐπισταμένοισι ὡς ὁ Λάκων ἱκανός τοι ἔμελλε ἔσεσθαι καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφοτέρων ἀπολογεύμενος ·
Now as long as you sought the leadership of the whole force, we Athenians were content to hold our peace, knowing that the Laconian was well able to answer for both of us;


7.161.2
8018
ἐπείτε δὲ ἁπάσης ἀπελαυνόμενος δέεαι τῆς ναυτικῆς ἄρχειν , οὕτω ἔχει τοι ·
but since, failing to win the whole, you would gladly command the fleet, we want to let you know how the matter stands.


7.161.2
8019
οὐδ’ ἢν ὁ Λάκων ἐπιῇ τοι ἄρχειν αὐτῆς , ἡμεῖς ἐπήσομεν ·
Even if the Laconian should permit you to command it, we would not do so,


7.161.2
8020
ἡμετέρη γὰρ ἐστὶ αὕτη γε , μὴ αὐτῶν βουλομένων Λακεδαιμονίων .
for the command of the fleet, which the Lacedaemonians do not desire for themselves, is ours.


7.161.2
8021
τούτοισι μὲν ὦν ἡγέεσθαι βουλομένοισι οὐκ ἀντιτείνομεν , ἄλλῳ δὲ παρήσομεν οὐδενὶ ναυαρχέειν .
If they should desire to lead it, we will not withstand them, but we will not allow anyone else to be admiral.


7.161.3
8022
μάτην γὰρ ἂν ὧδε πάραλον Ἑλλήνων στρατὸν πλεῖστον εἴημεν ἐκτημένοι , εἰ Συρηκοσίοισι ἐόντες Ἀθηναῖοι συγχωρήσομεν τῆς ἡγεμονίης , ἀρχαιότατον μὲν ἔθνος παρεχόμενοι , μοῦνοι δὲ ἐόντες οὐ μετανάσται Ἑλλήνων ·
It would be for nothing, then, that we possess the greatest number of seafaring men in Hellas, if we Athenians yield our command to Syracusans,


7.161.3
8023
τῶν καὶ Ὅμηρος ὁ ἐποποιὸς ἄνδρα ἄριστον ἔφησε ἐς Ἴλιον ἀπικέσθαι τάξαι τε καὶ διακοσμῆσαι στρατόν .
— we who can demonstrate the longest lineage of all and who alone among the Greeks have never changed our place of habitation; of our stock too was the man of whom the poet Homer says that of all who came to Ilion, he was the best man in ordering and marshalling armies.


7.161.3
8024
οὕτω οὐκ ὄνειδος οὐδὲν ἡμῖν ἐστι λέγειν ταῦτα " .
We accordingly cannot be reproached for what we now say.”


7.162.1
8025
ἀμείβετο Γέλων τοῖσιδε .
“My Athenian friend,” Gelon answered,


7.162.1
8026
" ξεῖνε Ἀθηναῖε , ὑμεῖς οἴκατε τοὺς μὲν ἄρχοντας ἔχειν , τοὺς δὲ ἀρξομένους οὐκ ἕξειν .
“it would seem that you have many who lead, but none who will follow.


7.162.1
8027
ἐπεὶ τοίνυν οὐδὲν ὑπιέντες ἔχειν τὸ πᾶν ἐθέλετε , οὐκ ἂν φθάνοιτε τὴν ταχίστην ὀπίσω ἀπαλλασσόμενοι καὶ ἀγγέλλοντες τῇ Ἑλλάδι ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ τὸ ἔαρ αὐτῇ ἐξαραίρηται " .
Since, then, you will waive no claim but must have the whole, it is high time that you hasten home and tell your Hellas that her year has lost its spring.”


7.162.2
8028
οὗτος δὲ ὁ νόος τοῦ ῥήματος τὸ ἐθέλει λέγειν ·
The significance of this statement was that Gelon's army was the most notable part of the Greek army,


7.162.2
8029
δῆλα γὰρ ὡς ἐν τῷ ἐνιαυτῷ ἐστὶ τὸ ἔαρ δοκιμώτατον , τῆς δὲ τῶν Ἑλλήνων στρατιῆς τὴν ἑωυτοῦ στρατιήν ·
just as the spring is the best part of the year.


7.162.2
8030
στερισκομένην ὦν τὴν Ἑλλάδα τῆς ἑωυτοῦ συμμαχίης εἴκαζε ὡς εἰ τὸ ἔαρ ἐκ τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ ἐξαραιρημένον εἴη .
He accordingly compared Hellas deprived of alliance with him to a year bereft of its spring.


7.163.1
8031
οἱ μὲν δὴ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἄγγελοι τοιαῦτα τῷ Γέλωνι χρηματισάμενοι ἀπέπλεον ·
After such dealings with Gelon the Greek envoys sailed away.


7.163.1
8032
Γέλων δὲ πρὸς ταῦτα δείσας μὲν περὶ τοῖσι Ἕλλησι μὴ οὐ δύνωνται τὸν βάρβαρον ὑπερβαλέσθαι , δεινὸν δὲ καὶ οὐκ ἀνασχετὸν ποιησάμενος ἐλθὼν ἐς Πελοπόννησον ἄρχεσθαι ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων ἐὼν Σικελίης τύραννος , ταύτην μὲν τὴν ὁδὸν ἠμέλησε , ὁ δὲ ἄλλης εἴχετο .
Gelon, however, feared that the Greeks would not be able to overcome the barbarian, while believing it dreadful and intolerable that he, the tyrant of Sicily, should go to the Peloponnese to be at the beck and call of Lacedaemonians. For this reason he took no more thought of this plan but followed another instead.


7.163.2
8033
ἐπείτε γὰρ τάχιστα ἐπύθετο τὸν Πέρσην διαβεβηκότα τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον , πέμπει πεντηκοντέροισι τρισὶ Κάδμον τὸν Σκύθεω ἄνδρα Κῷον ἐς Δελφούς , ἔχοντα χρήματα πολλὰ καὶ φιλίους λόγους , καραδοκήσοντα τὴν μάχην τῇ πεσέεται , καὶ ἢν μὲν ὁ βάρβαρος νικᾷ , τά τε χρήματα αὐτῷ διδόναι καὶ γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ τῶν ἄρχει ὁ Γέλων , ἢν δὲ οἱ Ἕλληνες , ὀπίσω ἀπάγειν .
As soon as he was informed that the Persian had crossed the  Hellespont, he sent Cadmus son of Scythes, a man of  Cos, to  Delphi with three fifty-oared ships, bringing them money and messages of friendship. Cadmus was to observe the outcome of the battle, and if the barbarian should be victorious, he was to give him both the money, and earth and water on behalf of Gelon's dominions. If, however, the Greeks were victorious, he was to bring everything back again.


7.164.1
8034
ὁ δὲ Κάδυος οὗτος πρότερον τούτων παραδεξάμενος παρὰ πατρὸς τυραννίδα Κῴων εὖ βεβηκυῖαν , ἑκών τε εἶναι καὶ δεινοῦ ἐπιόντος οὐδενὸς ἀλλὰ ὑπὸ δικαιοσύνης ἐς μέσον Κῴοισι καταθεὶς τὴν ἀρχὴν οἴχετο ἐς Σικελίην , ἔνθα παρὰ Σαμίων ἔσχε τε καὶ κατοίκησε πόλιν Ζάγκλην τὴν ἐς Μεσσήνην μεταβαλοῦσαν τὸ οὔνομα .
This Cadmus had previously inherited from his father the tyranny of Cos. Although the tyranny was well established, he nevertheless handed the government over to the whole body of Coans of his own free will. This he did under no constraint of danger, but out of a sense of justice, and he then went to  Sicily, where he was given by the Samians the city of  Zancle which he colonized and changed its name to  Messene.


7.164.2
8035
τοῦτον δὴ ὁ Γέλων τὸν Κάδμον καὶ τοιούτῳ τρόπῳ ἀπικόμενον διὰ δικαιοσύνην , τήν οἱ αὐτὸς ἄλλην συνῄδεε ἐοῦσαν , ἔπεμπε ·
This is how Cadmus had come, and it was he whom Gelon now sent because of his sense of justice.


7.164.2
8036
ὃς ἐπὶ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι δικαίοισι τοῖσι ἐξ ἑωυτοῦ ἐργασμένοισι καὶ τόδε οὐκ ἐλάχιστον τούτων ἐλίπετο .
What I will now relate was not the least of the many just acts of Cadmus' life; he had in his possession great wealth entrusted to him by Gelon and might have kept it.


7.164.2
8037
κρατήσας γὰρ μεγάλων χρημάτων τῶν οἱ Γέλων ἐπετράπετο , παρεὸν κατασχέσθαι οὐκ ἠθέλησε , ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐπεκράτησαν τῇ ναυμαχίῃ καὶ Ξέρξης οἰχώκεε ἀπελαύνων , καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐκεῖνος ἀπίκετο ἐς τὴν Σικελίην ἀπὸ πάντα τὰ χρήματα ἄγων .
He nevertheless would not do so, but when the Greeks had prevailed in the sea-fight and Xerxes had headed home, Cadmus returned to Sicily with all that money.


7.165.1
8038
λέγεται δὲ καὶ τάδε ὑπὸ τῶν ἐν τῇ Σικελίῃ οἰκημένων , ὡς ὅμως καὶ μέλλων ἄρχεσθαι ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων ὁ Γέλων ἐβοήθησε ἂν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι , εἰ μὴ ὑπὸ Θήρωνος τοῦ Αἰνησιδήμου Ἀκραγαντίνων μουνάρχου ἐξελασθεὶς ἐξ Ἱμέρης Τήριλλος ὁ Κρινίππου τύραννος ἐὼν Ἱμέρης ἐπῆγε ὑπ’ αὐτὸν τὸν χρόνον τοῦτον Φοινίκων καὶ Λιβύων καὶ Ἰβήρων καὶ Λιγύων καὶ Ἐλισύκων καὶ Σαρδονίων καὶ Κυρνίων τριήκοντα μυριάδας καὶ στρατηγὸν αὐτῶν Ἀμίλκαν τὸν Ἄννωνος , Καρχηδονίων ἐόντα βασιλέα , κατὰ ξεινίην τε τὴν ἑωυτοῦ ὁ Τήριλλος ἀναγνώσας καὶ μάλιστα διὰ τὴν Ἀναξίλεω τοῦ Κρητίνεω προθυμίην , ὃς Ῥηγίου ἐὼν τύραννος τὰ ἑωυτοῦ τέκνα δοὺς ὁμήρους Ἀμίλκᾳ ἐπῆγε ἐπὶ τὴν Σικελίην τιμωρέων τῷ πενθερῷ ·
There is, however, another story told by the Sicilians: even though he was to be under Lacedaemonian authority, Gelon would still have aided the Greeks had it not been for Terillus son of Crinippus, the tyrant of Himera. This man, who had been expelled from Himera by Theron son of Aenesidemus, sovereign ruler of Acragas, at this very time brought against Gelon three hundred thousand Phoenicians, Libyans, Iberians, Ligyes, Elisyci, Sardinians, and Cyrnians, led by Amilcas son of Annon, the king of the Carchedonians. Terillus had induced him to do this partly through the prerogative of personal friendship, but mainly through the efforts of Anaxilaus son of Cretines, tyrant of Rhegium. He had handed over his own children as hostages to Amilcas, and brought him into Sicily to the help of his father-in-law; for Anaxilaus had as his wife Terillus' daughter Cydippe. Accordingly Gelon sent the money to Delphi, because he could not aid the Greeks.


7.165.1
8039
Τηρίλλου γὰρ εἶχε θυγατέρα Ἀναξίλεως , τῇ οὔνομα ἦν Κυδίππη .
Terillus had induced him to do this partly through the prerogative of personal friendship, but mainly through the efforts of Anaxilaus son of Cretines, tyrant of Rhegium.


7.165.1
8040
οὕτω δὴ οὐκ οἷόν τε γενόμενον βοηθέειν τὸν Γέλωνα τοῖσι Ἕλλησι ἀποπέμπειν ἐς Δελφοὺς τὰ χρήματα .
Accordingly Gelon sent the money to Delphi, because he could not aid the Greeks.


7.166.1
8041
πρὸς δὲ καὶ τάδε λέγουσι , ὡς συνέβη τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρης ἔν τε τῇ Σικελίῃ Γέλωνα καὶ Θήρωνα νικᾶν Ἀμίλκαν τὸν Καρχηδόνιον καὶ ἐν Σαλαμῖνι τοὺς Ἕλληνας τὸν Πέρσην .
They add this tale too — that Gelon and Theron won a victory over Amilcas the Carchedonian in Sicily on the same day that the Greeks defeated the Persian at Salamis.


7.166.1
8042
τὸν δὲ Ἀμίλκαν Καρχηδόνιον ἐόντα πρὸς πατρός , μητρόθεν δὲ Συρηκόσιον , βασιλεύσαντά τε κατ’ ἀνδραγαθίην Καρχηδονίων , ὡς ἡ συμβολή τε ἐγίνετο καὶ ὡς ἑσσοῦτο τῇ μάχῃ , ἀφανισθῆναι πυνθάνομαι ·
This Amilcas was, on his father's side, a Carchedonian, and a Syracusan on his mother's and had been made king of Carchedon for his virtue. When the armies met and he was defeated in the battle, it is said that he vanished from sight, for Gelon looked for him everywhere but was not able to find him anywhere on earth, dead or alive.


7.166.1
8043
οὔτε γὰρ ζῶντα οὔτε ἀποθανόντα φανῆναι οὐδαμοῦ γῆς ·
It is said that he vanished from sight, for Gelon looked for him everywhere but was not able to find him anywhere on earth, dead or alive.


7.166.1
8044
τὸ πᾶν γὰρ ἐπεξελθεῖν διζήμενον Γέλωνα .
The whole of Carthage went into mourning and search for him, but he was not found either living or dead.


7.167.1
8045
ἔστι δὲ ὑπ’ αὐτῶν Καρχηδονίων ὅδε λόγος λεγόμενος , οἰκότι χρεωμένων , ὡς οἱ μὲν βάρβαροι τοῖσι Ἕλλησι ἐν τῇ Σικελίῃ ἐμάχοντο ἐξ ἠοῦς ἀρξάμενοι μέχρι δείλης ὀψίης ( ἐπὶ τοσοῦτο γὰρ λέγεται ἑλκύσαι τὴν σύστασιν ) , ὁ δὲ Ἀμίλκας ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ μένων ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ ἐθύετο καὶ ἐκαλλιερέετο ἐπὶ πυρῆς μεγάλης σώματα ὅλα καταγίζων , ἰδὼν δὲ τροπὴν τῶν ἑωυτοῦ γινομένην , ὡς ἔτυχε ἐπισπένδων τοῖσι ἱροῖσι , ὦσε ἑωυτὸν ἐς τὸ πῦρ ·
The story told by the Carchedonians themselves seems to have some element of truth. They say that the barbarians fought with the Greeks in Sicily from dawn until late evening (so long, it is said, the battle was drawn out), during which time Amilcas stayed in his camp offering sacrifice and striving to obtain favorable omens by burning whole bodies on a great pyre. When he saw his army routed, he cast himself into the fire where he was pouring libations on the sacrifice; he was consumed by this and was not seen any more.


7.167.1
8046
οὕτω δὴ κατακαυθέντα ἀφανισθῆναι .
When he saw his army routed, he cast himself into the fire where he was pouring libations on the sacrifice; he was consumed by this and was not seen any more.


7.167.2
8047
ἀφανισθέντι δὲ Ἀμίλκᾳ τρόπῳ εἴτε τοιούτῳ ὡς Φοίνικες λέγουσι , εἴτε ἑτέρῳ ὡς Καρχηδόνιοι καὶ Συρηκόσιοι ,τοῦτο μέν οἱ θύουσι , τοῦτο δὲ μνήματα ἐποίησαν ἐν πάσῃσι τῇσι πόλισι τῶν ἀποικίδων , ἐν αὐτῇ τε μέγιστον Καρχηδόνι .
Whether he vanished as the Phoenicians say, or in the manner related by the Carchedonians and Syracusans, sacrifice is offered to him, and monuments have been set up in all the colonists' cities, the greatest of which is in Carchedon itself.


7.168.1
8048
τὰ μὲν ἀπὸ Σικελίης τοσαῦτα .
This is how the campaign in Sicily fell out.


7.168.1
8049
Κερκυραῖοι δὲ τάδε ὑποκρινάμενοι τοῖσι ἀγγέλοισι τοιάδε ἐποίησαν ·
As for the Corcyraeans, their answer to the envoys and their acts were as I will show.


7.168.1
8050
καὶ γὰρ τούτους παρελάμβανον οἱ αὐτοὶ οἵ περ ἐς Σικελίην ἀπίκοντο , λέγοντες τοὺς αὐτοὺς λόγους τοὺς καὶ πρὸς Γέλωνα ἔλεγον .
The men who had gone to Sicily sought their aid too, using the same arguments which they had used with Gelon.


7.168.1
8051
οἳ δὲ παραυτίκα μὲν ὑπίσχοντο πέμψειν τε καὶ ἀμυνέειν , φράζοντες ὡς οὔ σφι περιοπτέη ἐστὶ ἡ Ἑλλὰς ἀπολλυμένη ·
The Corcyraeans straightaway promised to send help and protection, declaring that they would not allow Hellas to perish,


7.168.1
8052
ἢν γὰρ σφαλῇ , σφεῖς γε οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ δουλεύσουσι τῇ πρώτῃ τῶν ἡμερέων ·
for if she should fall, the very next day would certainly see them also enslaved.


7.168.1
8053
ἀλλὰ τιμωρητέον εἴη ἐς τὸ δυνατώτατον .
They would accordingly have to help to the best of their ability.


7.168.2
8054
ὑπεκρίναντο μὲν οὕτω εὐπρόσωπα ·
Now this answer seemed fair enough,


7.168.2
8055
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἔδει βοηθέειν , ἄλλα νοέοντες ἐπλήρωσαν νέας ἑξήκοντα , μόγις δὲ ἀναχθέντες προσέμιξαν τῇ Πελοποννήσῳ , καὶ περὶ Πύλον καὶ Ταίναρον γῆς τῆς Λακεδαιμονίων ἀνεκώχευον τὰς νέας , καραδοκέοντες καὶ οὗτοι τὸν πόλεμον τῇ πεσέεται , ἀελπτέοντες μὲν τοὺς Ἕλληνας ὑπερβαλέεσθαι , δοκέοντες δὲ τὸν Πέρσην κατακρατήσαντα πολλὸν ἄρξειν πάσης τῆς Ἑλλάδος .
but when the time came for sending help, their minds changed. They manned sixty ships and put out to sea, making for the coast of the Peloponnese. There, however, they anchored off Pylos and Taenarus in the Lacedaemonian territory, waiting like the others to see which way the war should incline. They had no hope that the Greeks would prevail, but thought that the Persian would win a great victory and be lord of all Hellas. They manned sixty ships and put out to sea, making for the coast of the Peloponnese. There, however, they anchored off Pylos and Taenarus in the Lacedaemonian territory, waiting like the others to see which way the war should incline. They had no hope that the Greeks would prevail, but thought that the Persian would win a great victory and be lord of all Hellas.


7.168.3
8056
ἐποίευν ὦν ἐπίτηδες , ἵνα ἔχωσι πρὸς τὸν Πέρσην λέγειν τοιάδε .
Their course of action, therefore, had been planned with a view to being able to say to the Persian,


7.168.3
8057
" ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἡμεῖς , παραλαμβανόντων τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡμέας ἐς τὸν πόλεμον τοῦτον , ἔχοντες δύναμιν οὐκ ἐλαχίστην οὐδὲ νέας ἐλαχίστας παρασχόντες ἂν ἀλλὰ πλείστας μετά γε Ἀθηναίους , οὐκ ἠθελήσαμέν τοι ἐναντιοῦσθαι οὐδέ τι ἀποθύμιον ποιῆσαι " .
“O king, we whose power is as great as any and who could have furnished as many ships as any state save Athens, — we, when the Greeks attempted to gain our aid in this war, would not resist you nor do anything displeasing to you.”


7.168.3
8058
τοιαῦτα λέγοντες ἤλπιζον πλέον τι τῶν ἄλλων οἴσεσθαι ·
This plea, they hoped, would win them some advantage more than ordinary; and so, I believe, it would have been.


7.168.3
8059
τά περ ἂν καὶ ἐγένετο , ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέει .
They had no hope that the Greeks would prevail, but thought that the Persian would win a great victory and be lord of all Hellas.


7.168.4
8060
πρὸς δὲ τοὺς Ἕλληνάς σφι σκῆψις ἐπεποίητο , τῇ περ δὴ καὶ ἐχρήσαντο .
They were, however, also ready with an excuse which they could make to the Greeks, and in the end they made it;


7.168.4
8061
αἰτιωμένων γὰρ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὅτι οὐκ ἐβοήθεον , ἔφασαν πληρῶσαι μὲν ἑξήκοντα τριήρεας , ὑπὸ δὲ ἐτησιέων ἀνέμων ὑπερβαλεῖν Μαλέην οὐκ οἷοί τε γενέσθαι ·
when the Greeks blamed them for sending no help, they said that they had manned sixty triremes, but that they could not round Malea because of the Etesian winds.


7.168.4
8062
οὕτω οὐκ ἀπικέσθαι ἐς Σαλαμῖνα , καὶ οὐδεμιῇ κακότητι λειφθῆναι τῆς ναυμαχίης .
It was for this reason, they said, that they could not arrive at Salamis; it was not cowardliness which made them late for the sea-fight.


7.169.1
8063
οὗτοι μὲν οὕτω διεκρούσαντο τοὺς Ἕλληνας .
With such a plea they put the Greeks off.


7.169.1
8064
Κρῆτες δέ , ἐπείτε σφέας παρελάμβανον οἱ ἐπὶ τούτοισι ταχθέντες Ἑλλήνων , ἐποίησαν τοιόνδε ·
But the Cretans, when the Greeks appointed to deal with them were trying to gain their aid, acted as I will show.


7.169.1
8065
πέμψαντες κοινῇ θεοπρόπους ἐς Δελφοὺς τὸν θεὸν ἐπειρώτων εἴ σφι ἄμεινον τιμωρέουσι γίνεται τῇ Ἑλλάδι .
They sent messengers to Delphi, inquiring if it would be to their advantage to help the Greeks.


7.169.2
8066
ἡ δὲ Πυθίη ὑπεκρίνατο " ὦ νήπιοι , ἐπιμέμφεσθε ὅσα ὑμῖν ἐκ τῶν Μενελάου τιμωρημάτων Μίνως ἔπεμψε μηνίων δακρύματα , ὅτι οἳ μὲν οὐ συνεξεπρήξαντο αὐτῷ τὸν ἐν Καμικῷ θάνατον γενόμενον , ὑμεῖς δὲ ἐκείνοισι τὴν ἐκ Σπάρτης ἁρπασθεῖσαν ὑπ’ ἀνδρὸς βαρβάρου γυναῖκα " .
The Pythia answered them, “Foolish men, was not the grief enough which Minos sent upon your people for the help given to Menelaus, out of anger that those others would not help to avenge his death at Camicus,


7.169.2
8067
ταῦτα οἱ Κρῆτες ὡς ἀπενειχθέντα ἤκουσαν , ἔσχοντο τῆς τιμωρίης .
while you helped them to avenge the stealing of that woman from Sparta by a barbarian?” When this was brought to the ears of the Cretans, they would have nothing to do with aiding the Greeks.


7.170.1
8068
λέγεται γὰρ Μίνων κατὰ ζήτησιν Δαιδάλου ἀπικόμενον ἐς Σικανίην τὴν νῦν Σικελίην καλευμένην ἀποθανεῖν βιαίῳ θανάτῳ .
Now Minos, it is said, went to Sicania, which is now called Sicily, in search for Daedalus, and perished there by a violent death.


7.170.1
8069
ἀνὰ δὲ χρόνον Κρῆτας , θεοῦ σφι ἐποτρύναντος , πάντας πλὴν Πολιχνιτέων τε καὶ Πραισίων ἀπικομένους στόλῳ μεγάλῳ ἐς Σικανίην πολιορκέειν ἐπ’ ἔτεα πέντε πόλιν Καμικόν , τὴν κατ’ ἐμὲ Ἀκραγαντῖνοι ἐνέμοντο ·
Presently all the Cretans except the men of Polichne and Praesus were bidden by a god to go with a great host to Sicania. Here they besieged the town of Camicus, where in my day the men of Acragas dwelt, for five years.


7.170.2
8070
τέλος δὲ οὐ δυναμένους οὔτε ἑλεῖν οὔτε παραμένειν λιμῷ συνεστεῶτας , ἀπολιπόντας οἴχεσθαι .
Presently, since they could neither take it nor remain there because of the famine which afflicted them, they departed.


7.170.2
8071
ὡς δὲ κατὰ Ἰηπυγίην γενέσθαι πλέοντας , ὑπολαβόντα σφέας χειμῶνα μέγαν ἐκβαλεῖν ἐς τὴν γῆν ·
However, when they were at sea off Iapygia, a great storm caught and drove them ashore.


7.170.2
8072
συναραχθέντων δὲ τῶν πλοίων , οὐδεμίαν γάρ σφι ἔτι κομιδὴν ἐς Κρήτην φαίνεσθαι , ἐνθαῦτα Ὑρίην πόλιν κτίσαντας καταμεῖναί τε καὶ μεταβαλόντας ἀντὶ μὲν Κρητῶν γενέσθαι Ἰήπυγας Μεσσαπίους , ἀντὶ δὲ εἶναι νησιώτας ἠπειρώτας .
Because their ships had been wrecked and there was no way left of returning to Crete, they founded there the town of Hyria, and made this their dwelling place, accordingly changing from Cretans to Messapians of Iapygia, and from islanders to dwellers on the mainland.


7.170.3
8073
ἀπὸ δὲ Ὑρίης πόλιος τὰς ἄλλας οἰκίσαι , τὰς δὴ Ταραντῖνοι χρόνῳ ὕστερον πολλῷ ἐξανιστάντες προσέπταισαν μεγάλως , ὥστε φόνος Ἑλληνικὸς μέγιστος οὗτος δὴ ἐγένετο πάντων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν , αὐτῶν τε Ταραντίνων καὶ Ῥηγίνων , οἳ ὑπὸ Μικύθου τοῦ Χοίρου ἀναγκαζόμενοι τῶν ἀστῶν καὶ ἀπικόμενοι τιμωροὶ Ταραντίνοισι ἀπέθανον τρισχίλιοι οὕτω ·
From Hyria they made settlements in those other towns which a very long time afterwards the Tarentines attempted to destroy, thereby suffering great disaster. The result was that no one has ever heard of so great a slaughter of Greeks as that of the Tarentines and Rhegians; three thousand townsmen of the latter, men who had been coerced by Micythus son of Choerus to come and help the Tarentines, were killed.


7.170.3
8074
αὐτῶν δὲ Ταραντίνων οὐκ ἐπῆν ἀριθμός .
No count was kept of the Tarentine slain.


7.170.4
8075
ὁ δὲ Μίκυθος οἰκέτης ἐὼν Ἀναξίλεω ἐπίτροπος Ῥηγίου καταλέλειπτο , οὗτος ὅς περ ἐκπεσὼν ἐκ Ῥηγίου καὶ Τεγέην τὴν Ἀρκάδων οἰκήσας ἀνέθηκε ἐν Ὀλυμπίῃ τοὺς πολλοὺς ἀνδριάντας .
Micythus was a servant of Anaxilaus and had been left in charge of  Rhegium; it was he who was banished from  Rhegium and settled in  Tegea of  Arcadia, and who set up those many statues at  Olympia.


7.171.1
8076
ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν κατὰ Ῥηγίνους τε καὶ Ταραντίνους τοῦ λόγου μοι παρενθήκη γέγονε ·
In relating the matter of the Rhegians and Tarentines, however, I digress from the main thread of my history.


7.171.1
8077
ἐς δὲ τὴν Κρήτην ἐρημωθεῖσαν , ὡς λέγουσι Πραίσιοι , ἐσοικίζεσθαι ἄλλους τε ἀνθρώπους καὶ μάλιστα Ἕλληνας , τρίτῃ δὲ γενεῇ μετὰ Μίνων τελευτήσαντα γενέσθαι τὰ Τρωικά , ἐν τοῖσι οὐ φλαυροτάτους φαίνεσθαι ἐόντας Κρῆτας τιμωροὺς Μενέλεῳ .
The Praesians say that when Crete was left desolate, it was populated especially by Greeks, among other peoples.


7.171.2
8078
ἀπὸ τούτων δέ σφι ἀπονοστήσασι ἐκ Τροίης λιμόν τε καὶ λοιμὸν γενέσθαι καὶ αὐτοῖσι καὶ τοῖσι προβάτοισι , ἔστε τὸ δεύτερον ἐρημωθείσης Κρήτης μετὰ τῶν ὑπολοίπων τρίτους αὐτὴν νῦν νέμεσθαι Κρῆτας .
Then, in the third generation after Minos, the events surrounding the Trojan War, in which the Cretans bore themselves as bravely as any in the cause of Menelaus, took place.


7.171.2
8079
ἡ μὲν δὴ Πυθίη ὑπομνήσασα ταῦτα ἔσχε βουλομένους τιμωρέειν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι .
After this, when they returned from Troy, they and their flocks and herds were afflicted by famine and pestilence, until Crete was once more left desolate.


7.172.1
8080
Θεσσαλοὶ δὲ ὑπὸ ἀναγκαίης τὸ πρῶτον ἐμήδισαν , ὡς διέδεξαν , ὅτι οὔ σφι ἥνδανε τὰ οἱ Ἀλευάδαι ἐμηχανῶντο .
Then came a third influx of Cretans, and it is they who, with those that were left, now dwell there.


7.172.1
8081
ἐπείτε γὰρ ἐπύθοντο τάχιστα μέλλοντα διαβαίνειν τὸν Πέρσην ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην , πέμπουσι ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν ἀγγέλους ·
It was this that the priestess bade them remember, and so prevented them from aiding the Greeks as they were previously inclined.


7.172.1
8082
ἐν δὲ τῷ Ἰσθμῷ ἦσαν ἁλισμένοι πρόβουλοι τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἀραιρημένοι ἀπὸ τῶν πολίων τῶν τὰ ἀμείνω φρονεουσέων περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
The Thessalians had at first sided with the Persians, not willingly but of necessity.


7.172.2
8083
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ ἐπὶ τούτους τῶν Θεσσαλῶν οἱ ἄγγελοι ἔλεγον ·
This their acts revealed, because they disliked the plans of the Aleuadae; as soon as they heard that the Persian was about to cross over into Europe, they sent messengers to the Isthmus, where men chosen from the cities which were best disposed towards Hellas were assembled in council for the Greek cause.


7.172.2
8084
" Ἄνδρες Ἕλληνες , δεῖ φυλάσσεσθαι τὴν ἐσβολὴν τὴν Ὀλυμπικήν , ἵνα Θεσσαλίη τε καὶ ἡ σύμπασα ᾖ Ἑλλὰς ἐν σκέπῃ τοῦ πολέμου .
To these the Thessalian messengers came and said, “Men of Hellas, the pass of Olympus must be guarded so that Thessaly and all Hellas may be sheltered from the war.


7.172.2
8085
ἡμεῖς μέν νυν ἕτοιμοι εἰμὲν συμφυλάσσειν , πέμπειν δὲ χρὴ καὶ ὑμέας στρατιὴν πολλήν , ὡς , εἰ μὴ πέμψετε , ἐπίστασθε ἡμέας ὁμολογήσειν τῷ Πέρσῃ ·
Now we are ready to guard it with you, but you too must send a great force.


7.172.2
8086
οὐ γάρ τι προκατημένους τοσοῦτο πρὸ τῆς ἄλλης Ἑλλάδος μούνους πρὸ ὑμέων δεῖ ἀπολέσθαι .
If you will not send it, be assured that we will make terms with the Persian, for it is not right that we should be left to stand guard alone and so perish for your sakes.


7.172.3
8087
βοηθέειν δὲ οὐ βουλόμενοι ἀναγκαίην ἡμῖν οὐδεμίαν οἷοί τε ἐστὲ προσφέρειν ·
If you will not send help, there is nothing you can do to constrain us, for no necessity can prevail over lack of ability.


7.172.3
8088
οὐδαμὰ γὰρ ἀδυνασίης ἀνάγκη κρέσσων ἔφυ .
As for us, we will attempt to find some means of deliverance for ourselves.”


7.172.3
8089
ἡμεῖς δὲ πειρησόμεθα αὐτοί τινα σωτηρίην μηχανώμενοι " .
These are the words of the men of Thessaly.


7.173.1
8090
ταῦτα ἔλεγον οἱ Θεσσαλοί .
Thereupon the Greeks resolved that they would send a land army to Thessaly by sea to guard the pass.


7.173.1
8091
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες πρὸς ταῦτα ἐβουλεύσαντο ἐς Θεσσαλίην πέμπειν κατὰ θάλασσαν πεζὸν στρατὸν φυλάξοντα τὴν ἐσβολήν .
When the forces had assembled, they passed through the Euripus and came to Alus in Achaea, where they disembarked and took the road for Thessaly, leaving their ships where they were.


7.173.1
8092
ὡς δὲ συνελέχθη ὁ στρατός , ἔπλεε δι’ Εὐρίπου ·
They then came to the pass of Tempe, which runs from the lower Macedonia into Thessaly along the river Peneus, between the mountains Olympus and Ossa.


7.173.1
8093
ἀπικόμενος δὲ τῆς Ἀχαιίης ἐς Ἄλον , ἀποβὰς ἐπορεύετο ἐς Θεσσαλίην , τὰς νέας αὐτοῦ καταλιπών , καὶ ἀπίκετο ἐς τὰ Τέμπεα ἐς τὴν ἐσβολὴν ἥ περ ἀπὸ Μακεδονίης τῆς κάτω ἐς Θεσσαλίην φέρει παρὰ ποταμὸν Πηνειόν , μεταξὺ δὲ Ὀλύμπου τε ὄρεος ἐόντα καὶ τῆς Ὄσσης .
There the Greeks were encamped, about ten thousand men-at-arms altogether, and the cavalry was there as well.


7.173.2
8094
ἐνθαῦτα ἐστρατοπεδεύοντο τῶν Ἑλλήνων κατὰ μυρίους ὁπλίτας συλλεγέντες , καί σφι προσῆν ἡ Θεσσαλῶν ἵππος ·
The general of the Lacedaemonians was Euaenetus son of Carenus, chosen from among the Polemarchs, yet not of the royal house, and Themistocles son of Neocles was the general of the Athenians.


7.173.2
8095
ἐστρατήγεε δὲ Λακεδαιμονίων μὲν Εὐαίνετος ὁ Καρήνου ἐκ τῶν πολεμάρχων ἀραιρημένος , γένεος μέντοι ἐὼν οὐ τοῦ βασιληίου , Ἀθηναίων δὲ Θεμιστοκλέης ὁ Νεοκλέος .
They remained there for only a few days.


7.173.2
8096
ἔμειναν δὲ ὀλίγας ἡμέρας ἐνθαῦτα ·
For messengers came from Alexander son of Amyntas, the Macedonian.


7.173.3
8097
ἀπικόμενοι γὰρ ἄγγελοι παρὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ Ἀμύντεω ἀνδρὸς Μακεδόνος συνεβούλευόν σφι ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι μηδὲ μένοντας ἐν τῇ ἐσβολῇ καταπατηθῆναι ὑπὸ τοῦ στρατοῦ τοῦ ἐπιόντος , σημαίνοντες τὸ πλῆθός τε τῆς στρατιῆς καὶ τὰς νέας .
These, pointing out the size of the army and the great number of ships, advised them to depart and not remain there to be trodden under foot by the invading host.


7.173.3
8098
ὡς δὲ οὗτοί σφι ταῦτα συνεβούλευον , χρηστὰ γὰρ ἐδόκεον συμβουλεύειν καί σφι εὔνοος ἐφαίνετο ἐὼν ὁ Μακεδών , ἐπείθοντο .
When they had received this advice from the messengers (as they thought their advice was sound and that the Macedonian meant well by them), the Greeks followed their counsel.


7.173.4
8099
δοκέειν δὲ μοι , ἀρρωδίη ἦν τὸ πεῖθον , ὡς ἐπύθοντο καὶ ἄλλην ἐοῦσαν ἐσβολὴν ἐς Θεσσαλοὺς κατὰ τὴν ἄνω Μακεδονίην διὰ Περραιβῶν κατὰ Γόννον πόλιν , τῇ περ δὴ καὶ ἐσέβαλε ἡ στρατιὴ ἡ Ξέρξεω .
To my thinking, however, what persuaded them was fear, since they had found out that there was another pass leading into Thessaly by the hill country of Macedonia through the country of the Perrhaebi, near the town of Gonnus; this was indeed the way by which Xerxes' army descended on Thessaly.


7.173.4
8100
καταβάντες δὲ οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐπὶ τὰς νέας ὀπίσω ἐπορεύοντο ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμόν .
The Greeks accordingly went down to their ships and made their way back to the Isthmus.


7.174.1
8101
αὕτη ἐγένετο ἡ ἐς Θεσσαλίην στρατηίη , βασιλέος τε μέλλοντος διαβαίνειν ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης καὶ ἐόντος ἤδη ἐν Ἀβύδῳ .
This was the course of their expedition into Thessaly, while the king was planning to cross into Europe from Asia and was already at Abydos.


7.174.1
8102
Θεσσαλοὶ δὲ ἐρημωθέντες συμμάχων οὕτω δὴ ἐμήδισαν προθύμως οὐδ’ ἔτι ἐνδοιαστῶς , ὥστε ἐν τοῖσι πρήγμασι ἐφαίνοντο βασιλέι ἄνδρες ἐόντες χρησιμώτατοι .
The Thessalians, now bereft of their allies, sided with the Persian wholeheartedly and unequivocally. As a result of this they, in their acts, proved themselves to be most useful to the king.


7.175.1
8103
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες ἐπείτε ἀπίκατο ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμόν , ἐβουλεύοντο πρὸς τὰ λεχθέντα ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου τῇ τε στήσονται τὸν πόλεμον καὶ ἐν οἵοισι χώροισι .
When they had come to the Isthmus, the Greeks, taking into account what was said by Alexander, deliberated as a body how and where they should stand to fight.


7.175.1
8104
ἡ νικῶσα δὲ γνώμη ἐγίνετο τὴν ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι ἐσβολὴν φυλάξαι ·
It was decided that they should guard the pass of Thermopylae,


7.175.1
8105
στεινοτέρη γὰρ ἐφαίνετο ἐοῦσα τῆς ἐς Θεσσαλίην καὶ ἅμα ἀγχοτέρη τῆς ἑωυτῶν ·
for they saw that it was narrower than the pass into Thessaly and nearer home.


7.175.2
8106
τὴν δὲ ἀτραπόν , δι’ ἣν ἥλωσαν οἱ ἁλόντες Ἑλλήνων ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι , οὐδὲ ᾔδεσαν ἐοῦσαν πρότερον ἤ περ ἀπικόμενοι ἐς Θερμοπύλας ἐπύθοντο Τρηχινίων .
The pass, then, which brought about the fall of those Greeks who fell at Thermopylae, was unknown to them until they came to Thermopylae and learned of it from the men of Trachis.


7.175.2
8107
ταύτην ὦν ἐβουλεύσαντο φυλάσσοντες τὴν ἐσβολὴν μὴ παριέναι ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα τὸν βάρβαρον , τὸν δὲ ναυτικὸν στρατὸν πλέειν γῆς τῆς Ἱστιαιώτιδος ἐπὶ Ἀρτεμίσιον .
This pass they were resolved to guard and so stay the barbarian's passage into Hellas, while their fleet should sail to Artemisium in the territory of Histiaea.


7.175.2
8108
ταῦτα γὰρ ἀγχοῦ τε ἀλλήλων ἐστὶ ὥστε πυνθάνεσθαι τὰ κατὰ ἑκατέρους ἐόντα , οἵ τε χῶροι οὕτω ἔχουσι .
These places are near to each other, and each force could therefore be informed of the other's doings. As for the places themselves, their nature is as follows.


7.176.1
8109
τοῦτο μὲν τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον ·
This is Artemisium:


7.176.1
8110
ἐκ τοῦ πελάγεος τοῦ Θρηικίου ἐξ εὐρέος συνάγεται ἐς στεινὸν ἐόντα τὸν πόρον τὸν μεταξὺ νήσου τε Σκιάθου καὶ ἠπείρου Μαγνησίης ·
 where the wide Thracian sea contracts until the passage between the island of Sciathus and the mainland of Magnesia is but narrow.


7.176.1
8111
ἐκ δὲ τοῦ στεινοῦ τῆς Εὐβοίης ἤδη τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον δέκεται αἰγιαλός , ἐν δὲ Ἀρτέμιδος ἱρόν .
This strait leads next to Artemisium, which is a beach on the coast of Euboea, on which stands a temple of Artemis.


7.176.2
8112
ἡ δὲ αὖ διὰ Τρηχῖνος ἔσοδος ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἐστὶ τῇ στεινοτάτη ἡμίπλεθρον .
The pass through Trachis into Hellas is fifty feet wide at its narrowest point.


7.176.2
8113
οὐ μέντοι κατὰ τοῦτό γε ἐστὶ τὸ στεινότατον τῆς χώρης τῆς ἄλλης , ἀλλ’ ἔμπροσθέ τε Θερμοπυλέων καὶ ὄπισθε , κατὰ τε Ἀλπηνοὺς ὄπισθε ἐόντας ἐοῦσα ἁμαξιτὸς μούνη , καὶ ἔμπροσθε κατὰ Φοίνικα ποταμὸν ἀγχοῦ Ἀνθήλης πόλιος ἄλλη ἁμαξιτὸς μούνη .
It is not here, however, but elsewhere that the way is narrowest, namely, in front of Thermopylae and behind it; at Alpeni, which lies behind, it is only the breadth of a cart-way, and it is the same at the Phoenix stream, near the town of Anthele.


7.176.3
8114
τῶν δὲ Θερμοπυλέων τὸ μὲν πρὸς ἑσπέρης ὄρος ἄβατόν τε καὶ ἀπόκρημνον , ὑψηλόν , ἀνατεῖνον ἐς τὴν Οἴτην ·
To the west of Thermopylae rises a high mountain, inaccessible and precipitous, a spur of Oeta;


7.176.3
8115
τὸ δὲ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ τῆς ὁδοῦ θάλασσα ὑποδέκεται καὶ τενάγεα .
to the east of the road there is nothing but marshes and sea.


7.176.3
8116
ἔστι δὲ ἐν τῇ ἐσόδῳ ταύτῃ θερμὰ λουτρά , τὰ Χύτρους καλέουσι οἱ ἐπιχώριοι , καὶ βωμὸς ἵδρυται Ἡρακλέος ἐπ’ αὐτοῖσι .
In this pass are warm springs for bathing, called the Basins by the people of the country, and an altar of Heracles stands nearby.


7.176.3
8117
ἐδέδμητο δὲ τεῖχος κατὰ ταύτας τὰς ἐσβολάς , καὶ τό γε παλαιὸν πύλαι ἐπῆσαν .
Across this entry a wall had been built, and formerly there was a gate in it.


7.176.4
8118
ἔδειμαν δὲ Φωκέες τὸ τεῖχος δείσαντες , ἐπεὶ Θεσσαλοὶ ἦλθον ἐκ Θεσπρωτῶν οἰκήσοντες γῆν τὴν Αἰολίδα τήν νῦν ἐκτέαται .
It was the Phocians who built it for fear of the Thessalians when these came from Thesprotia to dwell in the Aeolian land, the region which they now possess.


7.176.4
8119
ἅτε δὴ πειρωμένων τῶν Θεσσαλῶν καταστρέφεσθαι σφέας , τοῦτο προεφυλάξαντο οἱ Φωκέες , καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ τὸ θερμὸν τότε ἐπῆκαν ἐπὶ τὴν ἔσοδον , ὡς ἂν χαραδρωθείη ὁ χῶρος , πᾶν μηχανώμενοι ὅκως μή σφι ἐσβάλοιεν οἱ Θεσσαλοὶ ἐπὶ τὴν χώρην .
Since the Thessalians were trying to subdue them, the Phocians made this their protection, and in their search for every means to keep the Thessalians from invading their country, they then turned the stream from the hot springs into the pass, so that it might be a watercourse.


7.176.5
8120
τὸ μέν νυν τεῖχος τὸ ἀρχαῖον ἐκ παλαιοῦ τε ἐδέδμητο καὶ τὸ πλέον αὐτοῦ ἤδη ὑπὸ χρόνου ἔκειτο ·
The ancient wall had been built long ago and most of it lay in ruins;


7.176.5
8121
τοῖσι δὲ αὖτις ὀρθώσασι ἔδοξε ταύτῃ ἀπαμύνειν ἀπὸ τῆς Ἑλλάδος τὸν βάρβαρον .
those who built it up again thought that they would in this way bar the foreigner's way into Hellas.


7.176.5
8122
κώμη δὲ ἐστὶ ἀγχοτάτω τῆς ὁδοῦ Ἀλπηνοὶ οὔνομα ·
Very near the road is a village called Alpeni,


7.176.5
8123
ἐκ ταύτης δὲ ἐπισιτιεῖσθαι ἐλογίζοντο οἱ Ἕλληνες .
and it is from here that the Greeks expected to obtain provisions.


7.177.1
8124
οἱ μέν νυν χῶροι οὗτοι τοῖσι Ἕλλησι εἶναι ἐφαίνοντο ἐπιτήδεοι ·
These places, then, were thought by the Greeks to suit their purpose.


7.177.1
8125
πάντα γὰρ προσκεψάμενοι καὶ ἐπιλογισθέντες ὅτι οὔτε πλήθεϊ ἕξουσι χρᾶσθαι οἱ βάρβαροι οὔτε ἵππῳ , ταύτῃ σφι ἔδοξε δέκεσθαι τὸν ἐπιόντα ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
After making a thorough survey, they concluded that the barbarians could not make use of their entire army, nor of their horsemen.


7.177.1
8126
ὡς δὲ ἐπύθοντο τὸν Πέρσην ἐόντα ἐν Πιερίῃ , διαλυθέντες ἐκ τοῦ Ἰσθμοῦ ἐστρατεύοντο αὐτῶν οἳ μὲν ἐς Θερμοπύλας πεζῇ , ἄλλοι δὲ κατὰ θάλασσαν ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμίσιον .
They therefore resolved, that they would meet the invader of Hellas here. Then, when they heard that the Persian was in Pieria, they broke up from the Isthmus and set out with their army to Thermopylae and with their fleet to Artemisium.


7.178.1
8127
οἱ μὲν δὴ Ἕλληνες κατὰ τάχος ἐβοήθεον διαταχθέντες , Δελφοὶ δ’ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ ἐχρηστηριάζοντο τῷ θεῷ ὑπὲρ ἑωυτῶν καὶ τῆς Ἑλλάδος καταρρωδηκότες , καί σφι ἐχρήσθη ἀνέμοισι εὔχεσθαι ·
So with all speed the Greeks went their several ways to meet the enemy.


7.178.1
8128
μεγάλους γὰρ τούτους ἔσεσθαι τῇ Ἑλλάδι συμμάχους .
In the meantime, the Delphians, who were afraid for themselves and for Hellas, consulted the god. They were advised to pray to the winds, for these would be potent allies for Hellas.


7.178.2
8129
Δελφοὶ δὲ δεξάμενοι τὸ μαντήιον πρῶτα μὲν Ἑλλήνων τοῖσι βουλομένοισι εἶναι ἐλευθέροισι ἐξήγγειλαν τὰ χρησθέντα αὐτοῖσι , καί σφι δεινῶς καταρρωδέουσι τὸν βάρβαρον ἐξαγγείλαντες χάριν ἀθάνατον κατέθεντο .
When they had received the oracle, the Delphians first sent word of it to those Greeks who desired to be free; because of their dread of the barbarian, they were forever grateful.


7.178.2
8130
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Δελφοὶ τοῖσι ἀνέμοισι βωμόν τε ἀπέδεξαν ἐν Θυίῃ , τῇ περ τῆς Κηφισοῦ θυγατρὸς Θυίης τὸ τέμενος ἐστί , ἐπ’ ἧς καὶ ὁ χῶρος οὗτος τὴν ἐπωνυμίην ἔχει , καὶ θυσίῃσι σφέας μετήισαν .
Subsequently they erected an altar to the winds at Thyia, the present location of the precinct of Thyia the daughter of Cephisus, and they offered sacrifices to them. This, then, is the reason why the Delphians to this day offer the winds sacrifice of propitiation.


7.179.1
8131
Δελφοὶ μὲν δὴ κατὰ τὸ χρηστήριον ἔτι καὶ νῦν τοὺς ἀνέμους ἱλάσκονται .
This, then, is the reason why the Delphians to this day offer the winds sacrifice of propitiation.


7.179.1
8132
ὁ δὲ ναυτικὸς Ξέρξεω στρατὸς ὁρμώμενος ἐκ Θέρμης πόλιος παρέβαλε νηυσὶ τῇσι ἄριστα πλεούσῃσι δέκα ἰθὺ Σκιάθου , ἔνθα ἦσαν προφυλάσσουσαι νέες τρεῖς Ἑλληνίδες , Τροιζηνίη τε καὶ Αἰγιναίη καὶ Ἀττική .
Xerxes' fleet, however, set forth from the city of Therma, and the ten swiftest of the ships laid their course straight for Sciathus, where there lay an advance guard of three Greek ships, a Troezenian, an Aeginetan, and an Attic.


7.179.1
8133
προϊδόντες δὲ οὗτοι τὰς νέας τῶν βαρβάρων ἐς φυγὴν ὅρμησαν .
These, when they sighted the foreigners ships, took to flight.


7.180.1
8134
τὴν μὲν δὴ Τροιζηνίην , τῆς ἦρχε Πρηξῖνος , αὐτίκα αἱρέουσι ἐπισπόμενοι οἱ βάρβαροι , καὶ ἔπειτα τῶν ἐπιβατέων αὐτῆς τὸν καλλιστεύοντα ἀγαγόντες ἐπὶ τῆς πρῴρης τῆς νεὸς ἔσφαξαν , διαδέξιον ποιεύμενοι τὸν εἷλον τῶν Ἑλλήνων πρῶτον καὶ κάλλιστον .
The ship of Troezen, of which Prexinus was captain, was pursued and straightway captured by the foreigners,


7.180.1
8135
τῷ δὲ σφαγιασθέντι τούτῳ οὔνομα ἦν Λέων ·
who brought the best of its fighting men and cut his throat on the ship's prow, thinking that the sacrifice of the foremost and fairest of their Greek captives would be auspicious.


7.180.1
8136
τάχα δ’ ἄν τι καὶ τοῦ οὐνόματος ἐπαύροιτο .
The name of the sacrificed man was Leon, and it was perhaps his name that he had to thank for it.


7.181.1
8137
ἡ δὲ Αἰγιναίη , τῆς ἐτριηράρχεε Ἀσωνίδης , καὶ τινά σφι θόρυβον παρέσχε , Πυθέω τοῦ Ἰσχενόου ἐπιβατεύοντος , ἀνδρὸς ἀρίστου γενομένου ταύτην τὴν ἡμέρην ·
The Aeginetan trireme, of which Asonides was captain, did however give them some trouble.


7.181.1
8138
ὃς ἐπειδὴ ἡ νηῦς ἡλίσκετο ἐς τοῦτο ἀντεῖχε μαχόμενος ἐς ὃ κατεκρεουργήθη ἅπας .
On board this ship was Pytheas son of Ischenous, who acted heroically on that day. When his ship had been taken, he would not stop fighting until he had been entirely hacked to mincemeat.


7.181.2
8139
ὡς δὲ πεσὼν οὐκ ἀπέθανε ἀλλ’ ἦν ἔμπνοος , οἱ Πέρσαι , οἵ περ ἐπεβάτευον ἐπὶ τῶν νεῶν , δι’ ἀρετὴν τὴν ἐκείνου περιποιῆσαί μιν περὶ πλείστου ἐποιήσαντο , σμύρνῃσί τε ἰώμενοι τὰ ἕλκεα καὶ σινδόνος βυσσίνης τελαμῶσι κατειλίσσοντες ·
When he finally did fall, he still had life in him, and the Persian soldiers on the ships took great pains to keep him alive for his valor, tending his wounds with ointments and wrapping him in bandages of linen cloth .


7.181.3
8140
καί μιν , ὡς ὀπίσω ἀπίκοντο ἐς τὸ ἑωυτῶν στρατόπεδον , ἐπεδείκνυσαν ἐκπαγλεόμενοι πάσῃ τῇ στρατιῇ περιέποντες εὖ .
Upon returning to their own station, they showed him to the whole host, and made much of him and treated him with kindness.


7.181.3
8141
τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους τοὺς ἔλαβον ἐν τῇ νηὶ ταύτῃ περιεῖπον ὡς ἀνδράποδα .
The rest of those whom they took in that ship, however, they used as slaves.


7.182.1
8142
αἱ μὲν δὴ δύο τῶν νεῶν οὕτω ἐχειρώθησαν ·
Two of the ships, then, were made captive, and the third trireme, of which Phormus an Athenian was captain, ran aground in her flight at the mouth of the Peneus;


7.182.1
8143
ἡ δὲ τρίτη , τῆς ἐτριηράρχεε Φόρμος ἀνὴρ Ἀθηναῖοις , φεύγουσα ἐξοκέλλει ἐς τὰς ἐκβολὰς τοῦ Πηνειοῦ , καὶ τοῦ μὲν σκάφεος ἐκράτησαν οἱ βάρβαροι , τῶν δὲ ἀνδρῶν οὔ ·
the barbarians took her hull but not the crew,


7.182.1
8144
ὡς γὰρ δὴ τάχιστα ἐπώκειλαν τὴν νέα οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , ἀποθορόντες κατὰ Θεσσαλίην πορευόμενοι ἐκομίσθησαν ἐς Ἀθήνας .
for the Athenians, as soon as they had run their craft aground, leapt out and made their way through Thessaly to Athens.


7.183.1
8145
ταῦτα οἱ Ἕλληνες οἱ ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ στρατοπεδευόμενοι πυνθάνονται παρὰ πυρσῶν ἐκ Σκιάθου ·
The Greeks who were stationed at Artemisium were informed of these matters by beacons from Sciathus.


7.183.1
8146
πυθόμενοι δὲ καὶ καταρρωδήσαντες ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἀρτεμισίου μετορμίζοντο ἐς Χαλκίδα , φυλάξοντες μὲν τὸν Εὔριπον , λείποντες δὲ ἡμεροσκόπους περὶ τὰ ὑψηλὰ τῆς Εὐβοίης .
They were frightened by this and accordingly changed their anchorage from Artemisium to Chalcis, proposing to guard the Euripus and leaving watchmen on the heights of Euboea.


7.183.2
8147
τῶν δὲ δέκα νεῶν τῶν βαρβάρων τρεῖς ἐπήλασαν περὶ τὸ ἕρμα τὸ μεταξὺ ἐὸν Σκιάθου τε καὶ Μαγνησίης , καλεόμενον δὲ Μύρμηκα .
Three of the ten barbarian ships ran aground on the reef called the Ant, which lies between Sciathus and Magnesia.


7.183.2
8148
ἐνθαῦτα οἱ βάρβαροι ἐπειδὴ στήλην λίθου ἐπέθηκαν κομίσαντες ἐπὶ τὸ ἕρμα , ὁρμηθέντες αὐτοὶ ἐκ Θέρμης , ὥς σφι τὸ ἐμποδὼν ἐγεγόνεε καθαρόν , ἐπέπλεον πάσῃσι τῇσι νηυσί , ἕνδεκα ἡμέρας παρέντες μετὰ τὴν βασιλέος ἐξέλασιν ἐκ Θέρμης .
The barbarians then brought a pillar of stone and set it on the reef, and when their course was plain before them, the whole fleet set forth and sailed from Therma, eleven days after the king had marched from there.


7.183.3
8149
τὸ δὲ ἕρμα σφι κατηγήσατο ἐὸν ἐν πόρῳ μάλιστα Πάμμων Σκύριος .
It was Pammon of Scyros who showed them where in the strait the reef lay.


7.183.3
8150
πανημερὸν δὲ πλέοντες οἱ βάρβαροι ἐξανύουσι τῆς Μαγνησίης χώρης ἐπὶ Σηπιάδα τε καὶ τὸν αἰγιαλὸν τὸν μεταξὺ Κασθαναίης τε πόλιος ἐόντα καὶ Σηπιάδος ἀκτῆς .
After sailing along all day, the foreign fleet reached Sepias in Magnesia and the beach between the town of Casthanaea and the Sepiad headland.


7.184.1
8151
μέχρι μέν νυν τούτου τοῦ χώρου καὶ Θερμοπυλέων ἀπαθής τε κακῶν ἦν ὁ στρατός , καὶ πλῆθος ἦν τηνικαῦτα ἔτι , ὡς ἐγὼ συμβαλλόμενος εὑρίσκω , τῶν μὲν ἐκ τῶν νεῶν τῶν ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης , ἐουσέων ἑπτὰ καὶ διηκοσιέων καὶ χιλιέων , τὸν μὲν ἀρχαῖον ἑκάστων τῶν ἐθνέων ἐόντα ὅμιλον τέσσερας καὶ εἴκοσι μυριάδας καὶ πρὸς χιλιάδα τε καὶ τετρακοσίους , ὡς ἀνὰ διηκοσίους ἄνδρας λογιζομένοισι ἐν ἑκάστῃ νηί .
Until the whole host reached this place and  Thermopylae it suffered no hurt, and calculation proves to me that its numbers were still such as I will now show. The ships from  Asia were twelve hundred and seven in number, and including the entire host of nations involved, there were a total of two hundred and forty-one thousand and four hundred men, two hundred being reckoned for each ship.


7.184.2
8152
ἐπεβάτευον δὲ ἐπὶ τουτέων τῶν νεῶν , χωρὶς ἑκάστων τῶν ἐπιχωρίων ἐπιβατέων , Περσέων τε καὶ Μήδων καὶ Σακέων τριήκοντα ἄνδρες .
On board all these ships were thirty fighting men of the Persians and Medes and Sacae in addition to the company which each had of native fighters;


7.184.2
8153
οὗτος ἄλλος ὅμιλος γίνεται τρισμύριοι καὶ ἑξακισχίλιοι καὶ πρὸς διηκόσιοί τε καὶ δέκα .
the number of this added contingent is thirty-six thousand, two hundred and ten.


7.184.3
8154
προσθήσω δ’ ἔτι τούτῳ καὶ τῷ προτέρῳ ἀριθμῷ τοὺς ἐκ τῶν πεντηκοντέρων , ποιήσας , ὅ τι πλέον ἦν αὐτῶν ἢ ἔλασσον , ἀν’ ὀγδώκοντα ἄνδρας ἐνεῖναι .
To this and to the first number I add the crews of the ships of fifty oars, calculating eighty men for each, whether there were actually more or fewer.


7.184.3
8155
συνελέχθη δὲ ταῦτα τὰ πλοῖα , ὡς καὶ πρότερον εἰρέθη , τρισχίλια .
Now seeing that, as has already been said, three thousand of these vessels were assembled,


7.184.3
8156
ἤδη ὦν ἄνδρες ἂν εἶεν ἐν αὐτοῖσι τέσσερες μυριάδες καὶ εἴκοσι .
the number of men in them must have been two hundred and forty thousand.


7.184.4
8157
τοῦτο μὲν δὴ τό ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης ναυτικὸν ἦν , σύμπαν ἐὸν πεντήκοντα μυριάδες καὶ μία , χιλιάδες δὲ ἔπεισι ἐπὶ ταύτῃσι ἑπτὰ καὶ πρὸς ἑκατοντάδες ἓξ καὶ δεκάς .
These, then, were the ships' companies from Asia, and the total number of them was five hundred and seventeen thousand, six hundred and ten.


7.184.4
8158
τοῦ δὲ πεζοῦ ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν μυριάδες ἐγένοντο , τῶν δὲ ἱππέων ὀκτὼ μυριάδες .
There were seven hundred thousand and one hundred footsoldiers and eighty thousand cavalrymen;


7.184.4
8159
προσθήσω δ’ ἔτι τούτοισι τὰς καμήλους τοὺς ἐλαύνοντας Ἀραβίους καὶ τοὺς τὰ ἅρματα Λίβυας , πλῆθος ποιήσας δισμυρίους ἄνδρας .
to these I add the Arabian camel-riders and Libyan charioteers, estimating them to have been twenty thousand in number.


7.184.5
8160
καὶ δὴ τό τε ἐκ τῶν νεῶν καὶ τοῦ πεζοῦ πλῆθος συντιθέμενον γίνεται διηκόσιαί τε μυριάδες καὶ τριήκοντα καὶ μία , καὶ πρὸς χιλιάδες ἑπτὰ καὶ ἑκατοντάδες ἓξ καὶ δεκάς .
The forces of sea and land added together would consist of two million, three hundred and seventeen thousand, six hundred and ten men.


7.184.5
8161
τοῦτο μὲν τὸ ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς Ἀσίης στράτευμα ἐξαναχθὲν εἴρηται , ἄνευ τε τῆς θεραπηίης τῆς ἑπομένης καὶ τῶν σιταγωγῶν πλοίων καὶ ὅσοι ἐνέπλεον τούτοισι .
So far I have spoken of the force which came from Asia itself, without the train of servants which followed it and the companies of the grain-bearing craft.


7.185.1
8162
τὸ δὲ δὴ ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης ἀγόμενον στράτευμα ἔτι προσλογιστέα τούτῳ παντὶ τῷ ἐξηριθμημένῳ ·
I must, however, also take into account the force brought from Europe,


7.185.1
8163
δόκησιν δὲ δεῖ λέγειν .
and I will rely on my best judgment in doing so.


7.185.1
8164
νέας μέν νυν οἱ ἀπὸ Θρηίκης Ἕλληνες καὶ οἱ ἐκ τῶν νήσων τῶν ἐπικειμενέων τῇ Θρηίκῃ παρείχοντο εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατόν ·
The Greeks of Thrace and the islands off Thrace furnished one hundred and twenty ships,


7.185.1
8165
ἐκ μέν νυν τουτέων τῶν νεῶν ἄνδρες τετρακισχίλιοι καὶ δισμύριοι γίνονται .
and the companies of these ships must then have consisted of twenty-four thousand men.


7.185.2
8166
πεζοῦ δὲ τὸν Θρήικες παρείχοντο καὶ Παίονες καὶ Ἐορδοὶ καὶ Βοττιαῖοι καὶ τὸ Χαλκιδικὸν γένος καὶ Βρύγοι καὶ Πίερες καὶ Μακεδόνες καὶ Περραιβοὶ καὶ Ἐνιῆνες καὶ Δόλοπες καὶ Μάγνητες καὶ Ἀχαιοὶ καὶ ὅσοι τῆς Θρηίκης τὴν παραλίην νέμονται , τούτων τῶν ἐθνέων τριήκοντα μυριάδας δοκέω γενέσθαι .
As regards the land army supplied by all the nations — Thracians, Paeonians, Eordi, Bottiaei, Chalcidians, Brygi, Pierians, Macedonians, Perrhaebi, Enienes, Dolopes, Magnesians, Achaeans, dwellers on the coast of  Thrace — of all these I suppose the number to have been three hundred thousand.


7.185.3
8167
αὗται ὦν αἱ μυριάδες ἐκείνῃσι προστεθεῖσαι τῇσι ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίης , γίνονται αἱ πᾶσαι ἀνδρῶν αἱ μάχιμοι μυριάδες διηκόσιαι καὶ ἑξήκοντα καὶ τέσσερες , ἔπεισι δὲ ταύτῃσι ἑκατοντάδες ἑκκαίδεκα καὶ δεκάς .
When these numbers are added to the numbers from  Asia, the sum total of fighting men is two million, six hundred and forty-one thousand, six hundred and ten.


7.186.1
8168
τοῦ μαχίμου δὲ τούτου ἐόντος ἀριθμὸν τοσούτου , τὴν θεραπηίην τὴν ἑπομένην τούτοισι καὶ τοὺς ἐν τοῖσι σιταγωγοῖσι ἀκάτοισι ἐόντας καὶ μάλα ἐν τοῖσι ἄλλοισι πλοίοισι τοῖσι ἅμα πλέουσι τῇ στρατιῇ , τούτους τῶν μαχίμων ἀνδρῶν οὐ δοκέω εἶναι ἐλάσσονας ἀλλὰ πλεῦνας .
This then is the number of soldiers. As for the service-train which followed them and the crews of the light corn-bearing vessels and all the other vessels besides which came by sea with the force, these I believe to have been not fewer but more than the fighting men.


7.186.2
8169
καὶ δή σφεας ποιέω ἴσους ἐκείνοισι εἶναι καὶ οὔτε πλεῦνας οὔτε ἐλάσσονας οὐδέν ·
Suppose, however, that they were equal in number, neither more nor fewer.


7.186.2
8170
ἐξισούμενοι δὲ οὗτοι τῷ μαχίμῳ ἐκπληροῦσι τὰς ἴσας μυριάδας ἐκείνοισι .
If they were equal to the fighting contingent, they made up as many tens of thousands as the others.


7.186.2
8171
οὕτω πεντακοσίας τε μυριάδας καὶ εἴκοσι καὶ ὀκτὼ καὶ χιλιάδας τρεῖς καὶ ἑκατοντάδας δύο καὶ δεκάδας δύο ἀνδρῶν ἤγαγε Ξέρξης ὁ Δαρείου μέχρι Σηπιάδος καὶ Θερμοπυλέων .
The number, then, of those whom Xerxes son of Darius led as far as the Sepiad headland and Thermopylae was five million, two hundred and eighty-three thousand, two hundred and twenty.


7.187.1
8172
οὗτος μὲν δὴ τοῦ συνάπαντος τοῦ Ξέρξεω στρατεύματος ἀριθμός , γυναικῶν δὲ σιτοποιῶν καὶ παλλακέων καὶ εὐνούχων οὐδεὶς ἂν εἴποι ἀτρεκέα ἀριθμόν ·
That is the number of Xerxes' whole force.


7.187.1
8173
οὐδ’ αὖ ὑποζυγίων τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων κτηνέων τῶν ἀχθοφόρων καὶ κυνῶν Ἰνδικῶν τῶν ἑπομένων , οὐδ’ ἂν τούτων ὑπὸ πλήθεος οὐδεὶς ἂν εἴποι ἀριθμόν .
No one, however, can say what the exact number of cooking women, and concubines, and eunuchs was, nor can one determine the number of the beasts of draught and burden, and the Indian dogs which accompanied the host; so many of them were there.


7.187.1
8174
ὥστε οὐδέν μοι θῶμα παρίσταται προδοῦναι τὰ ῥέεθρα τῶν ποταμῶν ἔστι ὧν , ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ὅκως τὰ σιτία ἀντέχρησε θῶμά μοι μυριάσι τοσαύτῃσι .
It is accordingly not surprising to me that some of the streams of water ran dry. I do, however, wonder how there were provisions sufficient for so many tens of thousands,


7.187.2
8175
εὑρίσκω γὰρ συμβαλλόμενος , εἰ χοίνικα πυρῶν ἕκαστος τῆς ἡμέρης ἐλάμβανε καὶ μηδὲν πλέον , ἕνδεκα μυριάδας μεδίμνων τελεομένας ἐπ’ ἡμέρῃ ἑκάστῃ καὶ πρὸς τριηκοσίους τε ἄλλους μεδίμνους καὶ τεσσεράκοντα ·
for calculation shows me, that if each man received one choenix of wheat a day and no more, eleven hundred thousand and three hundred and forty bushels would be required every day.


7.187.2
8176
γυναιξὶ δὲ καὶ εὐνούχοισι καὶ ὑποζυγίοισι καὶ κυσὶ οὐ λογίζομαι .
In this calculation I take no account of the provisions for the women, eunuchs, beasts of burden and dogs.


7.187.2
8177
ἀνδρῶν δὲ ἐουσέων τοσουτέων μυριάδων , κάλλεός τε εἵνεκα καὶ μεγάθεος οὐδεὶς αὐτῶν ἀξιονικότερος ἦν αὐτοῦ Ξέρξεω ἔχειν τοῦτο τὸ κράτος .
Of all those tens of thousands of men, there was not one, as regards looks and grandeur, worthier than Xerxes himself to hold that command.


7.188.1
8178
ὁ δὲ δὴ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς ἐπείτε ὁρμηθεὶς ἔπλεε καὶ κατέσχε τῆς Μαγνησίης χώρης ἐς τὸν αἰγιαλὸν τὸν μεταξὺ Κασθαναίης τε πόλιος ἐόντα καὶ Σηπιάδος ἀκτῆς , αἱ μὲν δὴ πρῶται τῶν νεῶν ὅρμεον πρὸς γῇ , ἄλλαι δ’ ἐπ’ ἐκείνῃσι ἐπ’ ἀγκυρέων ·
The Persian fleet put to sea and reached the beach of the Magnesian land, between the city of Casthanaea and the headland of Sepia.


7.188.1
8179
ἅτε γὰρ τοῦ αἰγιαλοῦ ἐόντος οὐ μεγάλου , πρόκροσσαι ὁρμέοντο ἐς πόντον καὶ ἐπὶ ὀκτὼ νέας .
The first ships to arrive moored close to land, with the others after them at anchor; since the beach was not large, they lay at anchor in rows eight ships deep out into the sea.


7.188.2
8180
ταύτην μὲν τὴν εὐφρόνην οὕτω , ἅμα δὲ ὄρθρῳ ἐξ αἰθρίης τε καὶ νηνεμίης τῆς θαλάσσης ζεσάσης ἐπέπεσέ σφι χειμών τε μέγας καὶ πολλὸς ἄνεμος ἀπηλιώτης , τὸν δὴ Ἑλλησποντίην καλέουσι οἱ περὶ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία οἰκημένοι .
They spent the night in this way, but at dawn a storm descended upon them out of a clear and windless sky, and the sea began to boil. A strong east wind blew, which the people living in those parts call Hellespontian.


7.188.3
8181
ὅσοι μέν νυν αὐτῶν αὐξόμενον ἔμαθον τὸν ἄνεμον καὶ τοῖσι οὕτω εἶχε ὅρμου , οἳ δ’ ἔφθησαν τὸν χειμῶνα ἀνασπάσαντες τὰς νέας , καὶ αὐτοί τε περιῆσαν καὶ αἱ νέες αὐτῶν ·
Those who felt the wind rising or had proper mooring dragged their ships up on shore ahead of the storm and so survived with their ships.


7.188.3
8182
ὅσας δὲ τῶν νεῶν μεταρσίας ἔλαβε , τὰς μὲν ἐξέφερε πρὸς Ἴπνους καλεομένους τοὺς ἐν Πηλίῳ , τὰς δὲ ἐς τὸν αἰγιαλόν ·
The wind did, however, carry those ships caught out in the open sea against the rocks called the Ovens at Pelion or onto the beach.


7.188.3
8183
αἳ δὲ περὶ αὐτὴν τὴν Σηπιάδα περιέπιπτον , αἳ δὲ ἐς Μελίβοιαν πόλιν , αἳ δὲ ἐς Κασθαναίην ἐξεβράσσοντο ·
Some ships were wrecked on the Sepian headland, others were cast ashore at the city of Meliboea or at Casthanaea.


7.188.3
8184
ἦν τε τοῦ χειμῶνος χρῆμα ἀφόρητον .
The storm was indeed unbearable.


7.189.1
8185
λέγεται δὲ λόγος ὡς Ἀθηναῖοι τὸν Βορέην ἐκ θεοπροπίου ἐπεκαλέσαντο , ἐλθόντος σφι ἄλλου χρηστηρίου τὸν γαμβρὸν ἐπίκουρον καλέσασθαι .
The story is told that because of an oracle the Athenians invoked Boreas, the north wind, to help them, since another oracle told them to summon their son-in-law as an ally.


7.189.1
8186
Βορέης δὲ κατὰ τὸν Ἑλλήνων λόγον ἔχει γυναῖκα Ἀττικήν , Ὠρειθυίην τὴν Ἐρεχθέος .
According to the Hellenic story, Boreas had an Attic wife, Orithyia, the daughter of Erechtheus, ancient king of Athens.


7.189.2
8187
κατὰ δὴ τὸ κῆδος τοῦτο οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , ὡς φάτις ὅρμηται , συμβαλλόμενοι σφίσι τὸν Βορέην γαμβρὸν εἶναι , ναυλοχέοντες τῆς Εὐβοίης ἐν Χαλκίδι ὡς ἔμαθον αὐξόμενον τὸν χειμῶνα ἢ καὶ πρὸ τούτου , ἐθύοντό τε καὶ ἐπεκαλέοντο τόν τε Βορέην καὶ τὴν Ὠρειθυίην τιμωρῆσαι σφίσι καὶ διαφθεῖραι τῶν βαρβάρων τὰς νέας , ὡς καὶ πρότερον περὶ Ἄθων .
Because of this connection, so the tale goes, the Athenians considered Boreas to be their son-in-law. They were stationed off  Chalcis in  Euboea, and when they saw the storm rising, they then, if they had not already, sacrificed to and called upon Boreas and Orithyia to help them by destroying the barbarian fleet, just as before at  Athos.


7.189.3
8188
εἰ μέν νυν διὰ ταῦτα τοῖσι βαρβάροισι ὁρμέουσι Βορέης ἐπέπεσε , οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν ·
I cannot say whether this was the cause of Boreas falling upon the barbarians as they lay at anchor, but the Athenians say that he had come to their aid before and that he was the agent this time.


7.189.3
8189
οἱ δ’ ὦν Ἀθηναῖοι σφίσι λέγουσι βοηθήσαντα τὸν Βορέην πρότερον καὶ τότε ἐκεῖνα κατεργάσασθαι , καὶ ἱρὸν ἀπελθόντες Βορέω ἱδρύσαντο παρὰ ποταμὸν Ἰλισσόν .
When they went home, they founded a sacred precinct of Boreas beside the Ilissus river.


7.190.1
8190
ἐν τούτῳ τῷ πόνῳ νέας οἳ ἐλαχίστας λέγουσι διαφθαρῆναι τετρακοσιέων οὐκ ἐλάσσονας , ἄνδρας τε ἀναριθμήτους χρημάτων τε πλῆθος ἄφθονον .
They say that at the very least no fewer than 400 ships were destroyed in this labor, along with innumerable men and abundant wealth.


7.190.1
8191
ὥστε Ἀμεινοκλέι τῷ Κρητίνεω ἀνδρὶ Μάγνητι γηοχέοντι περὶ Σηπιάδα μεγάλως ἡ ναυηγίη αὕτη ἐγένετο χρηστή ·
This shipwreck proved useful to Ameinocles son of Cretines, a man of Magnesia who owned land around Sepia,


7.190.1
8192
ὃς πολλὰ μὲν χρύσεα ποτήρια ὑστέρῳ χρόνῳ ἐκβρασσόμενα ἀνείλετο πολλὰ δὲ ἀργύρεα , θησαυρούς τε τῶν Περσέων εὗρε , ἄλλα τε ἄφατα χρήματα περιεβάλετο .
for he later picked up many gold and silver cups cast up on shore, found the Persian treasures, and acquired other untold riches.


7.190.1
8193
ἀλλ’ ὃ μὲν τ- ἄλλα οὐκ εὐτυχέων εὑρήμασι μέγα πλούσιος ἐγένετο ·
Although he became very rich from his findings, he did not enjoy luck in everything,


7.190.1
8194
ἦν γάρ τις καὶ τοῦτον ἄχαρις συμφορὴ λυπεῦσα παιδοφόνος .
for he suffered greatly when his son was murdered.


7.191.1
8195
σιταγωγῶν δὲ ὁλκάδων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων πλοίων διαφθειρομένων οὐκ ἐπῆν ἀριθμός .
There was no counting how many grain-ships and other vessels were destroyed.


7.191.1
8196
ὥστε δείσαντες οἱ στρατηγοὶ τοῦ ναυτικοῦ στρατοῦ μή σφι κεκακωμένοισι ἐπιθέωνται οἱ Θεσσαλοί , ἕρκος ὑψηλὸν ἐκ τῶν ναυηγίων περιεβάλοντο ·
The generals of the fleet were afraid that the Thessalians might attack them now that they had been defeated, so they built a high palisade out of the wreckage.


7.191.2
8197
ἡμέρας γὰρ δὴ ἐχείμαζε τρεῖς .
The storm lasted three days.


7.191.2
8198
τέλος δὲ ἔντομά τε ποιεῦντες καὶ καταείδοντες γόησι οἱ Μάγοι τῷ ἀνέμῳ , πρός τε τούτοισι καὶ τῇ Θέτι καὶ τῇσι Νηρηίσι θύοντες , ἔπαυσαν τετάρτῃ ἡμέρῃ , ἢ ἄλλως κως αὐτὸς ἐθέλων ἐκόπασε .
Finally the Magi made offerings and cast spells upon the wind, sacrificing also to Thetis and the Nereids. In this way, they made the wind stop on the fourth day — or perhaps it died down on its own.


7.191.2
8199
τῇ δὲ Θέτι ἔθυον πυθόμενοι παρὰ τῶν Ἰώνων τὸν λόγον .
They sacrificed to Thetis after hearing from the Ionians the story


7.191.2
8200
ὡς ἐκ τοῦ χώρου τούτου ἁρπασθείη ὑπὸ Πηλέος , εἴη τε ἅπασα ἡ ἀκτὴ ἡ Σηπιὰς ἐκείνης τε καὶ τῶν ἀλλέων Νηρηίδων .
that it was from this place that Peleus had carried her off and that all the headland of Sepia belonged to her and to the other Nereids.


7.192.1
8201
ὃ μὲν δὴ τετάρτῃ ἡμέρῃ ἐπέπαυτο ·
The storm, then, ceased on the fourth day.


7.192.1
8202
τοῖσι δὲ Ἕλλησι οἱ ἡμεροσκόποι ἀπὸ τῶν ἄκρων τῶν Εὐβοϊκῶν καταδραμόντες δευτέρῃ ἡμέρῃ ἀπ’ ἧς ὁ χειμὼν ὁ πρῶτος ἐγένετο , ἐσήμαινον πάντα τὰ γενόμενα περὶ τὴν ναυηγίην .
Now the scouts stationed on the headlands of Euboea ran down and told the Hellenes all about the shipwreck on the second day after the storm began.


7.192.2
8203
οἳ δὲ ὡς ἐπύθοντο , Ποσειδέωνι σωτῆρι εὐξάμενοι καὶ σπονδὰς προχέαντες τὴν ταχίστην ὀπίσω ἠπείγοντο ἐπὶ τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον , ἐλπίσαντες ὀλίγας τινάς σφι ἀντιξόους ἔσεσθαι νέας .
After hearing this they prayed to Poseidon as their savior and poured libations. Then they hurried to  Artemisium hoping to find few ships opposing them. So they came to  Artemisium a second time and made their station there. From that time on they call Poseidon their savior.


7.193.1
8204
οἳ μὲν δὴ τὸ δεύτερον ἐλθόντες περὶ τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον ἐναυλόχεον , Ποσειδέωνος σωτῆρος ἐπωνυμίην ἀπὸ τούτου ἔτι καὶ ἐς τόδε νομίζοντες .
The Greeks, having arrived again at Artemisium, sacrificed to Poseidon the Saviour, giving the place this name which has lasted to the present day.


7.193.1
8205
οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι , ὡς ἐπαύσατό τε ὁ ἄνεμος καὶ τὸ κῦμα ἔστρωτο , κατασπάσαντες τὰς νέας ἔπλεον παρὰ τὴν ἤπειρον , κάμψαντες δὲ τὴν ἄκρην τῆς Μαγνησίης ἰθέαν ἔπλεον ἐς τὸν κόλπον τὸν ἐπὶ Παγασέων φέροντα .
The barbarians, when the wind ceased and the waves no longer ran high, put to sea and coasted along the mainland; they sailed around the headland of Magnesia and sailed straight into the gulf which stretches toward Pagasae.


7.193.2
8206
ἔστι δὲ χῶρος ἐν τῷ κόλπῳ τούτῳ τῆς Μαγνησίης , ἔνθα λέγεται τὸν Ἡρακλέα καταλειφθῆναι ὑπὸ Ἰήσονος τε καὶ τῶν συνεταίρων ἐκ τῆς Ἀργοῦς ἐπ’ ὕδωρ πεμφθέντα , εὖτ’ ἐπὶ τὸ κῶας ἔπλεον ἐς Αἶαν τὴν Κολχίδα ·
There is a place on this gulf in Magnesia, where, it is said, Heracles was sent for water and was left behind by Jason and his comrades of the Argo, when they were sailing to Aea in Colchis for the fleece;


7.193.2
8207
ἐνθεῦτεν γὰρ ἔμελλον ὑδρευσάμενοι ἐς τὸ πέλαγος ἀφήσειν .
their purpose was to draw water from there and then to put out to sea.


7.193.2
8208
ἐπὶ τούτου δὲ τῷ χώρῳ οὔνομα γέγονε Ἀφέται .
This is the reason why that place has been called Aphetae.


7.193.2
8209
ἐν τούτῳ ὦν ὅρμον οἱ Ξέρξεω ἐποιεῦντο .
Here Xerxes' men made their anchorage.


7.194.1
8210
πεντεκαίδεκα δὲ τῶν νεῶν τουτέων ἔτυχόν τε ὕσταται πολλὸν ἐξαναχθεῖσαι καί κως κατεῖδον τὰς ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ τῶν Ἑλλήνων νέας .
Fifteen of those ships had put to sea a long time after all the rest, and it chanced that they sighted the Greek ships off Artemisium.


7.194.1
8211
ἔδοξάν τε δὴ τὰς σφετέρας εἶναι οἱ βάρβαροι καὶ πλέοντες ἐσέπεσον ἐς τοὺς πολεμίους ·
Supposing these to be their own fleet, the barbarians proceeded into the midst of their enemies;


7.194.1
8212
τῶν ἐστρατήγεε ὁ ἀπὸ Κύμης τῆς Αἰολίδος ὕπαρχος Σανδώκης ὁ Θαμασίου τὸν δὴ πρότερον τούτων βασιλεὺς Δαρεῖος ἐπ’ αἰτίῃ τοιῇδε λαβὼν ἀνεσταύρωσε ἐόντα τῶν βασιληίων δικαστέων .
their captain was the viceroy from Cyme in Aeolia, Sandoces son of Thamasius. This man, who was one of the king's judges, had once before been taken and crucified by Darius.


7.194.1
8213
ὁ Σανδώκης ἐπὶ χρήμασι ἄδικον δίκην ἐδίκασε .
Sandoces had given unjust judgment for a bribe.


7.194.2
8214
ἀνακρεμασθέντος ὦν αὐτοῦ , λογιζόμενος ὁ Δαρεῖος εὗρέ οἱ πλέω ἀγαθὰ τῶν ἁμαρτημάτων πεποιημένα ἐς οἶκον τὸν βασιλήιον ·
When Sandoces had been hung on the cross, Darius found on consideration that his good services to the royal house outweighed his offenses.


7.194.2
8215
εὑρὼν δὲ τοῦτο ὁ Δαρεῖος , καὶ γνοὺς ὡς ταχύτερα αὐτὸς ἢ σοφώτερα ἐργασμένος εἴη , ἔλυσε .
The king then perceived that he had acted with more haste than wisdom and set Sandoces free.


7.194.3
8216
βασιλέα μὲν δὴ Δαρεῖον οὕτω διαφυγὼν μὴ ἀπολέσθαι περιῆν , τότε δὲ ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας καταπλώσας ἔμελλε οὐ τὸ δεύτερον διαφυγὼν ἔσεσθαι ·
In this way he escaped from being put to death by Darius. Now that he was taken into the midst of the Greeks, however, he was not to escape a second time,


7.194.3
8217
ὡς γὰρ σφέας εἶδον προσπλέοντας οἱ Ἕλληνες , μαθόντες αὐτῶν τὴν γινομένην ἁμαρτάδα , ἐπαναχθέντες εὐπετέως σφέας εἷλον .
for when the Greeks saw the Persians bearing down on them, they perceived their mistake and putting to sea, easily took them captive.


7.195.1
8218
ἐν τουτέων μιῇ Ἀρίδωλις πλέων ἥλω , τύραννος Ἀλαβάνδων τῶν ἐν Καρίῃ , ἐν ἑτέρῃ δὲ ὁ Πάφιος στρατηγὸς Πενθύλος ὁ Δημονόου , ὃς ἦγε μὲν δυώδεκα νέας ἐκ Πάφου , ἀποβαλὼν δὲ σφέων τὰς ἕνδεκα τῷ χειμῶνι τῷ γενομένῳ κατὰ Σηπιάδα , μιῇ τῇ περιγενομένῃ καταπλέων ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμίσιον ἥλω .
In one of these ships they took Aridolis, the tyrant of Alabanda in Caria, and in another the Paphian captain Penthylus, son of Demonous; of the twelve ships which he had brought from Paphos he had lost eleven in the storm off the Sepiad headland and was in the one which remained when he was taken as he headed down on Artemisium.


7.195.1
8219
τούτους οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐξιστορήσαντες τὰ ἐβούλοντο πυθέσθαι ἀπὸ τῆς Ξέρξεω στρατιῆς , ἀποπέμπουσι δεδεμένους ἐς τὸν Κορινθίων ἰσθμόν .
Having questioned these men and learned what they desired to know of Xerxes' force, the Greeks sent them away to the isthmus of Corinth in bonds.


7.196.1
8220
ὁ μὲν δὴ ναυτικὸς ὁ τῶν βαρβάρων στρατός , πάρεξ τῶν πεντεκαίδεκα νεῶν τῶν εἶπον Σανδώκεα στρατηγέειν , ἀπίκοντο ἐς Ἀφέτας .
So the foreign fleet, of which, with the exception of fifteen ships Sandoces was captain, came to Aphetae.


7.196.1
8221
Ξέρξης δὲ καὶ ὁ πεζὸς πορευθεὶς διὰ Θεσσαλίης καὶ Ἀχαιίης ἐσβεβληκὼς ἦν καὶ δὴ τριταῖος ἐς Μηλιέας , ἐν Θεσσαλίῃ μὲν ἅμιλλαν ποιησάμενος ἵππων τῶν τε ἑωυτοῦ ἀποπειρώμενος καὶ τῆς Θεσσαλίης ἵππου , πυθόμενος ὡς ἀρίστη εἴη τῶν ἐν Ἕλλησι ·
Xerxes and his land army marched through Thessaly and Achaea, and it was three days since he had entered Malis. In Thessaly he held a race for his own cavalry; this was also a test of the Thessalian horsemen, whom he had heard were the best in Hellas.


7.196.1
8222
ἔνθα δὴ αἱ Ἑλληνίδες ἵπποι ἐλείποντο πολλόν .
The Greek horses were far outpaced in this contest.


7.196.1
8223
τῶν μέν νυν ἐν Θεσσαλίῃ ποταμῶν Ὀνόχωνος μοῦνος οὐκ ἀπέχρησε τῇ στρατιῇ τὸ ῥέεθρον πινόμενος ·
Of the Thessalian rivers, the Onochonus was the only one which could not provide enough water for his army to drink.


7.196.1
8224
τῶν δὲ ἐν Ἀχαιίῃ ποταμῶν ῥεόντων οὐδὲ ὅστις μέγιστος αὐτῶν ἐστι Ἠπιδανός , οὐδὲ οὗτος ἀντέσχε εἰ μὴ φλαύρως .
In Achaea, however, even the greatest river there, the Apidanus, gave out, remaining but a sorry trickle.


7.197.1
8225
ἐς Ἄλον δὲ τῆς Ἀχαιίης ἀπικομένῳ Ξέρξῃ οἱ κατηγεμόνες τῆς ὁδοῦ βουλόμενοι τὸ πᾶν ἐξηγέεσθαι ἔλεγόν οἱ ἐπιχώριον λόγον , τὰ περὶ τὸ ἱρὸν τοῦ Λαφυστίου Διός , ὡς Ἀθάμας ὁ Αἰόλου ἐμηχανήσατο Φρίξῳ μόρον σὺν Ἰνοῖ βουλεύσας , μετέπειτα δὲ ὡς ἐκ θεοπροπίου Ἀχαιοὶ προτιθεῖσι τοῖσι ἐκείνου ἀπογόνοισι ἀέθλους τοιούσδε ·
When Xerxes had come to Alus in  Achaea, his guides, desiring to inform him of all they knew, told him the story which is related in that country concerning the worship of Laphystian Zeus, namely how Athamas son of Aeolus plotted Phrixus' death with Ino, and further, how the Achaeans by an oracle's bidding compel Phrixus descendants to certain tasks.


7.197.2
8226
ὃς ἂν ᾖ τοῦ γένεος τούτου πρεσβύτατος , τούτῳ ἐπιτάξαντες ἔργεσθαι τοῦ ληίτου αὐτοὶ φυλακὰς ἔχουσι .
They order the eldest of that family not to enter their town-hall  and themselves keep watch there.


7.197.2
8227
λήιτον δὲ καλέουσι τὸ πρυτανήιον οἱ Ἀχαιοί .
The Achaeans call it the People's House.


7.197.2
8228
ἢν δὲ ἐσέλθῃ , οὐκ ἔστι ὅκως ἔξεισι πρὶν ἢ θύσεσθαι μέλλῃ ·
If he should enter, he may not come out, save only to be sacrificed.


7.197.2
8229
ὥς τ’ ἔτι πρὸς τούτοισι πολλοὶ ἤδη τούτων τῶν μελλόντων θύσεσθαι δείσαντες οἴχοντο ἀποδράντες ἐς ἄλλην χώρην , χρόνου δὲ προϊόντος ὀπίσω κατελθόντες ἢν ἁλίσκωνται ἐστέλλοντο ἐς τὸ πρυτανήιον ·
They say as well that many of those who were to be sacrificed had fled in fear to another country, and that if they returned at a later day and were taken, they were brought into the town-hall.


7.197.2
8230
ὡς θύεταί τε ἐξηγέοντο στέμμασι πᾶς πυκασθεὶς καὶ ὡς σὺν πομπῇ ἐξαχθείς .
The guides showed Xerxes how the man is sacrificed, namely with fillets covering him all over and a procession to lead him forth.


7.197.3
8231
ταῦτα δὲ πάσχουσι οἱ Κυτισσώρου τοῦ Φρίξου παιδὸς ἀπόγονοι , διότι καθαρμὸν τῆς χώρης ποιευμένων Ἀχαιῶν ἐκ θεοπροπίου Ἀθάμαντα τὸν Αἰόλου καὶ μελλόντων μιν θύειν ἀπικόμενος οὗτος ὁ Κυτίσσωρος ἐξ Αἴης τῆς Κολχίδος ἐρρύσατο , ποιήσας δὲ τοῦτο τοῖσι ἐπιγενομένοισι ἐξ ἑωυτοῦ μῆνιν τοῦ θεοῦ ἐνέβαλε .
It is the descendants of Phrixus' son Cytissorus who are treated in this way, because when the Achaeans by an oracle's bidding made Athamas son of Aeolus a scapegoat for their country and were about to sacrifice him, this Cytissorus came from Aea in  Colchis and delivered him, thereby bringing the god's wrath on his own descendants.


7.197.4
8232
Ξέρξης δὲ ταῦτα ἀκούσας ὡς κατὰ τὸ ἄλσος ἐγίνετο , αὐτός τε ἔργετο αὐτοῦ καὶ τῇ στρατιῇ πάσῃ παρήγγειλε , τῶν τε Ἀθάμαντος ἀπογόνων τὴν οἰκίην ὁμοίως καὶ τὸ τέμενος ἐσέβετο .
Hearing all this, Xerxes, when he came to the temple grove, refrained from entering it himself and bade all his army do likewise, holding the house and the precinct of Athamas' descendants alike in reverence.


7.198.1
8233
ταῦτα μὲν τὰ ἐν Θεσσαλίῃ καὶ τὰ ἐν Ἀχαιίῃ ·
These were Xerxes' actions in Thessaly and Achaea.


7.198.1
8234
ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων τῶν χώρων ἤιε ἐς τὴν Μηλίδα παρὰ κόλπον θαλάσσης , ἐν τῷ ἄμπωτίς τε καὶ ῥηχίη ἀνὰ πᾶσαν ἡμέρην γίνεται .
From here he came into Malis along a gulf of the sea, in which the tide ebbs and flows daily.


7.198.1
8235
περὶ δὲ τὸν κόλπον τοῦτον ἐστὶ χῶρος πεδινός , τῇ μὲν εὐρὺς τῇ δὲ καὶ κάρτα στεινός ·
There is low-lying ground about this gulf, sometimes wide and sometimes very narrow,


7.198.1
8236
περὶ δὲ τὸν χῶρον ὄρεα ὑψηλὰ καὶ ἄβατα περικληίει πᾶσαν τὴν Μηλίδα γῆν , Τρηχίνιαι πέτραι καλεόμεναι .
and around it stand high and inaccessible mountains which enclose the whole of Malis and are called the Rocks of Trachis.


7.198.2
8237
πρώτη μέν νυν πόλις ἐστὶ ἐν τῷ κόλπῳ ἰόντι ἀπὸ Ἀχαιίης Ἀντικύρη , παρ’ ἣν Σπερχειὸς ποταμὸς ῥέων ἐξ Ἐνιήνων ἐς θάλασσαν ἐκδιδοῖ .
Now the first town by the gulf on the way from Achaea is Anticyra, near to which the river Spercheus flows from the country of the Enieni and issues into the sea.


7.198.2
8238
ἀπὸ δὲ τούτου διὰ εἴκοσί κου σταδίων ἄλλος ποταμὸς τῷ οὔνομα κεῖται Δύρας , τὸν βοηθέοντα τῷ Ἡρακλέι καιομένῳ λόγος ἐστὶ ἀναφανῆναι .
About twenty furlongs from that river is another named Dyras, which is said to have risen from the ground to aid Heracles against the fire that consumed him,


7.198.2
8239
ἀπὸ δὲ τούτου δι’ ἄλλων εἴκοσι σταδίων ἄλλος ποταμός ἐστι ὃς καλέεται Μέλας .
and twenty furlongs again from that there is another river called the Black river.


7.199.1
8240
Τρηχὶς δὲ πόλις ἀπὸ τοῦ Μέλανος τούτου ποταμοῦ πέντε στάδια ἀπέχει .
The town of Trachis is five furlongs away from this Black river.


7.199.1
8241
ταύτῃ δὲ καὶ εὐρύτατον ἐστὶ πάσης τῆς χώρης ταύτης ἐκ τῶν ὀρέων ἐς θάλασσαν , κατ’ ἃ Τρηχὶς πεπόλισται ·
Here is the greatest distance in all this region between the sea and the hills on which Trachis stands, for the plain is twenty-two thousand plethra in extent.


7.199.1
8242
δισχίλιά τε γὰρ καὶ δισμύρια πλέθρα τοῦ πεδίου ἐστί .
In the mountains which hem in the Trachinian land there is a ravine to the south of Trachis,


7.199.1
8243
τοῦ δὲ ὄρεος τὸ περικληίει τὴν γῆν τὴν Τρηχινίην ἐστὶ διασφὰξ πρὸς μεσαμβρίην Τρηχῖνος , διὰ δὲ τῆς διασφάγος Ἀσωπὸς ποταμὸς ῥέει παρὰ τὴν ὑπωρείαν τοῦ ὄρεος .
through which the river Asopus flows past the lower slopes of the mountains.


7.200.1
8244
ἔστι δὲ ἄλλος Φοῖνιξ ποταμὸς οὐ μέγας πρὸς μεσαμβρίην τοῦ Ἀσωποῦ , ὃς ἐκ τῶν ὀρέων τούτων ῥέων ἐς τὸν Ἀσωπὸν ἐκδιδοῖ .
There is another river south of the Asopus, the Phoenix, a little stream which flows from those mountains into the Asopus.


7.200.1
8245
κατὰ δὲ τὸν Φοίνικα ποταμὸν στεινότατον ἐστί ·
Near this stream is the narrowest place;


7.200.1
8246
ἁμαξιτὸς γὰρ μούνη δέδμηται .
there is only space for a single cart-way.


7.200.1
8247
ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ Φοίνικος ποταμοῦ πεντεκαίδεκα στάδια ἐστὶ ἐς Θερμοπύλας .
Thermopylae is fifteen furlongs away from the river Phoenix.


7.200.2
8248
ἐν δὲ τῷ μεταξὺ Φοίνικος ποταμοῦ καὶ Θερμοπυλέων κώμη τε ἐστὶ τῇ οὔνομα Ἀνθήλη κεῖται , παρ’ ἣν δὴ παραρρέων ὁ Ἀσωπὸς ἐς θάλασσαν ἐκδιδοῖ , καὶ χῶρος περὶ αὐτὴν εὐρύς , ἐν τῷ Δήμητρός τε ἱρὸν Ἀμφικτυονίδος ἵδρυται καὶ ἕδραι εἰσὶ Ἀμφικτύοσι καὶ αὐτοῦ τοῦ Ἀμφικτύονος ἱρόν .
Between the river and  Thermopylae there is a village named Anthele, past which the Asopus flows out into the sea, and there is a wide space around it in which stand a temple of Amphictyonid Demeter, seats for the Amphictyons, and a temple of Amphictyon himself


7.201.1
8249
βασιλεὺς μὲν δὴ Ξέρξης ἐστρατοπεδεύετο τῆς Μηλίδος ἐν τῇ Τρηχινίῃ , οἱ δὲ δὴ Ἕλληνες ἐν τῇ διόδῳ .
King Xerxes lay encamped in Trachis in Malis and the Hellenes in the pass.


7.201.1
8250
καλέεται δὲ ὁ χῶρος οὗτος ὑπὸ μὲν τῶν πλεόνων Ἑλλήνων Θερμοπύλαι , ὑπὸ δὲ τῶν ἐπιχωρίων καὶ περιοίκων Πύλαι .
This place is called Thermopylae by most of the Hellenes, but by the natives and their neighbors Pylae.


7.201.1
8251
ἐστρατοπεδεύοντο μέν νυν ἑκάτεροι ἐν τούτοισι τοῖσι χωρίοισι , ἐπεκράτεε δὲ ὃ μὲν τῶν πρὸς βορέην ἄνεμον ἐχόντων πάντων μέχρι Τρηχῖνος , οἳ δὲ τῶν πρὸς νότον καὶ μεσαμβρίην φερόντων τὸ ἐπὶ ταύτης τῆς ἠπείρου .
Each lay encamped in these places. Xerxes was master of everything to the north from Trachis, and the Hellenes of all that lay toward the south on the mainland.


7.202.1
8252
ἦσαν δὲ οἵδε Ἑλλήνων οἱ ὑπομένοντες τὸν Πέρσην ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χώρῳ , Σπαρτιητέων τε τριηκόσιοι ὁπλῖται καὶ Τεγεητέων καὶ Μαντινέων χίλιοι , ἡμίσεες ἑκατέρων , ἐξ Ὀρχομενοῦ τε τῆς Ἀρκαδίης εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατόν , καὶ ἐκ τῆς λοιπῆς Ἀρκαδίης χίλιοι ·
The Hellenes who awaited the Persians in that place were these: three hundred Spartan armed men; one thousand from Tegea and Mantinea, half from each place; one hundred and twenty from Orchomenus in Arcadia and one thousand from the rest of Arcadia;


7.202.1
8253
τοσοῦτοι μὲν Ἀρκάδων , ἀπὸ δὲ Κορίνθου τετρακόσιοι καὶ ἀπὸ Φλειοῦντος διηκόσιοι καὶ Μυκηναίων ὀγδώκοντα .
that many Arcadians, four hundred from Corinth, two hundred from Phlius, and eighty Mycenaeans.


7.202.1
8254
οὗτοι μὲν ἀπὸ Πελοποννήσου παρῆσαν , ἀπὸ δὲ Βοιωτῶν Θεσπιέων τε ἑπτακόσιοι καὶ Θηβαίων τετρακόσιοι .
These were the Peloponnesians present; from Boeotia there were seven hundred Thespians and four hundred Thebans.


7.203.1
8255
πρὸς τούτοισι ἐπίκλητοι ἐγένοντο Λοκροί τε οἱ Ὀπούντιοι πανστρατιῇ καὶ Φωκέων χίλιοι .
In addition, the Opuntian Locrians in full force and one thousand Phocians came at the summons.


7.203.1
8256
αὐτοὶ γὰρ σφέας οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐπεκαλέσαντο , λέγοντες δι’ ἀγγέλων ὡς αὐτοὶ μὲν ἥκοιεν πρόδρομοι τῶν ἄλλων , οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ τῶν συμμάχων προσδόκιμοι πᾶσαν εἶεν ἡμέρην , ἡ θάλασσά τέ σφι εἴη ἐν φυλακῇ ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίων τε φρουρεομένη καὶ Αἰγινητέων καὶ τῶν ἐς τὸν ναυτικὸν στρατὸν ταχθέντων , καί σφι εἴη δεινὸν οὐδέν ·
The Hellenes had called upon them through messengers who told them that this was only the advance guard, that the rest of the allies were expected any day now, and that the sea was being watched, with the Athenians and Aeginetans and all those enrolled in the fleet on guard. There was nothing for them to be afraid of.


7.203.2
8257
οὐ γὰρ θεὸν εἶναι τὸν ἐπιόντα ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἀλλ’ ἄνθρωπον , εἶναι δὲ θνητὸν οὐδένα οὐδὲ ἔσεσθαι τῷ κακὸν ἐξ ἀρχῆς γινομένῳ οὐ συνεμίχθη , τοῖσι δὲ μεγίστοισι αὐτῶν μέγιστα .
The invader of Hellas was not a god but a human being, and there was not, and never would be, any mortal on whom some amount of evil was not bestowed at birth, with the greatest men receiving the largest share.


7.203.2
8258
ὀφείλειν ὦν καὶ τὸν ἐπελαύνοντα , ὡς ἐόντα θνητόν , ἀπὸ τῆς δόξης πεσεῖν ἄν .
The one marching against them was certain to fall from pride, since he was a mortal.


7.203.2
8259
οἳ δὲ ταῦτα πυνθανόμενοι ἐβοήθεον ἐς τὴν Τρηχῖνα .
When they heard this, the Locrians and Phocians marched to Trachis to help.


7.204.1
8260
τούτοισι ἦσαν μέν νυν καὶ ἄλλοι στρατηγοὶ κατὰ πόλιας ἑκάστων , ὁ δὲ θωμαζόμενος μάλιστα καὶ παντὸς τοῦ στρατεύματος ἡγεόμενος Λακεδαιμόνιος ἦν Λεωνίδης ὁ Ἀναξανδρίδεω τοῦ Λέοντος τοῦ Εὐρυκρατίδεω τοῦ Ἀναξάνδρου τοῦ Εὐρυκράτεος τοῦ Πολυδώρου τοῦ Ἀλκαμένεος τοῦ Τηλέκλου τοῦ Ἀρχέλεω τοῦ Ἡγησίλεω τοῦ Δορύσσου τοῦ Λεωβώτεω τοῦ Ἐχεστράτου τοῦ Ἤγιος τοῦ Εὐρυσθένεος τοῦ Ἀριστοδήμου τοῦ Ἀριστομάχου τοῦ Κλεοδαίου τοῦ Ὕλλου τοῦ Ἡρακλέος , κτησάμενος τὴν βασιληίην ἐν Σπάρτῃ ἐξ ἀπροσδοκήτου .
Each city had its own general, but the one most admired and the leader of the whole army was a Lacedaemonian, Leonidas, son of Anaxandrides, son of Leon, son of Eurycratides, son of Anaxandrus, son of Eurycrates, son of Polydorus, son of Alcamenes, son of Teleclus, son of Archelaus, son of Hegesilaus, son of Doryssus, son of Leobotes, son of Echestratus, son of Agis, son of Eurysthenes, son of Aristodemus, son of Aristomachus, son of Cleodaeus, son of Hyllus, son of Heracles. Leonidas had gained the kingship at  Sparta unexpectedly.


7.205.1
8261
διξῶν γάρ οἱ ἐόντων πρεσβυτέρων ἀδελφεῶν , Κλεομένεός τε καὶ Δωριέος , ἀπελήλατο τῆς φροντίδος περὶ τῆς βασιληίης .
Since he had two older brothers, Cleomenes and Dorieus, he had renounced all thought of the kingship.


7.205.1
8262
ἀποθανόντος δὲ Κλεομένεος ἄπαιδος ἔρσενος γόνου , Δωριέος τε οὐκέτι ἐόντος ἀλλὰ τελευτήσαντος καὶ τούτου ἐν Σικελίῃ , οὕτω δὴ ἐς Λεωνίδην ἀνέβαινε ἡ βασιληίη , καὶ διότι πρότερος ἐγεγόνεε Κλεομβρότου ·
Cleomenes, however, died without male offspring, and Dorieus, who had met his end in Sicily, was also no longer alive.


7.205.1
8263
οὗτος γὰρ ἦν νεώτατος Ἀναξανδρίδεω παῖς καὶ δὴ καὶ εἶχε Κλεομένεος θυγατέρα .
The succession therefore fell to Leonidas since he was older than Anaxandrides' youngest son Cleombrotus and had married Cleomenes' daughter.


7.205.2
8264
ὃς τότε ἤιε ἐς Θερμοπύλας ἐπιλεξάμενος ἄνδρας τε τοὺς κατεστεῶτας τριηκοσίους καὶ τοῖσι ἐτύγχανον παῖδες ἐόντες ·
He now came to Thermopylae with the appointed three hundred he had selected, all of whom had sons.


7.205.2
8265
παραλαβὼν δὲ ἀπίκετο καὶ Θηβαίων τοὺς ἐς τὸν ἀριθμὸν λογισάμενος εἶπον , τῶν ἐστρατήγεε Λεοντιάδης ὁ Εὐρυμάχου .
He also brought those Thebans whom I counted among the number and whose general was Leontiades son of Eurymachus.


7.205.3
8266
τοῦδε δὲ εἵνεκα τούτους σπουδὴν ἐποιήσατο Λεωνίδης μούνους Ἑλλήνωι παραλαβεῖν , ὅτι σφέων μεγάλως κατηγόρητο μηδίζειν ·
Leonidas took pains to bring only the Thebans among the Hellenes, because they were accused of medizing;


7.205.3
8267
παρεκάλεε ὦν ἐς τὸν πόλεμον , θέλων εἰδέναι εἴτε συμπέμψουσι εἴτε καὶ ἀπερέουσι ἐκ τοῦ ἐμφανέος τὴν Ἑλλήνων συμμαχίην .
he summoned them to the war wishing to know whether they would send their men with him or openly refuse the Hellenic alliance.


7.205.3
8268
οἳ δὲ ἀλλοφρονέοντες ἔπεμπον .
They sent the men but intended something quite different.


7.206.1
8269
τούτους μὲν τοὺς ἀμφὶ Λεωνίδην πρώτους ἀπέπεμψαν Σπαρτιῆται , ἵνα τούτους ὁρῶντες οἱ ἄλλοι σύμμαχοι στρατεύωνται μηδὲ καὶ οὗτοι μηδίσωσι , ἢν αὐτοὺς πυνθάνωνται ὑπερβαλλομένους ·
The Spartans sent the men with Leonidas on ahead so that the rest of the allies would see them and march, instead of medizing like the others if they learned that the Spartans were delaying.


7.206.1
8270
μετὰ δέ , Κάρνεια γάρ σφι ἦν ἐμποδών , ἔμελλον ὁρτάσαντες καὶ φυλακὰς λιπόντες ἐν τῇ Σπάρτῃ κατὰ τάχος βοηθέειν πανδημεί .
At present the Carneia was in their way, but once they had completed the festival, they intended to leave a garrison at Sparta and march out in full force with all speed.


7.206.2
8271
ὣς δὲ καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ τῶν συμμάχων ἐνένωντο καὶ αὐτοὶ ἕτερα τοιαῦτα ποιήσειν ·
The rest of the allies planned to do likewise,


7.206.2
8272
ἦν γὰρ κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ Ὀλυμπιὰς τούτοισι τοῖσι πρήγμασι συμπεσοῦσα ·
for the Olympiad coincided with these events.


7.206.2
8273
οὔκων δοκέοντες κατὰ τάχος οὕτω διακριθήσεσθαι τὸν ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι πόλεμον ἔπεμπον τοὺς προδρόμους .
They accordingly sent their advance guard, not expecting the war at Thermopylae to be decided so quickly.


7.207.1
8274
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ οὕτω διενένωντο ποιήσειν ·
This is what they intended,


7.207.1
8275
οἱ δὲ ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι Ἕλληνες , ἐπειδὴ πέλας ἐγένετο τῆς ἐσβολῆς ὁ Πέρσης , καταρρωδέοντες ἐβουλεύοντο περὶ ἀπαλλαγῆς .
but the Hellenes at Thermopylae, when the Persians drew near the pass, fearfully took counsel whether to depart.


7.207.1
8276
τοῖσι μέν νυν ἄλλοισι Πελοποννησίοισι ἐδόκεε ἐλθοῦσι ἐς Πελοπόννησον τὸν Ἰσθμὸν ἔχειν ἐν φυλακῇ ·
The rest of the Peloponnesians were for returning to the Peloponnese and guarding the isthmus,


7.207.1
8277
Λεωνίδης δέ , Φωκέων καὶ Λοκρῶν περισπερχεόντων τῇ γνώμῃ ταύτῃ , αὐτοῦ τε μένειν ἐψηφίζετο πέμπειν τε ἀγγέλους ἐς τὰς πόλιας κελεύοντάς σφι ἐπιβοηθέειν , ὡς ἐόντων αὐτῶν ὀλίγων στρατὸν τὸν Μήδων ἀλέξασθαι .
but the Phocians and Locrians were greatly angered by this counsel. Leonidas voted to remain where they were and send messengers to the cities bidding them to send help, since they were too few to ward off the army of the Medes.


7.208.1
8278
ταῦτα βουλευομένων σφέων , ἔπεμπε Ξέρξης κατάσκοπον ἱππέα ἰδέσθαι ὁκόσοι εἰσὶ καὶ ὅ τι ποιέοιεν .
While they debated in this way, Xerxes sent a mounted scout to see how many there were and what they were doing.


7.208.1
8279
ἀκηκόεε δὲ ἔτι ἐὼν ἐν Θεσσαλίῃ ὡς ἁλισμένη εἴη ταύτῃ στρατιὴ ὀλίγη , καὶ τοὺς ἡγεμόνας ὡς εἴησαν Λακεδαιμόνιοί τε καὶ Λεωνίδης ἐὼν γένος Ἡρακλείδης .
While he was still in Thessaly, he had heard that a small army was gathered there and that its leaders were Lacedaemonians, including Leonidas, who was of the Heracleid clan.


7.208.2
8280
ὡς δὲ προσήλασε ὁ ἱππεὺς πρὸς τὸ στρατόπεδον , ἐθηεῖτό τε καὶ κατώρα πᾶν μὲν οὒ τὸ στρατόπεδον ·
Riding up to the camp, the horseman watched and spied out the place.


7.208.2
8281
τοὺς γὰρ ἔσω τεταγμένους τοῦ τείχεος , τὸ ἀνορθώσαντες εἶχον ἐν φυλακῇ , οὐκ οἷά τε ἦν κατιδέσθαι ·
He could, however, not see the whole camp, for it was impossible to see those posted inside the wall which they had rebuilt and were guarding.


7.208.2
8282
ὁ δὲ τοὺς ἔξω ἐμάνθανε , τοῖσι πρὸ τοῦ τείχεος τὰ ὅπλα ἔκειτο ·
He did take note of those outside, whose arms lay in front of the wall,


7.208.2
8283
ἔτυχον δὲ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἔξω τεταγμένοι .
and it chanced that at that time the Lacedaemonians were posted there.


7.208.3
8284
τοὺς μὲν δὴ ὥρα γυμναζομένους τῶν ἀνδρῶν , τοὺς δὲ τὰς κόμας κτενιζομένους .
He saw some of the men exercising naked and others combing their hair.


7.208.3
8285
ταῦτα δὴ θεώμενος ἐθώμαζε καὶ τὸ πλῆθος ἐμάνθανε .
He marvelled at the sight and took note of their numbers.


7.208.3
8286
μαθὼν δὲ πάντα ἀτρεκέως ἀπήλαυνε ὀπίσω κατ’ ἡσυχίην ·
When he had observed it all carefully, he rode back in leisure.


7.208.3
8287
οὔτε γάρ τις ἐδίωκε ἀλογίης τε ἐνεκύρησε πολλῆς ·
Nor did anyone pursue him or pay him any attention at all.


7.208.3
8288
ἀπελθών τε ἔλεγε πρὸς Ξέρξην τά περ ὀπώπεε πάντα .
So he returned and told Xerxes all that he had seen.


7.209.1
8289
ἀκούων δὲ Ξέρξης οὐκ εἶχε συμβαλέσθαι τὸ ἐόν , ὅτι παρασκευάζοιντο ὡς ἀπολεόμενοί τε καὶ ἀπολέοντες κατὰ δύναμιν ·
When Xerxes heard that, he could not comprehend the fact that the Lacedaemonians were actually, to the best of their ability, preparing to kill or be killed.


7.209.1
8290
ἀλλ’ αὐτῷ γελοῖα γὰρ ἐφαίνοντο ποιέειν , μετεπέμψατο Δημάρητον τὸν Ἀρίστωνος ἐόντα ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ ·
What they did appeared laughable to him, so he sent for Demaratus the son of Ariston, who was in his camp.


7.209.2
8291
ἀπικόμενον δέ μιν εἰρώτα Ξέρξης ἕκαστα τούτων , ἐθέλων μαθεῖν τὸ ποιεύμενον πρὸς τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων .
When this man arrived, he asked him about each of these matters, wanting to understand what it was that the Lacedaemonians were doing.


7.209.2
8292
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " Ἤκουσας μὲν καὶ πρότερόν μευ , εὖτε ὁρμῶμεν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , περὶ τῶν ἀνδρῶν τούτων , ἀκούσας δὲ γέλωτά με ἔθευ λέγοντα τῇ περ ὥρων ἐκβησόμενα πρήγματα ταῦτα ·
Demaratus said, “You have already heard about these men from me, when we were setting out for  Hellas, but when you heard, you mocked me, although I told you how I expected things to turn out.


7.209.2
8293
ἐμοὶ γὰρ τὴν ἀληθείην ἀσκέειν ἀντία σεῦ βασιλεῦ ἀγὼν μέγιστος ἐστί .
It is my greatest aim, O King, to be truthful in your presence.


7.209.3
8294
ἄκουσον δὲ καὶ νῦν ·
So hear me now.


7.209.3
8295
οἱ ἄνδρες οὗτοι ἀπίκαται μαχησόμενοι ἡμῖν περὶ τῆς ἐσόδου , καὶ ταῦτα παρασκευάζονται .
These men have come to fight us for the pass, and it for this that they are preparing.


7.209.3
8296
νόμος γάρ σφι ἔχων οὕτω ἐστί ·
This is their custom:


7.209.3
8297
ἐπεὰν μέλλωσι κινδυνεύειν τῇ ψυχῇ , τότε τὰς κεφαλὰς κοσμέονται .
when they are about to risk their lives, they arrange their hair.


7.209.4
8298
ἐπίστασο δέ , εἰ τούτους γε καὶ τὸ ὑπομένον ἐν Σπάρτῃ καταστρέψεαι , ἔστι οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἔθνος ἀνθρώπων τὸ σὲ βασιλεῦ ὑπομενέει χεῖρας ἀνταειρόμενον ·
Rest assured that if you overcome these men and those remaining behind at  Sparta, there is no one else on earth who will raise his hands to withstand you, my King.


7.209.4
8299
νῦν γὰρ πρὸς βασιληίην τε καὶ καλλίστην πόλιν τῶν ἐν Ἕλλησι προσφέρεαι καὶ ἄνδρας ἀρίστους " .
You are now attacking the fairest kingdom in  Hellas and men who are the very best.”


7.209.5
8300
κάρτα τε δὴ Ξέρξῃ ἄπιστα ἐφαίνετο τὰ λεγόμενα εἶναι , καὶ δεύτερα ἐπειρώτα ὅντινα τρόπον τοσοῦτοι ἐόντες τῇ ἑωυτοῦ στρατιῇ μαχήσονται .
What he said seemed completely incredible to Xerxes, so he then asked how they, who were so few in number, would fight against his army.


7.209.5
8301
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ἐμοὶ χρᾶσθαι ὡς ἀνδρὶ ψεύστῃ , ἢν μὴ ταῦτά τοι ταύτῃ ἐκβῇ τῇ ἐγὼ λέγω " .
Demaratus answered, “My King, take me for a liar if this does not turn out as I say.”


7.210.1
8302
ταῦτα λέγων οὐκ ἔπειθε τὸν Ξέρξην τέσσερας μὲν δὴ παρεξῆκε ἡμέρας , ἐλπίζων αἰεί σφεας ἀποδρήσεσθαι ·
He let four days go by, expecting them to run away at any minute.


7.210.1
8303
πέμπτῃ δέ , ὡς οὐκ ἀπαλλάσσοντο ἀλλά οἱ ἐφαίνοντο ἀναιδείῃ τε καὶ ἀβουλίῃ διαχρεώμενοι μένειν , πέμπει ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς Μήδους τε καὶ Κισσίους θυμωθείς , ἐντειλάμενος σφέας ζωγρήσαντας ἄγειν ἐς ὄψιν τὴν ἑωυτοῦ .
They did not leave, and it seemed to him that they stayed out of folly and lack of due respect. On the fifth day he became angry and sent the Medes and Cissians against them, bidding them take them prisoner and bring them into his presence.


7.210.2
8304
ὡς δ’ ἐσέπεσον φερόμενοι ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας οἱ Μῆδοι , ἔπιπτον πολλοί , ἄλλοι δ’ ἐπεσήισαν , καὶ οὐκ ἀπηλαύνοντο , καίπερ μεγάλως προσπταίοντες .
The Medes bore down upon the Hellenes and attacked.


7.210.2
8305
δῆλον δ’ ἐποίευν παντί τεῳ καὶ οὐκ ἥκιστα αὐτῷ βασιλέι , ὅτι πολλοὶ μὲν ἄνθρωποι εἶεν , ὀλίγοι δὲ ἄνδρες .
Many fell, but others attacked in turn, and they made it clear to everyone, especially to the king himself, that among so many people there were few real men.


7.210.2
8306
ἐγίνετο δὲ ἡ συμβολὴ δι’ ἡμέρης .
The battle lasted all day.


7.211.1
8307
ἐπείτε δὲ οἱ Μῆδοι τρηχέως περιείποντο , ἐνθαῦτα οὗτοι μὲν ὑπεξήισαν , οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ἐκδεξάμενοι ἐπήισαν , τοὺς ἀθανάτους ἐκάλεε βασιλεύς , τῶν ἦρχε Ὑδάρνης , ὡς δὴ οὗτοί γε εὐπετέως κατεργασόμενοι .
When the Medes had been roughly handled, they retired, and the Persians whom the king called Immortals, led by Hydarnes, attacked in turn. It was thought that they would easily accomplish the task.


7.211.2
8308
ὡς δὲ καὶ οὗτοι συνέμισγον τοῖσι Ἕλλησι , οὐδὲν πλέον ἐφέροντο τῆς στρατιῆς τῆς Μηδικῆς ἀλλὰ τὰ αὐτά , ἅτε ἐν στεινοπόρῳ τε χώρῳ μαχόμενοι καὶ δόρασι βραχυτέροισι χρεώμενοι ἤ περ οἱ Ἕλληνες , καὶ οὐκ ἔχοντες πλήθεϊ χρήσασθαι .
When they joined battle with the Hellenes, they fared neither better nor worse than the Median army, since they used shorter spears than the Hellenes and could not use their numbers fighting in a narrow space.


7.211.3
8309
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ ἐμάχοντο ἀξίως λόγου , ἄλλα τε ἀποδεικνύμενοι ἐν οὐκ ἐπισταμένοισι μάχεσθαι ἐξεπιστάμενοι , καὶ ὅκως ἐντρέψειαν τὰ νῶτα , ἁλέες φεύγεσκον δῆθεν , οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι ὁρῶντες φεύγοντας βοῇ τε καὶ πατάγῳ ἐπήισαν , οἳ δ’ ἂν καταλαμβανόμενοι ὑπέστρεφον ἀντίοι εἶναι τοῖσι βαρβάροισι , μεταστρεφόμενοι δὲ κατέβαλλον πλήθεϊ ἀναριθμήτους τῶν Περσέων ·
The Lacedaemonians fought memorably, showing themselves skilled fighters amidst unskilled on many occasions, as when they would turn their backs and feign flight. The barbarians would see them fleeing and give chase with shouting and noise, but when the Lacedaemonians were overtaken, they would turn to face the barbarians and overthrow innumerable Persians.


7.211.3
8310
ἔπιπτον δὲ καὶ αὐτῶν τῶν Σπαρτιητέων ἐνθαῦτα ὀλίγοι .
A few of the Spartans themselves were also slain.


7.211.3
8311
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐδὲν ἐδυνέατο παραλαβεῖν οἱ Πέρσαι τῆς ἐσόδου πειρώμενοι καὶ κατὰ τέλεα καὶ παντοίως προσβάλλοντες , ἀπήλαυνον ὀπίσω .
When the Persians could gain no inch of the pass, attacking by companies and in every other fashion, they withdrew.


7.212.1
8312
ἐν ταύτῃσι τῇσι προσόδοισι τῆς μάχης λέγεται βασιλέα θηεύμενον τρὶς ἀναδραμεῖν ἐκ τοῦ θρόνου δείσαντα περὶ τῇ στρατιῇ .
It is said that during these assaults in the battle the king, as he watched, jumped up three times from the throne in fear for his army.


7.212.1
8313
τότε μὲν οὕτω ἠγωνίσαντο , τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίῃ οἱ βάρβαροι οὐδὲν ἄμεινον ἀέθλεον .
This, then, is how the fighting progressed, and on the next day the barbarians fought no better.


7.212.1
8314
ἅτε γὰρ ὀλίγων ἐόντων , ἐλπίσαντες σφέας κατατετρωματίσθαι τε καὶ οὐκ οἵους τε ἔσεσθαι ἔτι χεῖρας ἀνταείρασθαι συνέβαλλον .
They joined battle supposing that their enemies, being so few, were now disabled by wounds and could no longer resist.


7.212.2
8315
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες κατὰ τάξις τε καὶ κατὰ ἔθνεα κεκοσμημένοι ἦσαν , καὶ ἐν μέρεϊ ἕκαστοι ἐμάχοντο , πλὴν Φωκέων ·
The Hellenes, however, stood ordered in ranks by nation, and each of them fought in turn, except the Phocians.


7.212.2
8316
οὗτοι δὲ ἐς τὸ ὄρος ἐτάχθησαν φυλάξοντες τὴν ἀτραπόν .
These men were posted on the mountain to guard the path.


7.212.2
8317
ὡς δὲ οὐδὲν εὕρισκον ἀλλοιότερον οἱ Πέρσαι ἢ τῇ προτεραίῃ ἐνώρων , ἀπήλαυνον .
When the Persians found nothing different from what they saw the day before, they withdrew.


7.213.1
8318
ἀπορέοντος δὲ βασιλέος ὅ τι χρήσηται τῷ παρεόντι πρήγματι , Ἐπιάλτης ὁ Εὐρυδήμου ἀνὴρ Μηλιεὺς ἦλθέ οἱ ἐς λόγους ·
The king was at a loss as to how to deal with the present difficulty.


7.213.1
8319
ὃς μέγα τι παρὰ βασιλέος δοκέων οἴσεσθαι ἔφρασέ τε τὴν ἀτραπὸν τὴν διὰ τοῦ ὄρεος φέρουσαν ἐς Θερμοπύλας , καὶ διέφθειρε τοὺς ταύτῃ ὑπομείναντας Ἑλλήνων .
Epialtes son of Eurydemus, a Malian, thinking he would get a great reward from the king, came to speak with him and told him of the path leading over the mountain to  Thermopylae. In so doing he caused the destruction of the Hellenes remaining there.


7.213.2
8320
ὕστερον δὲ δείσας Λακεδαιμονίους ἔφυγε ἐς Θεσσαλίην , καί οἱ φυγόντι ὑπὸ τῶν Πυλαγόρων τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων ἐς τὴν Πυλαίην συλλεγομένων ἀργύριον ἐπεκηρύχθη .
Later he fled into  Thessaly in fear of the Lacedaemonians, and while he was in exile, a price was put on his head by the Pylagori when the Amphictyons assembled at Pylae.


7.213.2
8321
χρόνῳ δὲ ὕστερον , κατῆλθε γὰρ ἐς Ἀντικύρην , ἀπέθανε ὑπὸ Ἀθηνάδεω ἀνδρὸς Τρηχινίου .
Still later he returned from exile to Anticyra and was killed by Athenades, a Trachinian.


7.213.3
8322
ὁ δὲ Ἀθηνάδης οὗτος ἀπέκτεινε μὲν Ἐπιάλτεα δι’ ἄλλην αἰτίην , τὴν ἐγὼ ἐν τοῖσι ὄπισθε λόγοισι σημανέω , ἐτιμήθη μέντοι ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων οὐδὲν ἧσσον .
Athenades slew Epialtes for a different reason, which I will tell later in my history, but he was given no less honor by the Lacedaemonians. It was in this way, then, that Epialtes was later killed.


7.214.1
8323
Ἐπιάλτης μὲν οὕτω ὕστερον τούτων ἀπέθανε , ἔστι δὲ ἕτερος λεγόμενος λόγος , ὡς Ὀνήτης τε ὁ Φαναγόρεω ἀνὴρ Καρύστιος καὶ Κορυδαλλὸς Ἀντικυρεὺς εἰσὶ οἱ εἴπαντες πρὸς βασιλέα τούτους τοὺς λόγους καὶ περιηγησάμενοι τὸ ὄρος τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι , οὐδαμῶς ἔμοιγε πιστός .
There is another story told, namely that Onetes son of Phanagoras, a Carystian, and Corydallus of Anticyra are the ones who gave the king this information and guided the Persians around the mountain, but I find it totally incredible.


7.214.2
8324
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ τῷδε χρὴ σταθμώσασθαι , ὅτι οἱ τῶν Ἑλλήνων Πυλαγόροι ἐπεκήρυξαν οὐκ ἐπὶ Ὀνήτῃ τε καὶ Κορυδαλλῷ ἀργύριον ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ Ἐπιάλτῃ τῷ Τρηχινίῳ , πάντως κου τὸ ἀτρεκέστατον πυθόμενοι ·
One must judge by the fact that the Pylagori set a price not on Onetes and Corydallus but on Epialtes the Trachinian, and I suppose they had exact knowledge;


7.214.2
8325
τοῦτο δὲ φεύγοντα Ἐπιάλτην ταύτην τὴν αἰτίην οἴδαμεν .
furthermore, we know that Epialtes was banished on this charge.


7.214.3
8326
εἰδείη μὲν γὰρ ἂν καὶ ἐὼν μὴ Μηλιεὺς ταύτην τὴν ἀτραπὸν Ὀνήτης , εἰ τῇ χώρῃ πολλὰ ὡμιληκὼς εἴη ·
Onetes might have known the path, although he was not a Malian, if he had often come to that country,


7.214.3
8327
ἀλλ’ Ἐπιάλτης γὰρ ἐστὶ ὁ περιηγησάμενος τὸ ὄρος κατὰ τὴν ἀτραπόν , τοῦτον αἴτιον γράφω .
but Epialtes was the one who guided them along the path around the mountain. It is he whom I put on record as guilty.


7.215.1
8328
Ξέρξης δέ , ἐπεὶ ἤρεσε τὰ ὑπέσχετο ὁ Ἐπιάλτης κατεργάσασθαι , αὐτίκα περιχαρὴς γενόμενος ἔπεμπε Ὑδάρνεα καὶ τῶν ἐστρατήγεε Ὑδάρνης ·
Xerxes was pleased by what Epialtes promised to accomplish.


7.215.1
8329
ὁρμέατο δὲ περὶ λύχνων ἁφὰς ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου .
He immediately became overjoyed and sent out Hydarnes and the men under Hydarnes command, who set forth from the camp at about lamp-lighting time.


7.215.1
8330
τὴν δὲ ἀτραπὸν ταύτην ἐξεῦρον μὲν οἱ ἐπιχώριοι Μηλιέες , ἐξευρόντες δὲ Θεσσαλοῖσι κατηγήσαντο ἐπὶ Φωκέας , τότε ὅτε οἱ Φωκέες φράξαντες τείχεϊ τὴν ἐσβολὴν ἦσαν ἐν σκέπῃ τοῦ πολέμου ·
This path had been discovered by the native Malians, who used it to guide the Thessalians into  Phocis when the Phocians had fenced off the pass with a wall and were sheltered from the war.


7.215.1
8331
ἔκ τε τόσου δὴ κατεδέδεκτο ἐοῦσα οὐδὲν χρηστὴ Μηλιεῦσι .
So long ago the Malians had discovered that the pass was in no way a good thing.


7.216.1
8332
ἔχει δὲ ὧδε ἡ ἀτραπὸς αὕτη ·
The course of the path is as follows:


7.216.1
8333
ἄρχεται μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἀσωποῦ ποταμοῦ τοῦ διὰ τῆς διασφάγος ῥέοντος , οὔνομα δὲ τῷ ὄρεϊ τούτῳ καὶ τῇ ἀτραπῷ τ- αὐτὸ κεῖται , Ἀνόπαια ·
it begins at the river Asopus as it flows through the ravine, and this mountain and the path have the same name, Anopaea.


7.216.1
8334
τείνει δὲ ἡ Ἀνόπαια αὕτη κατὰ ῥάχιν τοῦ ὄρεος , λήγει δὲ κατά τε Ἀλπηνὸν πόλιν , πρώτην ἐοῦσαν τῶν Λοκρίδων πρὸς τῶν Μηλιέων , καὶ κατὰ Μελαμπύγου τε καλεόμενον λίθον καὶ κατὰ Κερκώπων ἕδρας , τῇ καὶ τὸ στεινότατον ἐστί .
This Anopaea stretches along the ridge of the mountain and ends at Alpenus, the Locrian city nearest to Malis, near the rock called Blackbuttock and the seats of the Cercopes, where it is narrowest.


7.217.1
8335
κατὰ ταύτην δὴ τὴν ἀτραπὸν καὶ οὕτω ἔχουσαν οἱ Πέρσαι , τὸν Ἀσωπὸν διαβάντες , ἐπορεύοντο πᾶσαν τὴν νύκτα , ἐν δεξιῇ μὲν ἔχοντες ὄρεα τὰ Οἰταίων , ἐν ἀριστερῇ δὲ τὰ Τρηχινίων .
This, then, was the nature of the pass. The Persians crossed the Asopus and travelled all night along this path, with the Oetaean mountains on their right and the Trachinian on their left.


7.217.1
8336
ἠώς τε δὴ διέφαινε καὶ οἳ ἐγένοντο ἐπ’ ἀκρωτηρίῳ τοῦ ὄρεος .
At dawn they came to the summit of the pass.


7.217.2
8337
κατὰ δὲ τοῦτο τοῦ ὄρεος ἐφύλασσον , ὡς καὶ πρότερόν μοι εἴρηται , Φωκέων χίλιοι ὁπλῖται , ῥυόμενοί τε τὴν σφετέρην χώρην καὶ φρουρέοντες τὴν ἀτραπόν .
In this part of the mountain one thousand armed men of the Phocians were on watch, as I have already shown, defending their own country and guarding the path.


7.217.2
8338
ἡ μὲν γὰρ κάτω ἐσβολὴ ἐφυλάσσετο ὑπὸ τῶν εἴρηται ·
The lower pass was held by those I have mentioned,


7.217.2
8339
τὴν δὲ διὰ τοῦ ὄρεος ἀτραπὸν ἐθελονταὶ Φωκέες ὑποδεξάμενοι Λεωνίδῃ ἐφύλασσον .
but the Phocians had voluntarily promised Leonidas to guard the path over the mountain.


7.218.1
8340
ἔμαθον δὲ σφέας οἱ Φωκέες ὧδε ἀναβεβηκότας ·
The Phocians learned in the following way that the Persians had climbed up:


7.218.1
8341
ἀναβαίνοντες γὰρ ἐλάνθανον οἱ Πέρσαι τὸ ὄρος πᾶν ἐὸν δρυῶν ἐπίπλεον .
they had ascended without the Phocians' notice because the mountain was entirely covered with oak trees.


7.218.1
8342
ἦν μὲν δὴ νηνεμίη , ψόφου δὲ γινομένου πολλοῦ , ὡς οἰκὸς ἦν φύλλων ὑποκεχυμένων ὑπὸ τοῖσι ποσί , ἀνά τε ἔδραμον οἱ Φωκέες καὶ ἐνέδυνον τὰ ὅπλα , καὶ αὐτίκα οἱ βάρβαροι παρῆσαν .
Although there was no wind, a great noise arose like leaves being trodden underfoot. The Phocians jumped up and began to put on their weapons, and in a moment the barbarians were there.


7.218.2
8343
ὡς δὲ εἶδον ἄνδρας ἐνδυομένους ὅπλα , ἐν θώματι ἐγένοντο ·
When they saw the men arming themselves, they were amazed,


7.218.2
8344
ἐλπόμενοι γὰρ οὐδένα σφι φανήσεσθαι ἀντίξοον ἐνεκύρησαν στρατῷ .
for they had supposed that no opposition would appear, but they had now met with an army.


7.218.2
8345
ἐνθαῦτα Ὑδάρνης καταρρωδήσας μὴ οἱ Φωκέες ἔωσι Λακεδαιμόνιοι , εἴρετο Ἐπιάλτην ὁποδαπὸς εἴη ὁ στρατός , πυθόμενος δὲ ἀτρεκέως διέτασσε τοὺς Πέρσας ὡς ἐς μάχην .
Hydarnes feared that the Phocians might be Lacedaemonians and asked Epialtes what country the army was from. When he had established what he wanted to know with certainty, he arrayed the Persians for battle.


7.218.3
8346
οἱ δὲ Φωκέες ὡς ἐβάλλοντο τοῖσι τοξεύμασι πολλοῖσί τε καὶ πυκνοῖσι , οἴχοντο φεύγοντες ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρεος τὸν κόρυμβον , ἐπιστάμενοι ὡς ἐπὶ σφέας ὁρμήθησαν ἀρχήν , καὶ παρεσκευάδατο ὡς ἀπολεόμενοι .
The Phocians, assailed by thick showers of arrows and supposing that the Persians had set out against them from the start, fled to the top of the mountain and prepared to meet their destruction.


7.218.3
8347
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἐφρόνεον , οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ Ἐπιάλτην καὶ Ὑδάρνεα Πέρσαι Φωκέων μὲν οὐδένα λόγον ἐποιεῦντο , οἳ δὲ κατέβαινον τὸ ὄρος κατὰ τάχος .
This is what they intended, but the Persians with Epialtes and Hydarnes paid no attention to the Phocians and went down the mountain as fast as possible.


7.219.1
8348
τοῖσι δὲ ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι Ἑλλήνων πρῶτον μὲν ὁ μάντις Μεγιστίης ἐσιδὼν ἐς τὰ ἱρὰ ἔφρασε τὸν μέλλοντα ἔσεσθαι ἅμα ἠοῖ σφι θάνατον , ἐπὶ δὲ καὶ αὐτόμολοι ἦσαν οἱ ἐξαγγείλαντες τῶν Περσέων τὴν περίοδον .
The seer Megistias, examining the sacrifices, first told the Hellenes at  Thermopylae that death was coming to them with the dawn.


7.219.1
8349
οὗτοι μὲν ἔτι νυκτὸς ἐσήμηναν , τρίτοι δὲ οἱ ἡμεροσκόποι καταδραμόντες ἀπὸ τῶν ἄκρων ἤδη διαφαινούσης ἡμέρης .
Then deserters came who announced the circuit made by the Persians. These gave their signals while it was still night; a third report came from the watchers running down from the heights at dawn.


7.219.2
8350
ἐνθαῦτα ἐβουλεύοντο οἱ Ἕλληνες , καί σφεων ἐσχίζοντο αἱ γνῶμαι ·
The Hellenes then took counsel, but their opinions were divided.


7.219.2
8351
οἳ μὲν γὰρ οὐκ ἔων τὴν τάξιν ἐκλιπεῖν , οἳ δὲ ἀντέτεινον .
Some advised not to leave their post, but others spoke against them.


7.219.2
8352
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο διακριθέντες οἳ μὲν ἀπαλλάσσοντο καὶ διασκεδασθέντες κατὰ πόλις ἕκαστοι ἐτράποντο , οἳ δὲ αὐτῶν ἅμα Λεωνίδῃ μένειν αὐτοῦ παρεσκευάδατο .
They eventually parted, some departing and dispersing each to their own cities, others preparing to remain there with Leonidas.


7.220.1
8353
λέγεται δὲ καὶ ὡς αὐτός σφεας ἀπέπεμψε Λεωνίδης , μὴ ἀπόλωνται κηδόμενος ·
It is said that Leonidas himself sent them away because he was concerned that they would be killed,


7.220.1
8354
αὐτῷ δὲ καὶ Σπαρτιητέων τοῖσι παρεοῦσι οὐκ ἔχειν εὐπρεπέως ἐκλιπεῖν τὴν τάξιν ἐς τὴν ἦλθον φυλάξοντες ἀρχήν .
but felt it not fitting for himself and the Spartans to desert that post which they had come to defend at the beginning.


7.220.2
8355
ταύτῃ καὶ μᾶλλον τὴν γνώμην πλεῖστος εἰμί , Λεωνίδην , ἐπείτε ᾔσθετο τοὺς συμμάχους ἐόντας ἀπροθύμους καὶ οὐκ ἐθέλοντας συνδιακινδυνεύειν , κελεῦσαι σφέας ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι , αὐτῷ δὲ ἀπιέναι οὐ καλῶς ἔχειν ·
I, however, tend to believe that when Leonidas perceived that the allies were dispirited and unwilling to run all risks with him, he told them to depart.


7.220.2
8356
μένοντι δὲ αὐτοῦ κλέος μέγα ἐλείπετο , καὶ ἡ Σπάρτης εὐδαιμονίη οὐκ ἐξηλείφετο .
For himself, however, it was not good to leave; if he remained, he would leave a name of great fame, and the prosperity of  Sparta would not be blotted out.


7.220.3
8357
ἐκέχρηστο γὰρ ὑπὸ τῆς Πυθίης τοῖσι Σπαρτιήτῃσι χρεωμένοισι περὶ τοῦ πολέμου τούτου αὐτίκα κατ’ ἀρχὰς ἐγειρομένου , ἢ Λακεδαίμονα ἀνάστατον γενέσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων ἢ τὴν βασιλέα σφέων ἀπολέσθαι .
When the Spartans asked the oracle about this war when it broke out, the Pythia had foretold that either  Lacedaemon would be destroyed by the barbarians or their king would be killed.


7.220.3
8358
ταῦτα δέ σφι ἐν ἔπεσι ἑξαμέτροισι χρᾷ λέγοντα ὧδε .
She gave them this answer in hexameter verses running as follows:


7.220.4
8359
ὑμῖν δ’ , ὦ Σπάρτης οἰκήτορες εὐρυχόροιο , ἢ μέγα ἄστυ ἐρικυδὲς ὑπ’ ἀνδράσι Περσεΐδῃσι πέρθεται , ἢ τὸ μὲν οὐχί , ἀφ’ Ἡρακλέους δὲ γενέθλης πενθήσει βασιλῆ φθίμενον Λακεδαίμονος οὖρος .
"For you, inhabitants of wide-wayed  Sparta,   Either your great and glorious city must be wasted by Persian men,


7.220.4
8360
οὐ γὰρ τὸν ταύρων σχήσει μένος οὐδὲ λεόντων ἀντιβίην ·
Or if not that, then the bound of  Lacedaemon must mourn a dead king, from Heracles' line.


7.220.4
8361
Ζηνὸς γὰρ ἔχει μένος ·
The might of bulls or lions will not restrain him with opposing strength; for he has the might of Zeus.


7.220.4
8362
οὐδέ ἑ φημί σχήσεσθαι , πρὶν τῶνδ’ ἕτερον διὰ πάντα δάσηται .
I declare that he will not be restrained until he utterly tears apart one of these."


7.220.4
8363
ταῦτά τε δὴ ἐπιλεγόμενον Λεωνίδην , καὶ βουλόμενον κλέος καταθέσθαι μούνωνΣπαρτιητέων , ἀποπέμψαι τοὺς συμμάχους μᾶλλον ἢ γνώμῃ διενειχθέντας οὕτω ἀκόσμως οἴχεσθαι τοὺς οἰχομένους .
Considering this and wishing to win distinction for the Spartans alone, he sent away the allies rather than have them leave in disorder because of a difference of opinion.


7.221.1
8364
μαρτύριον δέ μοι καὶ τόδε οὐκ ἐλάχιστον τούτου πέρι γέγονε , ὅτι καὶ τὸν μάντιν ὃς εἵπετο τῇ στρατιῇ ταύτῃ , Μεγιστίην τὸν Ἀκαρνῆνα , λεγόμενον εἶναι τὰ ἀνέκαθεν ἀπὸ Μελάμποδος , τοῦτον εἴπαντα ἐκ τῶν ἱρῶν τὰ μέλλοντά σφι ἐκβαίνειν , φανερός ἐστι Λεωνίδης ἀποπέμπων , ἵνα μὴ συναπόληταί σφι .
Not the least proof I have of this is the fact that Leonidas publicly dismissed the seer who attended the expedition, for fear that he might die with them.


7.221.1
8365
ὁ δὲ ἀποπεμπόμενος αὐτὸς μὲν οὐκ ἀπέλιπε , τὸν δὲ παῖδα συστρατευόμενον , ἐόντα οἱ μουνογενέα , ἀπέπεμψε .
This was Megistias the Acarnanian, said to be descended from Melampus, the one who told from the sacrifices what was going to happen to them. He was dismissed but did not leave; instead he sent away his only son who was also with the army.


7.222.1
8366
οἱ μέν νυν σύμμαχοι οἱ ἀποπεμπόμενοι οἴχοντό τε ἀπιόντες καὶ ἐπείθοντο Λεωνίδῃ , Θεσπιέες δὲ καὶ Θηβαῖοι κατέμειναν μοῦνοι παρὰ Λακεδαιμονίοισι .
Those allies who were dismissed went off in obedience to Leonidas, only the Thespians and Thebans remaining with the Lacedaemonians.


7.222.1
8367
τούτων δὲ Θηβαῖοι μὲν ἀέκοντες ἔμενον καὶ οὐ βουλόμενοι ·
The Thebans remained against their will and desire,


7.222.1
8368
κατεῖχε γὰρ σφέας Λεωνίδης ἐν ὁμήρων λόγῳ ποιεύμενος ·
for Leonidas kept them as hostages.


7.222.1
8369
Θεσπιέες δὲ ἑκόντες μάλιστα , οἳ οὐκ ἔφασαν ἀπολιπόντες Λεωνίδην καὶ τοὺς μετ’ αὐτοῦ ἀπαλλάξεσθαι , ἀλλὰ καταμείναντες συναπέθανον .
The Thespians very gladly remained, saying they would not abandon Leonidas and those with him by leaving; instead they would stay and die with them.


7.222.1
8370
ἐστρατήγεε δὲ αὐτῶν Δημόφιλος Διαδρόμεω .
Their general was Demophilus son of Diadromes.


7.223.1
8371
Ξέρξης δὲ ἐπεὶ ἡλίου ἀνατείλαντος σπονδὰς ἐποιήσατο , ἐπισχὼν χρόνον ἐς ἀγορῆς κου μάλιστα πληθώρην πρόσοδον ἐποιέετο ·
Xerxes made libations at sunrise and waiting till about mid-morning, made his assault.


7.223.1
8372
καὶ γὰρ ἐπέσταλτο ἐξ Ἐπιάλτεω οὕτω ·
Epialtes had advised this,


7.223.1
8373
ἀπὸ γὰρ τοῦ ὄρεος ἡ κατάβασις συντομωτέρη τε ἐστὶ καὶ βραχύτερος ὁ χῶρος πολλὸν ἤ περ ἡ περίοδός τε καὶ ἀνάβασις .
for the descent from the mountain is more direct, and the way is much shorter than the circuit and ascent.


7.223.2
8374
οἵ τε δὴ βάρβαροι οἱ ἀμφὶ Ξέρξην προσήισαν , καὶ οἱ ἀμφὶ Λεωνίδην Ἕλληνες , ὡς τὴν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ ἔξοδον ποιεύμενοι , ἤδη πολλῶ μᾶλλον ἢ κατ’ ἀρχὰς ἐπεξήισαν ἐς τὸ εὐρύτερον τοῦ αὐχένος .
Xerxes and his barbarians attacked, but Leonidas and his Hellenes, knowing they were going to their deaths, advanced now much farther than before into the wider part of the pass.


7.223.2
8375
τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἔρυμα τοῦ τείχεος ἐφυλάσσετο , οἳ δὲ ἀνὰ τὰς προτέρας ἡμέρας ὑπεξιόντες ἐς τὰ στεινόπορα ἐμάχοντο .
In all the previous days they had sallied out into the narrow way and fought there, guarding the defensive wall.


7.223.3
8376
τότε δὲ συμμίσγοντες ἔξω τῶν στεινῶν ἔπιπτον πλήθεϊ πολλοὶ τῶν βαρβάρων ·
Now, however, they joined battle outside the narrows and many of the barbarians fell,


7.223.3
8377
ὄπισθε γὰρ οἱ ἡγεμόνες τῶν τελέων ἔχοντες μάστιγας ἐρράπιζον πάντα ἄνδρα , αἰεὶ ἐς τὸ πρόσω ἐποτρύνοντες .
for the leaders of the companies beat everyone with whips from behind, urging them ever forward.


7.223.3
8378
πολλοὶ μὲν δὴ ἐσέπιπτον αὐτῶν ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν καὶ διεφθείροντο , πολλῷ δ’ ἔτι πλεῦνες κατεπατέοντο ζωοὶ ὑπ’ ἀλλήλων ·
Many of them were pushed into the sea and drowned; far more were trampled alive by each other,


7.223.3
8379
ἦν δὲ λόγος οὐδεὶς τοῦ ἀπολλυμένου .
with no regard for who perished.


7.223.4
8380
ἅτε γὰρ ἐπιστάμενοι τὸν μέλλοντα σφίσι ἔσεσθαι θάνατον ἐκ τῶν περιιόντων τὸ ὄρος , ἀπεδείκνυντο ῥώμης ὅσον εἶχον μέγιστον ἐς τοὺς βαρβάρους , παραχρεώμενοί τε καὶ ἀτέοντες .
Since the Hellenes knew that they must die at the hands of those who had come around the mountain, they displayed the greatest strength they had against the barbarians, fighting recklessly and desperately.


7.224.1
8381
δόρατα μέν νυν τοῖσι πλέοσι αὐτῶν τηνικαῦτα ἤδη ἐτύγχανε κατεηγότα , οἳ δὲ τοῖσι ξίφεσι διεργάζοντο τοὺς Πέρσας .
By this time most of them had had their spears broken and were killing the Persians with swords.


7.224.1
8382
καὶ Λεωνίδης τε ἐν τούτῳ τῷ πόνῳ πίπτει ἀνὴρ γενόμενος ἄριστος καὶ ἕτεροι μετ’ αὐτοῦ ὀνομαστοὶ Σπαρτιητέων , τῶν ἐγὼ ὡς ἀνδρῶν ἀξίων γενομένων ἐπυθόμην τὰ οὐνόματα , ἐπυθόμην δὲ καὶ ἁπάντων τῶν τριηκοσίων .
Leonidas, proving himself extremely valiant, fell in that struggle and with him other famous Spartans, whose names I have learned by inquiry since they were worthy men. Indeed, I have learned by inquiry the names of all three hundred.


7.224.2
8383
καὶ δὴ Περσέων πίπτουσι ἐνθαῦτα ἄλλοι τε πολλοὶ καὶ ὀνομαστοί , ἐν δὲ δὴ καὶ Δαρείου δύο παῖδες Ἀβροκόμης τε καὶ Ὑπεράνθης , ἐκ τῆς Ἀρτάνεω θυγατρὸς Φραταγούνης γεγονότες Δαρείῳ .
Many famous Persians also fell there, including two sons of Darius, Abrocomes and Hyperanthes, born to Darius by Phratagune daughter of Artanes.


7.224.2
8384
ὁ δὲ Ἀρτάνης Δαρείου μὲν τοῦ βασιλέος ἦν ἀδελφεός , Ὑστάσπεος δὲ τοῦ Ἀρσάμεος παῖς ·
Artanes was the brother of king Darius and son of Hystaspes son of Arsames.


7.224.2
8385
ὃς καὶ ἐκδιδοὺς τὴν θυγατέρα Δαρείῳ τὸν οἶκον πάντα τὸν ἑωυτοῦ ἐπέδωκε , ὡς μούνης οἱ ἐούσης ταύτης τέκνου .
When he gave his daughter in marriage to Darius, he gave his whole house as dowry, since she was his only child.


7.225.1
8386
Ξέρξεώ τε δὴ δύο ἀδελφεοὶ ἐνθαῦτα πίπτουσι μαχόμενοι , καὶ ὑπὲρ τοῦ νεκροῦ τοῦ Λεωνίδεω Περσέων τε καὶ Λακεδαιμονίων ὠθισμὸς ἐγίνετο πολλός , ἐς ὃ τοῦτόν τε ἀρετῇ οἱ Ἕλληνες ὑπεξείρυσαν καὶ ἐτρέψαντο τοὺς ἐναντίους τετράκις .
Two brothers of Xerxes accordingly fought and fell there.


7.225.1
8387
τοῦτο δὲ συνεστήκεε μέχρι οὗ οἱ σὺν Ἐπιάλτῃ παρεγένοντο .
There was a great struggle between the Persians and Lacedaemonians over Leonidas' body, until the Hellenes by their courageous prowess dragged it away and routed their enemies four times. The battle went on until the men with Epialtes arrived.


7.225.2
8388
ὡς δὲ τούτους ἥκειν ἐπύθοντο οἱ Ἕλληνες , ἐνθεῦτεν ἤδη ἑτεροιοῦτο τὸ νεῖκος ·
When the Hellenes saw that they had come, the contest turned,


7.225.2
8389
ἔς τε γὰρ τὸ στεινὸν τῆς ὁδοῦ ἀνεχώρεον ὀπίσω , καὶ παραμειψάμενοι τὸ τεῖχος ἐλθόντες ἵζοντο ἐπὶ τὸν κολωνὸν πάντες ἁλέες οἱ ἄλλοι πλὴν Θηβαίων .
for they retired to the narrow part of the way, passed behind the wall, and took their position crowded together on the hill, all except the Thebans.


7.225.2
8390
ὁ δὲ κολωνὸς ἐστὶ ἐν τῇ ἐσόδῳ , ὅκου νῦν ὁ λίθινος λέων ἕστηκε ἐπὶ Λεωνίδῃ .
This hill is at the mouth of the pass, where the stone lion in honor of Leonidas now stands.


7.225.3
8391
ἐν τούτῳ σφέας τῷ χώρῳ ἀλεξομένους μαχαίρῃσι , τοῖσι αὐτῶν ἐτύγχανον ἔτι περιεοῦσαι , καὶ χερσὶ καὶ στόμασι κατέχωσαν οἱ βάρβαροι βάλλοντες , οἳ μὲν ἐξ ἐναντίης ἐπισπόμενοι καὶ τὸ ἔρυμα τοῦ τείχεος συγχώσαντες , οἳ δὲ περιελθόντες πάντοθεν περισταδόν .
In that place they defended themselves with swords, if they still had them, and with hands and teeth. The barbarians buried them with missiles, some attacking from the front and throwing down the defensive wall, others surrounding them on all sides.


7.226.1
8392
Λακεδαιμονίων δὲ καὶ Θεσπιέων τοιούτων γενομένων ὅμως λέγεται ἀνὴρ ἄριστος γενέσθαι Σπαρτιήτης Διηνέκης ·
This then is how the Lacedaemonians and Thespians conducted themselves, but the Spartan Dieneces is said to have exhibited the greatest courage of all.


7.226.1
8393
τὸν τόδε φασὶ εἰπεῖν τὸ ἔπος πρὶν ἢ συμμῖξαι σφέας τοῖσι Μήδοισι , πυθόμενον πρός τευ τῶν Τρηχινίων ὡς ἐπεὰν οἱ βάρβαροι ἀπίωσι τὰ τοξεύματα , τὸν ἥλιον ὑπὸ τοῦ πλήθεος τῶν ὀιστῶν ἀποκρύπτουσι ·
They say that he made the following speech before they joined battle with the Medes: he had learned from a Trachinian that there were so many of the barbarians that when they shot their missiles, the sun was hidden by the multitude of their arrows. "Great, in that case, we shall have our battle in the shade."


7.226.1
8394
τοσοῦτο πλῆθος αὐτῶν εἶναι .
So great was their number.


7.226.2
8395
τὸν δὲ οὐκ ἐκπλαγέντα τούτοισι εἰπεῖν ἐν ἀλογίῃ ποιεύμενον τὸ Μήδων πλῆθος , ὡς πάντα σφι ἀγαθὰ ὁ Τρηχίνιος ξεῖνος ἀγγέλλοι , εἰ ἀποκρυπτόντων τῶν Μήδων τὸν ἥλιον ὑπὸ σκιῇ ἔσοιτο πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἡ μάχη καὶ οὐκ ἐν ἡλίῳ .
He was not at all disturbed by this and made light of the multitude of the Medes, saying that their Trachinian foreigner brought them good news. If the Medes hid the sun, they could fight them in the shade instead of in the sun. This saying and others like it, they claim, Dieneces the Lacedaemonian left behind as a memorial.


7.227.1
8396
ταῦτα μὲν καὶ ἄλλα τοιουτότροπα ἔπεα φασὶ Διηνέκεα τὸν Λακεδαιμόνιον λιπέσθαι μνημόσυνα ·
This, and other similar sayings, they claim Dieneces the Spartan left behind as a memorial.


7.227.1
8397
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον ἀριστεῦσαι λέγονται Λακεδαιμόνιοι δύο ἀδελφεοί , Ἀλφεός τε καὶ Μάρων Ὀρσιφάντου παῖδες .
Next after him two Lacedaemonian brothers, Alpheus and Maron, sons of Orsiphantus, are said to have been most courageous.


7.227.1
8398
Θεσπιέων δὲ εὐδοκίμεε μάλιστα τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Διθύραμβος Ἁρματίδεω .
The Thespian who gained most renown was one whose name was Dithyrambus son of Harmatides.


7.228.1
8399
θαφθεῖσι δέ σφι αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ τῇ περ ἔπεσον , καὶ τοῖσι πρότερον τελευτήσασι ἢ ὑπὸ Λεωνίδεω ἀποπεμφθέντας οἴχεσθαι , ἐπιγέγραπται γράμματα λέγοντα τάδε .
There is an inscription written over these men, who were buried where they fell, and over those who died before the others went away, dismissed by Leonidas. It reads as follows:


7.228.1
8400
μυριάσιν ποτὲ τῇδε τριηκοσίαις ἐμάχοντο ἐκ Πελοποννάσου χιλιάδες τέτορες .
"Here four thousand from the Peloponnese once fought three million."


7.228.2
8401
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ τοῖσι πᾶσι ἐπιγέγραπται , τοῖσι δὲ Σπαρτιήτῃσι ἰδίῃ .
That inscription is for them all, but the Spartans have their own:


7.228.2
8402
ὦ ξεῖν’ , ἀγγέλλειν Λακεδαιμονίοις ὅτι τῇδε κείμεθα τοῖς κείνων ῥήμασι πειθόμενοι .
"Foreigner, go tell the Spartans that we lie here obedient to their commands."


7.228.3
8403
Λακεδαιμονίοισι μὲν δὴ τοῦτο , τῷ δὲ μάντι τόδε .
That one is to the Lacedaemonians, this one to the seer:


7.228.3
8404
μνῆμα τόδε κλεινοῖο Μεγιστία , ὅν ποτε Μῆδοι Σπερχειὸν ποταμὸν κτεῖναν ἀμειψάμενοι , μάντιος , ὃς τότε κῆρας ἐπερχομένας σάφα εἰδώς οὐκ ἔτλη Σπάρτης ἡγεμόνα προλιπεῖν .
"This is a monument to the renowned Megistias, / Slain by the Medes who crossed the Spercheius river. / The seer knew well his coming doom, / But endured not to abandon the leaders of Sparta."


7.228.4
8405
ἐπιγράμμασι μέν νυν καὶ στήλῃσι , ἔξω ἢ τὸ τοῦ μάντιος ἐπίγραμμα , Ἀμφικτύονες εἰσὶ σφέας οἱ ἐπικοσμήσαντες ·
Except for the seer's inscription, the Amphictyons are the ones who honored them by erecting inscriptions and pillars.


7.228.4
8406
τὸ δὲ τοῦ μάντιος Μεγιστίεω Σιμωνίδης ὁ Λεωπρέπεος ἐστὶ κατὰ ξεινίην ὁ ἐπιγράψας .
That of the seer Megistias was inscribed by Simonides son of Leoprepes because of his tie of guest-friendship with the man.


7.229.1
8407
δύο δὲ τούτων τῶν τριηκοσίων λέγεται Εὔρυτόν τε καὶ Ἀριστόδημον , παρεὸν αὐτοῖσι ἀμφοτέροισι κοινῷ λόγῳ χρησαμένοισι ἢ ἀποσωθῆναι ὁμοῦ ἐς Σπάρτην , ὡς μεμετιμένοι γε ἦσαν ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου ὑπὸ Λεωνίδεω καὶ κατεκέατο ἐν Ἀλπηνοῖσι ὀφθαλμιῶντες ἐς τὸ ἔσχατον , ἢ εἴ γε μὴ ἐβούλοντο νοστῆσαι , ἀποθανεῖν ἅμα τοῖσι ἄλλοισι , παρεόν σφι τούτων τὰ ἕτερα ποιέειν οὐκ ἐθελῆσαι ὁμοφρονέειν , ἀλλὰ γνώμῃ διενειχθέντας Εὔρυτον μέν , πυθόμενον τῶν Περσέων τὴν περίοδον , αἰτήσαντά τε τὰ ὅπλα καὶ ἐνδύντα ἄγειν ἑωυτὸν κελεῦσαι τὸν εἵλωτα ἐς τοὺς μαχομένους , ὅκως δὲ αὐτὸν ἤγαγε , τὸν μὲν ἀγαγόντα οἴχεσθαι φεύγοντα , τὸν δὲ ἐσπεσόντα ἐς τὸν ὅμιλον διαφθαρῆναι , Ἀριστόδημον δὲ λιποψυχέοντα λειφθῆναι .
It is said that two of these three hundred, Eurytus and Aristodemus, could have agreed with each other either to come home safely together to  Sparta, since Leonidas had dismissed them from the camp and they were lying at Alpeni very sick of ophthalmia, or to die with the others, if they were unwilling to return home. They could have done either of these things, but they could not agree and had different intentions. When Eurytus learned of the Persians circuit, he demanded his armor and put it on, bidding his helot to lead him to the fighting. The helot led him there and fled, but he rushed into the fray and was killed. Aristodemus, however, lost his strength and stayed behind.


7.229.2
8408
εἰ μέν νυν ἢ μοῦνον Ἀριστόδημον ἀλγήσαντα ἀπονοστῆσαι ἐς Σπάρτην ἢ καὶ ὁμοῦ σφεων ἀμφοτέρων τὴν κομιδὴν γενέσθαι , δοκέειν ἐμοί , οὐκ ἄν σφι Σπαρτιήτας μῆνιν οὐδεμίαν προσθέσθαι ·
Now if Aristodemus alone had been sick and returned to Sparta, or if they had both made the trip, I think the Spartans would not have been angry with them.


7.229.2
8409
νυνὶ δὲ τοῦ μὲν αὐτῶν ἀπολομένου , τοῦ δὲ τῆς μὲν αὐτῆς ἐχομένου προφάσιος οὐκ ἐθελήσαντος δὲ ἀποθνήσκειν , ἀναγκαίως σφι ἔχειν μηνῖσαι μεγάλως Ἀριστοδήμῳ .
When, however, one of them died, and the other had the same excuse but was unwilling to die, the Spartans had no choice but to display great anger towards Aristodemus.


7.230.1
8410
οἳ μέν νυν οὕτω σωθῆναι λέγουσι Ἀριστόδημον ἐς Σπάρτην καὶ διὰ πρόφασιν τοιήνδε , οἳ δὲ ἄγγελον πεμφθέντα ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου , ἐξεὸν αὐτῷ καταλαβεῖν τὴν μάχην γινομένην οὐκ ἐθελῆσαι , ἀλλ’ ὑπομείναντα ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ περιγενέσθαι , τὸν δὲ συνάγγελον αὐτοῦ ἀπικόμενον ἐς τὴν μάχην ἀποθανεῖν .
Some say that Aristodemus came home safely to  Sparta in this way and by this excuse. Others say that he had been sent out of the camp as a messenger and could have gotten back in time for the battle but chose not to, staying behind on the road and so surviving, while his fellow-messenger arrived at the battle and was killed.


7.231.1
8411
ἀπονοστήσας δὲ ἐς Λακεδαίμονα ὁ Ἀριστόδημος εἶχε ὄνειδός τε καὶ ἀτιμίην ·
When Aristodemus returned to Lacedaemon, he was disgraced and without honor.


7.231.1
8412
πάσχων δὲ τοιάδε ἠτίμωτο ·
He was deprived of his honor in this way:


7.231.1
8413
οὔτε οἱ πῦρ οὐδεὶς ἔναυε Σπαρτιητέων οὔτε διελέγετο .
no Spartan would give him fire or speak with him,


7.231.1
8414
ὄνειδος δὲ εἶχε ὁ τρέσας Ἀριστόδημος καλεόμενος .
and they taunted him by calling him Aristodemus the Trembler.


7.231.1
8415
ἀλλ’ ὃ μὲν ἐν τῇ ἐν Πλαταιῇσι μάχῃ ἀνέλαβε πᾶσαν τὴν ἐπενειχθεῖσαν αἰτίην ·
In the battle at Plataea, however, he made up for all the blame brought against him.


7.232.1
8416
λέγεται δὲ καὶ ἄλλον ἀποπεμφθέντα ἄγγελον ἐς Θεσσαλίην τῶν τριηκοσίων τούτων περιγενέσθαι , τῷ οὔνομα εἶναι Παντίτην ·
It is said that another of the three hundred survived because he was sent as a messenger to Thessaly. His name was Pantites.


7.232.1
8417
νοστήσαντα δὲ τοῦτον ἐς Σπάρτην , ὡς ἠτίμωτο , ἀπάγξασθαι .
When he returned to Sparta, he was dishonored and hanged himself.


7.233.1
8418
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι , τῶν ὁ Λεοντιάδης ἐστρατήγεε , τέως μὲν μετὰ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐόντες ἐμάχοντο ὑπ’ ἀναγκαίης ἐχόμενοι πρὸς τὴν βασιλέος στρατιήν ·
The Thebans, whose general was Leontiades, fought against the king's army as long as they were with the Hellenes and under compulsion.


7.233.1
8419
ὡς δὲ εἶδον κατυπέρτερα τῶν Περσέων γινόμενα τὰ πρήγματα , οὕτω δή , τῶν σὺν Λεωνίδῃ Ἑλλήνων ἐπειγομένων ἐπὶ τὸν κολωνόν , ἀποσχισθέντες τούτων χεῖράς τε προέτεινον καὶ ἤισαν ἆσσον τῶν βαρβάρων , λέγοντες τὸν ἀληθέστατον τῶν λόγων , ὡς καὶ μηδίζουσι καὶ γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ ἐν πρώτοισι ἔδοσαν βασιλέι , ὑπὸ δὲ ἀναγκαίης ἐχόμενοι ἐς Θερμοπύλας ἀπικοίατο καὶ ἀναίτιοι εἶεν τοῦ τρώματος τοῦ γεγονότος βασιλέι .
When, however, they saw the Persian side prevailing and the Hellenes with Leonidas hurrying toward the hill, they split off and approached the barbarians, holding out their hands.


7.233.2
8420
ὥστε ταῦτα λέγοντες περιεγίνοντο ·
By this plea they saved their lives, and the Thessalians bore witness to their words.


7.233.2
8421
εἶχον γὰρ καὶ Θεσσαλοὺς τούτων τῶν λόγων μάρτυρας ·
With the most truthful words ever spoken, they explained that they were Medizers, had been among the first to give earth and water to the king, had come to Thermopylae under constraint, and were guiltless of the harm done to the king.


7.233.2
8422
οὐ μέντοι τά γε πάντα εὐτύχησαν ·
They were not, however, completely lucky.


7.233.2
8423
ὡς γὰρ αὐτοὺς ἔλαβον οἱ βάρβαροι ἐλθόντας , τοὺς μὲν τινὰς καὶ ἀπέκτειναν προσιόντας , τοὺς δὲ πλεῦνας αὐτῶν κελεύσαντος Ξέρξεω ἔστιζον στίγματα βασιλήια , ἀρξάμενοι ἀπὸ τοῦ στρατηγοῦ Λεοντιάδεω ·
When the barbarians took hold of them as they approached, they killed some of them even as they drew near.


7.233.2
8424
τοῦ τὸν παῖδα Εὐρύμαχον χρόνῳ μετέπειτα ἐφόνευσαν Πλαταιέες στρατηγήσαντα ἀνδρῶν Θηβαίων τετρακοσίων καὶ σχόντα τὸ ἄστυ τὸ Πλαταιέων .
Most of them were branded by Xerxes' command with the king's marks, starting with the general Leontiades. His son Eurymachus long afterwards was murdered by the Plataeans when, as general of four hundred Thebans, he seized the town of Plataea.


7.234.1
8425
οἱ μὲν δὴ περὶ Θερμοπύλας Ἕλληνες οὕτω ἠγωνίσαντο , Ξέρξης δὲ καλέσας Δημάρητον εἰρώτα ἀρξάμενος ἐνθένδε .
This, then, is how the Greeks fought at Thermopylae. Xerxes then sent for Demaratus and questioned him, saying first,


7.234.1
8426
" Δημάρητε , ἀνὴρ εἶς ἀγαθός .
“Demaratus you are a good man.


7.234.1
8427
τεκμαίρομαι δὲ τῇ ἀληθείῃ ·
I hold that proven by the plain truth,


7.234.1
8428
ὅσα γὰρ εἶπας , ἅπαντα ἀπέβη οὕτω .
for things have turned out no differently than you foretold.


7.234.1
8429
νῦν δέ μοι εἰπέ , κόσοι τινὲς εἰσὶ οἱ λοιποὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , καὶ τούτων ὁκόσοι τοιοῦτοι τὰ πολέμια εἴτε καὶ ἅπαντες " .
Now, tell me this: how many Lacedaemonians are left, and how many of them are warriors like these? Or is it so with them all?”


7.234.2
8430
ὃ δ’ εἶπε " ὦ βασιλεῦ , πλῆθος μὲν πολλὸν πάντων τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ πόλιες πολλαί ·
“My king,” said Demaratus, “the number of the Lacedaemonians is great, and so too the number of their cities.


7.234.2
8431
τὸ δὲ θέλεις ἐκμαθεῖν , εἰδήσεις .
But what you would like to know, I will tell you:


7.234.2
8432
ἔστι ἐν τῇ Λακεδαίμονι Σπάρτη πόλις ἀνδρῶν ὀκτακισχιλίων μάλιστα , καὶ οὗτοι πάντες εἰσὶ ὅμοιοι τοῖσι ἐνθάδε μαχεσαμένοισι ·
there is in Lacedaemon a city called Sparta, a city of about eight thousand men, all of them equal to those who have fought here;


7.234.2
8433
οἵ γε μὲν ἄλλοι Λακεδαιμόνιοι τούτοισι μὲν οὐκ ὅμοιοι , ἀγαθοὶ δέ " .
the rest of the Lacedaemonians are not equal to these, yet they are valiant men.”


7.234.3
8434
εἶπε πρὸς ταῦτα Ξέρξης " Δημάρητε , τέῳ τρόπῳ ἀπονητότατα τῶν ἀνδρῶν τούτων ἐπικρατήσομεν ;
“And how, Demaratus,” answered Xerxes, “can we overcome those men with the least trouble to ourselves?


7.234.3
8435
ἴθι ἐξηγέο ·
Come, disclose that to me,


7.234.3
8436
σὺ γὰρ ἔχεις αὐτῶν τὰς διεξόδους τῶν βουλευμάτων οἷα βασιλεὺς γενόμενος " .
for you have been their king and know the plan and order of their counsels.”


7.235.1
8437
ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο " ὦ βασιλεῦ , εἰ μὲν δὴ συμβουλεύεαί μοι προθύμως , δίκαιόν με σοί ἐστι φράζειν τὸ ἄριστον ·
“My king,” Demaratus replied, “if you in sincerity ask my counsel, it is but right that I should point out to you the best way.


7.235.1
8438
εἰ τῆς ναυτικῆς στρατιῆς νέας τριηκοσίας ἀποστείλειας ἐπὶ τὴν Λάκαιναν χώρην .
It is this, namely that you should send three hundred ships of your fleet to the Laconian land.


7.235.2
8439
ἔστι δὲ ἐπ’ αὐτῇ νῆσος ἐπικειμένη τῇ οὔνομα ἐστὶ Κύθηρα , τὴν Χίλων ἀνὴρ παρ’ ἡμῖν σοφώτατος γενόμενος κέρδος μέζον ἂν ἔφη εἶναι Σπαρτιήτῃσι κατὰ τῆς θαλάσσης καταδεδυκέναι μᾶλλον ἢ ὑπερέχειν , αἰεί τι προσδοκῶν ἀπ’ αὐτῆς τοιοῦτο ἔσεσθαι οἷόν τοι ἐγὼ ἐξηγέομαι , οὔτι τὸν σὸν στόλον προειδώς , ἀλλὰ πάντα ὁμοίως φοβεόμενος ἀνδρῶν στόλον .
There is an island lying off their coasts called  Cythera. Chilon, a man of much wisdom among us, says about it that it would be better for the Spartans if  Cythera were beneath the sea rather than above it. This he said because he expected that it would provide an opportunity for attack just as I am suggesting — not that he had any foreknowledge of your force, but he dreaded all men's forces alike.


7.235.3
8440
ἐκ ταύτης τῆς νήσου ὁρμώμενοι φοβεόντων τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους .
Let them then make that island their station and set out from there to strike fear into the Lacedaemonians.


7.235.3
8441
παροίκου δὲ πολέμου σφι ἐόντος οἰκηίου , οὐδὲν δεινοὶ ἔσονταί τοι μὴ τῆς ἄλλης Ἑλλάδος ἁλισκομένης ὑπὸ τοῦ πεζοῦ βοηθέωσι ταύτῃ .
If these have a war of their own on their borders, you will have no cause to fear that they will send men to save the rest of Hellas from being overrun by your armies;


7.235.3
8442
καταδουλωθείσης δὲ τῆς ἄλλης Ἑλλάδος ἀσθενὲς ἤδη τὸ Λακωνικὸν μοῦνον λείπεται .
furthermore, the enslavement of the rest of Hellas must weaken Laconia if it is left to stand alone.


7.235.4
8443
ἢν δὲ ταῦτα μὴ ποιέῃς , τάδε τοι προσδόκα ἔσεσθαι .
If, however, you do not do this, then expect what I will now tell you:


7.235.4
8444
ἔστι τῆς Πελοποννήσου ἰσθμὸς στεινός ·
a narrow isthmus leads to the Peloponnese;


7.235.4
8445
ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χώρῳ πάντων Πελοποννησίων συνομοσάντων ἐπὶ σοὶ μάχας ἰσχυροτέρας ἄλλας τῶν γενομενέων προσδέκεο ἔσεσθαί τοι .
all the Peloponnesians will be banded together there against you, and you may expect battles more stubborn than those that you have fought already.


7.235.4
8446
ἐκεῖνο δὲ ποιήσαντι ἀμαχητὶ ὅ τε ἰσθμὸς οὗτος καὶ αἱ πόλιες προσχωρήσουσι " .
But if you do as I have said, then you may have that isthmus and all their cities without striking a blow.”


7.235.4
8447
;
[Incorrectly added sentence break.]


7.236.1
8448
λέγει μετὰ τοῦτον Ἀχαιμένης , ἀδελφεός τε ἐὼν Ξέρξεω καὶ τοῦ ναυτικοῦ στρατοῦ στρατηγός , παρατυχών τε τῷ λόγῳ καὶ δείσας μὴ ἀναγνωσθῇ Ξέρξης ποιέειν ταῦτα , " ὦ βασιλεῦ , ὁρῶ σε ἀνδρὸς ἐνδεκόμενον λόγους ὃς φθονέει τοι εὖ πρήσσοντι ἢ καὶ προδιδοῖ πρήγματα τὰ σά .
Next spoke Achaemenes, Xerxes' brother and admiral of the fleet; it chanced that he was present during their conversation, and he feared that Xerxes would be persuaded to follow Demaratus' counsel.


7.236.1
8449
καὶ γὰρ δὴ καὶ τρόποισι τοιούτοισι χρεώμενοι Ἕλληνες χαίρουσι ·
“O king,” he said, “I see that you are listening to a man who is jealous of your good fortune or is perhaps even a traitor to your cause.


7.236.1
8450
τοῦ τε εὐτυχέειν φθονέουσι καὶ τὸ κρέσσον στυγέουσι .
These are the ways that are dear to the hearts of all Greeks: they are jealous of success and they hate power.


7.236.2
8451
εἰ δ’ ἐπὶ τῇσι παρεούσῃσι τύχῃσι , τῶν νέες νεναυηγήκασι τετρακόσιαι , ἄλλας ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου τριηκοσίας ἀποπέμψεις περιπλέειν Πελοπόννησον , ἀξιόμαχοί τοι γίνονται οἱ ἀντίπαλοι ·
No, if after the recent calamity which has wrecked four hundred of your ships you send away three hundred more from your fleet to sail round the Peloponnese, your enemies will be enough to do battle with you;


7.236.2
8452
ἁλὴς δὲ ἐὼν ὁ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς δυσμεταχείριστός τε αὐτοῖσι γίνεται , καὶ ἀρχὴν οὐκ ἀξιόμαχοί τοι ἔσονται , καὶ πᾶς ὁ ναυτικὸς τῷ πεζῷ ἀρήξει καὶ ὁ πεζὸς τῷ ναυτικῷ ὁμοῦ πορευόμενος ·
while your fleet is united, however, it is invincible, and your enemies will not be so many as to be enough to fight; moreover, all your navy will be a help to your army and your army to your navy, both moving together.


7.236.2
8453
εἰ δὲ διασπάσεις , οὔτε σὺ ἔσεαι ἐκείνοισι χρήσιμος οὔτε ἐκεῖνοι σοί .
If you separate some of your fleet from yourself, you will be of no use to them, nor they to you.


7.236.3
8454
τὰ σεωτοῦ δὲ τιθέμενον εὖ γνώμην ἔχω τὰ τῶν ἀντιπολέμων μὴ ἐπιλέγεσθαι πρήγματα , τῇ τε στήσονται τὸν πόλεμον τά τε ποιήσουσι ὅσοι τε πλῆθος εἰσί .
My counsel is rather that you make your own plans well, and take no account of the business of your adversaries, what battlefields they will choose, what they will do, and how many they are.


7.236.3
8455
ἱκανοὶ γὰρ ἐκεῖνοί γε αὐτοὶ ἑωυτῶν πέρι φροντίζειν εἰσί , ἡμεῖς δὲ ἡμέων ὡσαύτως .
They are able enough to think for themselves, and we similarly for ourselves.


7.236.3
8456
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ ἢν ἴωσι ἀντία Πέρσῃσι ἐς μάχην , οὐδὲν τὸ παρεὸν τρῶμα ἀκεῦνται " .
As for the Lacedaemonians, if they meet the Persians in the field, they will in no way repair their most recent losses.”


7.237.1
8457
ἀμείβεται Ξέρξης τοῖσιδε .
Xerxes answered"


7.237.1
8458
" Ἀχαίμενες , εὖ τε μοι δοκέεις λέγειν καὶ ποιήσω ταῦτα .
“Achaemenes, I think that you speak well, and I will do as you counsel.


7.237.1
8459
Δημάρητος δὲ λέγει μὲν τὰ ἄριστα ἔλπεται εἶναι ἐμοί , γνώμῃ μέντοι ἑσσοῦται ὑπὸ σεῦ .
Despite the fact that your advice is better than his, Demaratus does say what he supposes to be most serviceable to me,


7.237.2
8460
οὐ γὰρ δὴ κεῖνό γε ἐνδέξομαι ὅκως οὐκ εὐνοέει τοῖσι ἐμοῖσι πρήγμασι , τοῖσί τε λεγομένοισι πρότερον ἐκ τούτου σταθμώμενος καὶ τῷ ἐόντι , ὅτι πολιήτης μὲν πολιήτῃ εὖ πρήσσοντι φθονέει καὶ ἔστι δυσμενὴς τῇ σιγῇ , οὐδ’ ἂν συμβουλευομένου τοῦ ἀστοῦ πολιήτης ἀνὴρ τὰ ἄριστά οἱ δοκέοντα εἶναι ὑποθέοιτο , εἰ μὴ πρόσω ἀρετῆς ἀνήκοι ·
for assuredly I will never believe that he is no friend to my cause.


7.237.2
8461
σπάνιοι δὲ εἰσὶ οἱ τοιοῦτοι ·
I believe this of him because of all that he has already said and by what is the truth, namely, that if one citizen prospers, another citizen is jealous of him and shows his enmity by silence, and no one, (except if he has attained the height of excellence; and such are seldom seen) if his own townsman asks for counsel, will give him what he thinks to be the best advice.


7.237.3
8462
ξεῖνος δὲ ξείνῳ εὖ πρήσσοντι ἐστὶ εὐμενέστατον πάντων , συμβουλευομένου τε ἂν συμβουλεύσειε τὰ ἄριστα .
If one stranger prospers, however, another stranger is beyond all men his well-wisher and will, if he is asked, impart to him the best counsel he has.


7.237.3
8463
οὕτω ὦν κακολογίης τῆς ἐς Δημάρητον , ἐόντος ἐμοὶ ξείνου πέρι , ἔχεσθαι τινὰ τοῦ λοιποῦ κελεύω " .
It is for this reason that I bid you all to refrain from maligning Demaratus, seeing that he is a stranger and a friend.”


7.238.1
8464
ταῦτα εἴπας Ξέρξης διεξήιε διὰ τῶν νεκρῶν , καὶ Λεωνίδεω , ἀκηκοὼς ὅτι βασιλεύς τε ἦν καὶ στρατηγὸς Λακεδαιμονίων , ἐκέλευσε ἀποταμόντας τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀνασταυρῶσαι .
Having spoken in this way, Xerxes passed over the place where the dead lay and hearing that Leonidas had been king and general of the Lacedaemonians, he gave orders to cut off his head and impale it.


7.238.2
8465
δῆλά μοι πολλοῖσι μὲν καὶ ἄλλοισι τεκμηρίοισι , ἐν δὲ καὶ τῷδε οὐκ ἥκιστα γέγονε , ὅτι βασιλεὺς Ξέρξης πάντων δὴ μάλιστα ἀνδρῶν ἐθυμώθη ζῶντι Λεωνίδῃ ·
It is plain to me by this piece of evidence among many others, that while Leonidas lived, king Xerxes was more incensed against him than against all others;


7.238.2
8466
οὐ γὰρ ἄν κοτε ἐς τὸν νεκρὸν ταῦτα παρενόμησε , ἐπεὶ τιμᾶν μάλιστα νομίζουσι τῶν ἐγὼ οἶδα ἀνθρώπων Πέρσαι ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς τὰ πολέμια .
otherwise he would never have dealt so outrageously with his dead body, for the Persians are beyond all men known in the habit of honoring valiant warriors.


7.238.2
8467
οἳ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἐποίευν , τοῖσι ἐπετέτακτο ποιέειν .
They, then, who received these orders did as I have said.


7.239.1
8468
ἄνειμι δὲ ἐκεῖσε τοῦ λόγου τῇ μοι τὸ πρότερον ἐξέλιπε .
I return now to that place in my history where it earlier left off.


7.239.1
8469
ἐπύθοντο Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὅτι βασιλεὺς στέλλοιτο ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πρῶτοι , καὶ οὕτω δὴ ἐς τὸ χρηστήριον τὸ ἐς Δελφοὺς ἀπέπεμψαν , ἔνθα δή σφι ἐχρήσθη τὰ ὀλίγῳ πρότερον εἶπον ·
The Lacedaemonians were the first to be informed that the king was equipping himself to attack Hellas; with this knowledge it was that they sent to the oracle at Delphi, where they received the answer about which I spoke a little while ago.


7.239.1
8470
ἐπύθοντο δὲ τρόπῳ θωμασίῳ .
Now the way in which they were informed of this was strange.


7.239.2
8471
Δημάρητος γὰρ ὁ Ἀρίστωνος φυγὼν ἐς Μήδους , ὡς μὲν ἐγὼ δοκέω καὶ τὸ οἰκὸς ἐμοὶ συμμάχεται , οὐκ ἦν εὔνοος Λακεδαιμονίοισι , πάρεστι δὲ εἰκάζειν εἴτε εὐνοίῃ ταῦτα ἐποίησε εἴτε καὶ καταχαίρων .
Demaratus son of Ariston, an exile among the Medes, was, as I suppose (reason being also my ally), no friend to the Lacedaemonians, and I leave it to be imagined whether what he did was done out of goodwill or spiteful triumph.


7.239.2
8472
ἐπείτε γὰρ Ξέρξῃ ἔδοξε στρατηλατέειν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἐὼν ἐν Σούσοισι ὁ Δημάρητος καὶ πυθόμενος ταῦτα ἠθέλησε Λακεδαιμονίοισι ἐξαγγεῖλαι .
When Xerxes was resolved to march against Hellas, Demaratus, who was then at Susa and had knowledge of this, desired to send word of it to the Lacedaemonians.


7.239.3
8473
ἄλλως μὲν δὴ οὐκ εἶχε σημῆναι ·
He, however, feared detection and had no other way of informing them than this trick: —


7.239.3
8474
ἐπικίνδυνον γὰρ ἦν μὴ λαμφθείη ·
taking a double tablet, he scraped away the wax from it,


7.239.3
8475
ὁ δὲ μηχανᾶται τοιάδε ·
and then wrote the king's plan on the wood.


7.239.3
8476
δελτίον δίπτυχον λαβὼν τὸν κηρὸν αὐτοῦ ἐξέκνησε , καὶ ἔπειτα ἐν τῷ ξύλῳ τοῦ δελτίου ἔγραψε τὴν βασιλέος γνώμην , ποιήσας δὲ ταῦτα ὀπίσω ἐπέτηξε τὸν κηρὸν ἐπὶ τὰ γράμματα , ἵνα φερόμενον κεινὸν τὸ δελτίον μηδὲν πρῆγμα παρέχοι πρὸς τῶν ὁδοφυλάκων .
Next he melted the wax back again over the writing, so that the bearer of this seemingly blank tablet might not be troubled by the way-wardens.


7.239.4
8477
ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ ἀπίκετο ἐς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα , οὐκ εἶχον συμβαλέσθαι οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , πρίν γε δή σφι , ὡς ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι , Κλεομένεος μὲν θυγάτηρ Λεωνίδεω δὲ γυνὴ Γοργὼ ὑπέθετο ἐπιφρασθεῖσα αὐτή , τὸν κηρὸν κνᾶν κελεύουσα , καὶ εὑρήσειν σφέας γράμματα ἐν τῷ ξύλῳ .
When the tablet came to Lacedaemon, the Lacedaemonians could not guess its meaning, until at last (as I have been told) Gorgo, Cleomenes' daughter and Leonidas' wife, discovered the trick herself and advised them to scrape the wax away so that they would find writing on the wood.


7.239.4
8478
πειθόμενοι δὲ εὗρον καὶ ἐπελέξαντο , ἔπειτα δὲ τοῖσι ἄλλοισι Ἕλλησι ἐπέστειλαν .
When they did so, they found and read the message, and presently sent it to the rest of the Greeks.


7.239.4
8479
ταῦτα μὲν δὴ οὕτω λέγεται γενέσθαι .
This is the story, as it is told.



8.1.1
8480
οἱ δὲ Ἑλλήνων ἐς τὸν ναυτικὸν στρατὸν ταχθέντες ἦσαν οἵδε , Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν νέας παρεχόμενοι ἑκατὸν καὶ εἴκοσι καὶ ἑπτά ·
The Greeks appointed to serve in the fleet were these: the Athenians furnished a hundred and twenty-seven ships;


8.1.1
8481
ὑπὸ δὲ ἀρετῆς τε καὶ προθυμίης Πλαταιέες ἄπειροι τῆς ναυτικῆς ἐόντες συνεπλήρουν τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι τὰς νέας .
the Plataeans manned these ships with the Athenians, not that they had any knowledge of seamanship, but because of mere valor and zeal.


8.1.1
8482
Κορίνθιοι δὲ τεσσεράκοντα νέας παρείχοντο , Μεγαρέες δὲ εἴκοσι .
The Corinthians furnished forty ships and the Megarians twenty;


8.1.2
8483
καὶ Χαλκιδέες ἐπλήρουν εἴκοσι , Ἀθηναίων σφι παρεχόντων τὰς νέας , Αἰγινῆται δὲ ὀκτωκαίδεκα , Σικυώνιοι δὲ δυοκαίδεκα , Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ δέκα , Ἐπιδαύριοι δὲ ὀκτώ , Ἐρετριέες δὲ ἑπτά , Τροιζήνιοι δὲ πέντε , Στυρέες δὲ δύο , καὶ Κήιοι δύο τε νέας καὶ πεντηκοντέρους δύο ·
the Chalcidians manned twenty, the Athenians furnishing the ships; the Aeginetans eighteen, the Sicyonians twelve, the Lacedaemonians ten, the Epidaurians eight, the Eretrians seven, the Troezenians five, the Styrians two, and the Ceans two, and two fifty-oared barks;


8.1.2
8484
Λοκροὶ δέ σφι οἱ Ὀπούντιοι ἐπεβοήθεον πεντηκοντέρους ἔχοντες ἑπτά .
the Opuntian Locrians brought seven fifty-oared barks to their aid.


8.2.1
8485
ἦσαν μὲν ὦν οὗτοι οἱ στρατευόμενοι ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμίσιον , εἴρηται δέ μοι καὶ ὡς τὸ πλῆθος ἕκαστοι τῶν νεῶν παρείχοντο .
These are the forces which came to Artemisium for battle, and I have now shown how they individually furnished the whole sum.


8.2.1
8486
ἀριθμὸς δὲ τῶν συλλεχθεισέων νεῶν ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμίσιον ἦν , πάρεξ τῶν πεντηκοντέρων , διηκόσιαι καὶ ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ μία .
The number of ships mustered at Artemisium was two hundred and seventy-one, besides the fifty-oared barks.


8.2.2
8487
τὸν δὲ στρατηγὸν τὸν τὸ μέγιστον κράτος ἔχοντα παρείχοντο Σπαρτιῆται Εὐρυβιάδην Εὐρυκλείδεω ·
The Spartans, however, provided the admiral who had the chief command, Eurybiades, son of Euryclides,


8.2.2
8488
οἱ γὰρ σύμμαχοι οὐκ ἔφασαν , ἢν μὴ ὁ Λάκων ἡγεμονεύῃ , Ἀθηναίοισι ἕψεσθαι ἡγεομένοισι , ἀλλὰ λύσειν τὸ μέλλον ἔσεσθαι στράτευμα .
for the allies said that if the Laconian were not their leader, they would rather make an end of the fleet that was assembling than be led by the Athenians.


8.3.1
8489
ἐγένετο γὰρ κατ’ ἀρχὰς λόγος , πρὶν ἢ καὶ ἐς Σικελίην πέμπειν ἐπὶ συμμαχίην , ὡς τὸ ναυτικὸν Ἀθηναίοισι χρεὸν εἴη ἐπιτρέπειν .
In the first days, before the sending to Sicily for alliance, there had been talk of entrusting the command at sea to the Athenians.


8.3.1
8490
ἀντιβάντων δὲ τῶν συμμάχων εἶκον οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι μέγα πεποιημένοι περιεῖναι τὴν Ἑλλάδα καὶ γνόντες , εἰ στασιάσουσι περὶ τῆς ἡγεμονίης , ὡς ἀπολέεται ἡ Ἑλλάς , ὀρθὰ νοεῦντες ·
However, when the allies resisted, the Athenians waived their claim, considering the safety of Hellas of prime importance and seeing that if they quarrelled over the leadership, Hellas must perish.


8.3.1
8491
στάσις γὰρ ἔμφυλος πολέμου ὁμοφρονέοντος τοσούτῳ κάκιον ἐστὶ ὅσῳ πόλεμος εἰρήνης .
In this they judged rightly, for civil strife is as much worse than united war as war is worse than peace.


8.3.2
8492
ἐπιστάμενοι ὦν αὐτὸ τοῦτο οὐκ ἀντέτεινον ἀλλ’ εἶκον , μέχρι ὅσου κάρτα ἐδέοντο αὐτῶν , ὡς διέδεξαν ·
Knowing that, they gave ground and waived their claim, but only so long as they had great need of the others.


8.3.2
8493
ὡς γὰρ δὴ ὠσάμενοι τὸν Πέρσην περὶ τῆς ἐκείνου ἤδη τὸν ἀγῶνα ἐποιεῦντο , πρόφασιν τὴν Παυσανίεω ὕβριν προϊσχόμενοι ἀπείλοντο τὴν ἡγεμονίην τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους .
This is clear, for when they had driven the Persian back and the battle was no longer for their territory but for his, they made a pretext of Pausanias' highhandedness and took the command away from the Lacedaemonians.


8.3.2
8494
ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ὕστερον ἐγένετο .
All that, however, took place later.


8.4.1
8495
τότε δὲ οὗτοι οἱ καὶ ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμίσιον Ἑλλήνων ἀπικόμενοι ὡς εἶδον νέας τε πολλὰς καταχθείσας ἐς τὰς Ἀφέτας καὶ στρατιῆς ἅπαντα πλέα , ἐπεὶ αὐτοῖσι παρὰ δόξαν τὰ πρήγματα τῶν βαρβάρων ἀπέβαινε ἤ ὡς αὐτοὶ κατεδόκεον , καταρρωδήσαντες δρησμὸν ἐβουλεύοντο ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἀρτεμισίου ἔσω ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
But now, the Greeks who had at last come to  Artemisium saw a multitude of ships launched at  Aphetae and forces everywhere, and contrary to all expectation, the barbarian was shown to be in much different shape than they had supposed. They accordingly lost heart and began to deliberate about flight from  Artemisium homewards into  Hellas.


8.4.2
8496
γνόντες δὲ σφέας οἱ Εὐβοέες ταῦτα βουλευομένους ἐδέοντο Εὐρυβιάδεω προσμεῖναι χρόνον ὀλίγον , ἔστ’ ἂν αὐτοὶ τέκνα τε καὶ τοὺς οἰκέτας ὑπεκθέωνται .
Then the Euboeans, noticing that they were making such plans, entreated Eurybiades to wait a little while, till they themselves had removed their children and households.


8.4.2
8497
ὡς δ’ οὐκ ἔπειθον , μεταβάντες τὸν Ἀθηναίων στρατηγὸν πείθουσι Θεμιστοκλέα ἐπὶ μισθῷ τριήκοντα ταλάντοισι , ἐπ’ ᾧ τε καταμείναντες πρὸ τῆς Εὐβοίης ποιήσονται τὴν ναυμαχίην .
When they could not prevail with him, they tried another way and gave Themistocles, the Athenian admiral, a bribe of thirty talents on the condition that the Greek fleet should remain there and fight, when they fought, to defend Euboea.


8.5.1
8498
ὁ δὲ Θεμιστοκλέης τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐπισχεῖν ὧδε ποιέει ·
This was the way in which Themistocles made the Greeks stay where they were:


8.5.1
8499
Εὐρυβιάδῃ τούτων τῶν χρημάτων μεταδιδοῖ πέντε τάλαντα ὡς παρ’ ἑωυτοῦ δῆθεν διδούς .
he gave Eurybiades for his share five talents of that money, as though he were making the present of his own money.


8.5.1
8500
ὡς δέ οἱ οὗτος ἀνεπέπειστο , Ἀδείμαντος γὰρ ὁ Ὠκύτου ὁ Κορίνθιος στρατηγὸς τῶν λοιπῶν ἤσπαιρε μοῦνος , φάμενος ἀποπλεύσεσθαί τε ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἀρτεμισίου καὶ οὐ παραμενέειν , πρὸς δὴ τοῦτον εἶπε ὁ Θεμιστοκλέης ἐπομόσας " οὐ σύ γε ἡμέας ἀπολείψεις , ἐπεί τοι ἐγὼ μέζω δῶρα δώσω ἢ βασιλεὺς ἄν τοι ὁ Μήδων πέμψειε ἀπολιπόντι τοὺς συμμάχους " .
When Eurybiades had been won over in this way, none of the rest was inclined to resist save Adimantus, son of Ocytus, the Corinthian admiral, who said that he would not remain but sail away from Artemisium; to him Themistocles, adding an oath, said:


8.5.2
8501
ταῦτά τε ἅμα ἠγόρευε καὶ πέμπει ἐπὶ τὴν νέα τὴν Ἀδειμάντου τάλαντα ἀργυρίου τρία ·
“No, you of all men will not desert us, for I will give you a greater gift than the king of the Medes would send you for deserting your allies.” With that he sent three talents of silver to Adimantus ship.


8.5.3
8502
οὗτοί τε δὴ πάντες δώροισι ἀναπεπεισμένοι ἦσαν καὶ τοῖσι Εὐβοεῦσι ἐκεχάριστο , αὐτός τε ὁ Θεμιστοκλέης ἐκέρδηνε , ἐλάνθανε δὲ τὰ λοιπὰ ἔχων , ἀλλ’ ἠπιστέατο οἱ μεταλαβόντες τούτων τῶν χρημάτων ἐκ τῶν Ἀθηνέων ἐλθεῖν ἐπὶ τῷ λόγῳ τούτῳ τὰ χρήματα .
These two, then, were won over by gifts, the Euboeans got what they wanted, and Themistocles himself was the gainer. No one knew that he had kept the rest of the money, and those who had received a part of it supposed that it had been sent for that purpose by the Athenians.


8.6.1
8503
οὕτω δὴ κατέμεινάν τε ἐν τῇ Εὐβοίῃ καὶ ἐναυμάχησαν , ἐγένετο δὲ ὧδε .
So the Greeks remained in Euboea and fought there; this came about as I will now reveal.


8.6.1
8504
ἐπείτε δὴ ἐς τὰς Ἀφέτας περὶ δείλην πρωίην γινομένην ἀπίκατο οἱ βάρβαροι , πυθόμενοι μὲν ἔτι καὶ πρότερον περὶ τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον ναυλοχέειν νέας Ἑλληνίδας ὀλίγας , τότε δὲ αὐτοὶ ἰδόντες , πρόθυμοι ἦσαν ἐπιχειρέειν , εἴ κως ἕλοιεν αὐτάς .
Having arrived at Aphetae in the early part of the afternoon, the barbarians saw for themselves the few Greek ships that they had already heard were stationed off Artemisium, and they were eager to attack so that they might take them.


8.6.2
8505
ἐκ μὲν δὴ τῆς ἀντίης προσπλέειν οὔ κώ σφι ἐδόκεε τῶνδε εἵνεκα , μή κως ἰδόντες οἱ Ἕλληνες προσπλέοντας ἐς φυγὴν ὁρμήσειαν φεύγοντάς τε εὐφρόνη καταλαμβάνῃ ·
They were not prepared to make a head-on attack since they feared that the Greeks would see them coming and turn to flee with night close upon them as they fled;


8.6.2
8506
καὶ ἔμελλον δῆθεν ἐκφεύξεσθαι , ἔδει δὲ μηδὲ πυρφόρον τῷ ἐκείνων λόγῳ ἐκφυγόντα περιγενέσθαι .
it was their belief that the Greeks would save themselves by flight, and they did not want even so much as a firebearer to be saved.


8.7.1
8507
πρὸς ταῦτα ὦν τάδε ἐμηχανῶντο ·
Taking these things into consideration, they devised the following plan;


8.7.1
8508
τῶν νεῶν ἁπασέων ἀποκρίναντες διηκοσίας περιέπεμπον ἔξωθεν Σκιάθου , ὡς ἂν μὴ ὀφθείησαν ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων περιπλέουσαι Εὔβοιαν κατά τε Καφηρέα καὶ περὶ Γεραιστὸν ἐς τὸν Εὔριπον , ἵνα δὴ περιλάβοιεν οἳ μὲν ταύτῃ ἀπικόμενοι καὶ φράξαντες αὐτῶν τὴν ὀπίσω φέρουσαν ὁδόν , σφεῖς δὲ ἐπισπόμενοι ἐξ ἐναντίης .
separating two hundred ships from the whole number, they sent them to cruise outside Sciathus so that the enemies might not see them sailing round Euboea and by way of Caphereus round Geraestus to the Euripus so that they might catch the Greeks between them, the one part holding that course and barring the retreat, and they themselves attacking in front.


8.7.2
8509
ταῦτα βουλευσάμενοι ἀπέπεμπον τῶν νεῶν τὰς ταχθείσας , αὐτοὶ οὐκ ἐν νόῳ ἔχοντες ταύτης τῆς ἡμέρης τοῖσι Ἕλλησι ἐπιθήσεσθαι , οὐδὲ πρότερον ἢ τὸ σύνθημά σφι ἔμελλε φανήσεσθαι παρὰ τῶν περιπλεόντων ὡς ἡκόντων .
Upon making these plans they sent the appointed ships on their way, intending not to make an attack upon the Greeks either on that day or before the signal should be seen, whereby the ships that sailed round were to declare their coming.


8.7.2
8510
ταύτας μὲν δὴ περιέπεμπον , τῶν δὲ λοιπέων νεῶν ἐν τῇσι Ἀφέτῃσι ἐποιεῦντο ἀριθμόν .
So they sent those ships to sail round, and set about counting the rest at Aphetae.


8.8.1
8511
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ ἐν ᾧ οὗτοι ἀριθμὸν ἐποιεῦντο τῶν νεῶν , ἦν γὰρ ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ τούτῳ Σκυλλίης Σκιωναῖος δύτης τῶν τότε ἀνθρώπων ἄριστος , ὃς καὶ ἐν τῇ ναυηγίῃ τῇ κατὰ Πήλιον γενομένῃ πολλὰ μὲν ἔσωσε τῶν χρημάτων τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι , πολλὰ δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς περιεβάλετο ·
Now when they were engaged in this count, there was in the fleet one Scyllias, a man of Scione; he was the best diver of the time, and in the shipwreck at Pelion he had saved for the Persians much of their possessions and gotten much for himself in addition;


8.8.1
8512
οὗτος ὁ Σκυλλίης ἐν νόῳ μὲν εἶχε ἄρα καὶ πρότερον αὐτομολήσειν ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας , ἀλλ’ οὐ γάρ οἱ παρέσχε ὡς τότε .
this Scyllias had before now, it would seem, intended to desert to the Greeks, but he never had had so fair an occasion as now.


8.8.2
8513
ὅτεῳ μὲν δὴ τρόπῳ τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν ἔτι ἀπίκετο ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας , οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν ἀτρεκέως , θωμάζω δὲ εἰ τὰ λεγόμενα ἐστὶ ἀληθέα ·
By what means he did at last make his way to the Greeks, I cannot with exactness say.


8.8.2
8514
λέγεται γὰρ ὡς ἐξ Ἀφετέων δὺς ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν οὐ πρότερον ἀνέσχε πρὶν ἢ ἀπίκετο ἐπὶ τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον , σταδίους μάλιστά κῃ τούτους ἐς ὀγδώκοντα διὰ τῆς θαλάσσης διεξελθών .
If the story is true, it is marvellous indeed, for it is said that he dove into the sea at Aphetae and never rose to the surface till he came to Artemisium, thus passing underneath the sea for about eighty furlongs.


8.8.3
8515
λέγεται μέν νυν καὶ ἄλλα ψευδέσι εἴκελα περὶ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς τούτου , τὰ δὲ μετεξέτερα ἀληθέα ·
There are many tales about this man, some similar to lies and some true,


8.8.3
8516
περὶ μέντοι τούτου γνώμη μοι ἀποδεδέχθω πλοίῳ μιν ἀπικέσθαι ἐπὶ τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον .
but as regards the present business it is my opinion that he came to Artemisium in a boat.


8.8.3
8517
ὡς δὲ ἀπίκετο , αὐτίκα ἐσήμηνε τοῖσι στρατηγοῖσι τήν τε ναυηγίην ὡς γένοιτο , καὶ τὰς περιπεμφθείσας τῶν νεῶν περὶ Εὔβοιαν .
After arriving, he straightway told the admirals the story of the shipwreck, and of the ships that had been sent round Euboea.


8.9.1
8518
τοῦτο δὲ ἀκούσαντες οἱ Ἕλληνες λόγον σφίσι αὐτοῖσι ἐδίδοσαν .
Hearing that, the Greeks took counsel together;


8.9.1
8519
πολλῶν δὲ λεχθέντων ἐνίκα τὴν ἡμέρην ἐκείνην αὐτοῦ μείναντάς τε καὶ αὐλισθέντας , μετέπειτα νύκτα μέσην παρέντας πορεύεσθαι καὶ ἀπαντᾶν τῇσι περιπλεούσῃσι τῶν νεῶν .
there was much talk, but the opinion prevailed that they should remain and encamp where they were for that day, and then, after midnight, to put to sea and meet the ships which were sailing around.


8.9.1
8520
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο , ὡς οὐδείς σφι ἐπέπλεε , δείλην ὀψίην γινομένην τῆς ἡμέρης φυλάξαντες αὐτοὶ ἐπανέπλεον ἐπὶ τοὺς βαρβάρους , ἀπόπειραν αὐτῶν ποιήσασθαι βουλόμενοι τῆς τε μάχης καὶ τοῦ διεκπλόου .
Presently, however, meeting with no opposition, they waited for the late afternoon of the day and themselves advanced their ships against the barbarian, desiring to put to the proof his fashion of fighting and the art of breaking the line.


8.10.1
8521
ὁρῶντες δὲ σφέας οἵ τε ἄλλοι στρατιῶται οἱ Ξέρξεω καὶ οἱ στρατηγοὶ ἐπιπλέοντας νηυσὶ ὀλίγῃσι , πάγχυ σφι μανίην ἐπενείκαντες ἀνῆγον καὶ αὐτοὶ τὰς νέας , ἐλπίσαντες σφέας εὐπετέως αἱρήσειν , οἰκότα κάρτα ἐλπίσαντες , τὰς μέν γε τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὁρῶντες ὀλίγας νέας , τὰς δὲ ἑωυτῶν πλήθεΐ τε πολλαπλησίας καὶ ἄμεινον πλεούσας .
When Xerxes' men and their generals saw the Greeks bearing down on them with but a few ships, they thought that they were definitely mad and put out to sea themselves, thinking that they would win an easy victory; this expectation was very reasonable, since they saw that the Greek ships so few while their own were many times more numerous and more seaworthy.


8.10.1
8522
καταφρονήσαντες ταῦτα ἐκυκλοῦντο αὐτοὺς ἐς μέσον .
With this assurance, they hemmed in the Greeks in their midst.


8.10.2
8523
ὅσοι μέν νυν τῶν Ἰώνων ἦσαν εὔνοοι τοῖσι Ἕλλησι , ἀέκοντές τε ἐστρατεύοντο συμφορήν τε ἐποιεῦντο μεγάλην ὁρῶντες περιεχομένους αὐτοὺς καὶ ἐπιστάμενοι ὡς οὐδεὶς αὐτῶν ἀπονοστήσει ·
Now all the Ionians who were friendly to the Greeks came unwillingly to the war and were distressed to see the Greeks surrounded.


8.10.2
8524
οὕτω ἀσθενέα σφι ἐφαίνετο εἶναι τὰ τῶν Ἑλλήνων πρήγματα .
They supposed that not one of them would return home, so powerless did the Greeks seem to them to be.


8.10.3
8525
ὅσοισι δὲ καὶ ἡδομένοισι ἦν τὸ γινόμενον , ἅμιλλαν ἐποιεῦντο ὅκως αὐτὸς ἕκαστος πρῶτος νέα Ἀττικὴν ἑλὼν παρὰ βασιλέος δῶρα λάμψεται ·
Those who were glad about the business, however, vied each with each that he might be the first to take an Attic ship and receive gifts from the king,


8.10.3
8526
Ἀθηναίων γὰρ αὐτοῖσι λόγος ἦν πλεῖστος ἀνὰ τὰ στρατόπεδα .
for it was the Athenians of whom there was most talk in the fleet.


8.11.1
8527
τοῖσι δὲ Ἕλλησι ὡς ἐσήμηνε , πρῶτα μὲν ἀντίπρῳροι τοῖσι βαρβάροισι γενόμενοι ἐς τὸ μέσον τὰς πρύμνας συνήγαγον , δεύτερα δὲ σημήναντος ἔργου εἴχοντο ἐν ὀλίγῳ περ ἀπολαμφθέντες καὶ κατὰ στόμα .
But the Greeks, when the signal was given them, first drew the sterns of their ships together, their prows turned towards the foreigners; then at the second signal they put their hands to the work, despite the fact that they were hemmed in within a narrow space and were fighting face-to-face.


8.11.2
8528
ἐνθαῦτα τριήκοντα νέας αἱρέουσι τῶν βαρβάρων καὶ τὸν Γόργου τοῦ Σαλαμινίων βασιλέος ἀδελφεὸν Φιλάονα τὸν Χέρσιος , λόγιμον ἐόντα ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ ἄνδρα .
There they took thirty of the foreigners' ships as well as the brother of Gorgus king of Salamis, Philaon son of Chersis, a man of note in the fleet.


8.11.2
8529
πρῶτος δὲ Ἑλλήνων νέα τῶν πολεμίων εἷλε ἀνὴρ Ἀθηναῖος Λυκομήδης Αἰσχραίου , καὶ τὸ ἀριστήιον ἔλαβε οὗτος .
The first Greek to take an enemy ship was an Athenian, Lycomedes, son of Aeschraeus, and he it was who received the prize for valor.


8.11.3
8530
τοὺς δ’ ἐν τῇ ναυμαχίῃ ταύτῃ ἑτεραλκέως ἀγωνιζομένους νὺξ ἐπελθοῦσα διέλυσε .
They fought that sea-fight with doubtful issue, and nightfall ended the battle;


8.11.3
8531
οἱ μὲν δὴ Ἕλληνες ἐπὶ τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον ἀπέπλεον , οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι ἐς τὰς Ἀφέτας , πολλὸν παρὰ δόξαν ἀγωνισάμενοι .
the Greeks sailed back to Artemisium, and the barbarians to Aphetae, after faring far below their hopes in the fight.


8.11.3
8532
ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ναυμαχίῃ Ἀντίδωρος Λήμνιος μοῦνος τῶν σὺν βασιλέι Ἑλλήνων ἐόντων αὐτομολέει ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας , καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι διὰ τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον ἔδοσαν αὐτῷ χῶρον ἐν Σαλαμῖνι .
In that battle Antidorus of Lemnos, the only one of the Greeks siding with the Persian, deserted to the Greeks, and for that the Athenians gave him land in Salamis.


8.12.1
8533
ὡς δὲ εὐφρόνη ἐγεγόνεε , ἦν μὲν τῆς ὥρης μέσον θέρος , ἐγίνετο δὲ ὕδωρ τε ἄπλετον διὰ πάσης τῆς νυκτὸς καὶ σκληραὶ βρονταὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Πηλίου ·
When darkness came on, the season being then midsummer, there was abundance of rain all through the night and violent thunderings from Pelion.


8.12.1
8534
οἱ δὲ νεκροὶ καὶ τὰ ναυήγια ἐξεφέποντο ἐς τὰς Ἀφέτας , καὶ περί τε τὰς πρῴρας τῶν νεῶν εἱλέοντο καὶ ἐτάρασσον τοὺς ταρσοὺς τῶν κωπέων .
The dead and the wrecks were driven towards Aphetae, where they were entangled with the ships' prows and jumbled the blades of the oars.


8.12.2
8535
οἱ δὲ στρατιῶται οἱ ταύτῃ ἀκούοντες ταῦτα ἐς φόβον κατιστέατο , ἐλπίζοντες πάγχυ ἀπολέεσθαι ἐς οἷα κακὰ ἧκον .
The ships' crews who were there were dismayed by the noise of this, and considering their present bad state, expected utter destruction;


8.12.2
8536
πρὶν γὰρ ἢ καὶ ἀναπνεῦσαι σφέας ἔκ τε τῆς ναυηγίης καὶ τοῦ χειμῶνος τοῦ γενομένου κατὰ Πήλιον , ὑπέλαβε ναυμαχίη καρτερή , ἐκ δὲ τῆς ναυμαχίης ὄμβρος τε λάβρος καὶ ῥεύματα ἰσχυρὰ ἐς θάλασσαν ὁρμημένα βρονταί τε σκληραί .
for before they had recovered from the shipwreck and the storm off Pelion, they next endured a stubborn sea-fight, and after the sea-fight, rushing rain and mighty torrents pouring seaward and violent thunderings.


8.13.1
8537
καὶ τούτοισι μὲν τοιαύτη ἡ νὺξ ἐγίνετο , τοῖσι δὲ ταχθεῖσι αὐτῶν περιπλέειν Εὔβοιαν ἡ αὐτή περ ἐοῦσα νὺξ πολλὸν ἦν ἔτι ἀγριωτέρη , τοσούτω ὅσῳ ἐν πελάγεϊ φερομένοισι ἐπέπιπτε , καὶ τὸ τέλος σφι ἐγίνετο ἄχαρι .
This is how the night dealt with them.


8.13.1
8538
ὡς γὰρ δὴ πλέουσι αὐτοῖσι χειμών τε καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ ἐπεγίνετο ἐοῦσι κατὰ τὰ Κοῖλα τῆς Εὐβοίης , φερόμενοι τῷ πνεύματι καὶ οὐκ εἰδότες τῇ ἐφέροντο ἐξέπιπτον πρὸς τὰς πέτρας ·
To those who were appointed to sail round Euboea, however, that same night was still more cruel since it caught them on the open sea.


8.13.1
8539
ἐποιέετό τε πᾶν ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ὅκως ἂν ἐξισωθείη τῷ Ἑλληνικῷ τὸ Περσικὸν μηδὲ πολλῷ πλέον εἴη .
Their end was a terrible one, for when the storm and the rain came on them in their course off the Hollows of Euboea, they were driven by the wind in an unknown direction and were driven onto the rocks. All this was done by the god so that the Persian power might be more equally matched with the Greek, and not much greater than it.


8.14.1
8540
οὗτοι μέν νυν περὶ τὰ Κοῖλα τῆς Εὐβοίης διεφθείροντο ·
These men, then, perished at the Hollows of Euboea.


8.14.1
8541
οἱ δ’ ἐν Ἀφέτῃσι βάρβαροι , ὥς σφι ἀσμένοισι ἡμέρη ἐπέλαμψε , ἀτρέμας τε εἶχον τὰς νέας καί σφι ἀπεχρᾶτο κακῶς πρήσουσι ἡσυχίην ἄγειν ἐν τῷ παρεόντι .
As for the barbarians at Aphetae, when to their great comfort the day dawned, they kept their ships unmoved, being in their evil plight well content to do nothing for the moment.


8.14.1
8542
τοῖσι δε Ἕλλησι ἐπεβοήθεον νέες τρεῖς καὶ πεντήκοντα Ἀττικαί .
Now fifty-three Attic ships came to aid the Greeks,


8.14.2
8543
αὗταί τε δή σφεας ἐπέρρωσαν ἀπικόμεναι καὶ ἅμα ἀγγελίη ἐλθοῦσα , ὡς τῶν βαρβάρων οἱ περιπλέοντες τὴν Εὔβοιαν πάντες εἴησαν διεφθαρμένοι ὑπὸ τοῦ γενομένου χειμῶνος .
who were encouraged both by the ships coming and by the news that the barbarians sailing round Euboea had all perished in the recent storm.


8.14.2
8544
φυλάξαντες δὴ τὴν αὐτὴν ὥρην , πλέοντες ἐπέπεσον νηυσὶ Κιλίσσῃσι ·
They waited then for the same hour as before, and fell upon certain Cilician ships when they put to sea.


8.14.2
8545
ταύτας δὲ διαφθείραντες , ὡς εὐφρόνη ἐγίνετο , ἀπέπλεον ὀπίσω ἐπὶ τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον .
After destroying these when night fell, they sailed back to Artemisium.


8.15.1
8546
τρίτῃ δὲ ἡμέρῃ δεινόν τι ποιησάμενοι οἱ στρατηγοὶ τῶν βαρβάρων νέας οὕτω σφι ὀλίγας λυμαίνεσθαι , καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ Ξέρξεω δειμαίνοντες , οὐκ ἀνέμειναν ἔτι τοὺς Ἕλληνας μάχης ἄρξαι , ἀλλὰ παρακελευσάμενοι κατὰ μέσον ἡμέρης ἀνῆγον τὰς νέας .
On the third day, however, the barbarian admirals, finding it hard to bear that so few ships should do them hurt and fearing Xerxes' anger, waited no longer for the Greeks to begin the fight, but gave the word and put out to sea about midday.


8.15.1
8547
συνέπιπτε δὲ ὥστε τὰς αὐτὰς ἡμέρας τάς τε ναυμαχίας γίνεσθαι ταύτας καὶ τὰς πεζομαχίας τὰς ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι .
So it came to pass that these sea-battles were fought on the same days as the land-battles at Thermopylae;


8.15.2
8548
ἦν δὲ πᾶς ὁ ἀγὼν τοῖσι κατὰ θάλασσαν περὶ τοῦ Εὐρίπου , ὥσπερ τοῖσι ἀμφὶ Λεωνίδην τὴν ἐσβολὴν φυλάσσειν .
the seamen's whole endeavor was to hold the Euripus while Leonidas' men strove to guard the passage;


8.15.2
8549
οἳ μὲν δὴ παρεκελεύοντο ὅκως μὴ παρήσουσι ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα τοὺς βαρβάρους , οἳ δ’ ὅκως τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν στράτευμα διαφθείραντες τοῦ πόρου κρατήσουσι .
the Greeks were ordered to give the barbarian no entry into Hellas, and the Persians to destroy the Greek host and win the strait.


8.15.2
8550
ὡς δὲ ταξάμενοι οἱ Ξέρξεω ἐπέπλεον , οἱ Ἕλληνες ἀτρέμας εἶχον πρὸς τῷ Ἀρτεμισίῳ .
So when Xerxes' men ordered their battle and advanced, the Greeks remained in their station off Artemisium,


8.15.2
8551
οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι μηνοειδὲς ποιήσαντες τῶν νεῶν ἐκυκλοῦντο , ὡς περιλάβοιεν αὐτούς .
and the barbarians made a half circle of their ships striving to encircle and enclose them.


8.16.1
8552
ἐνθεῦτεν οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐπανέπλεόν τε καὶ συνέμισγον .
At that the Greeks charged and joined battle.


8.16.1
8553
ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ναυμαχίῃ παραπλήσιοι ἀλλήλοισι ἐγίνοντο .
In that sea-fight both had equal success.


8.16.2
8554
ὁ γὰρ Ξέρξεω στρατὸς ὑπὸ μεγάθεός τε καὶ πλήθεος αὐτὸς ὑπ’ ἑωυτοῦ ἔπιπτε , ταρασσομενέων τε τῶν νεῶν καὶ περιπιπτουσέων περὶ ἀλλήλας ·
Xerxes' fleet did itself harm by its numbers and size.


8.16.2
8555
ὅμως μέντοι ἀντεῖχε καὶ οὐκ εἶκε ·
The ships were thrown into confusion and ran foul of each other; nevertheless they held fast and did not yield,


8.16.2
8556
δεινὸν γὰρ χρῆμα ἐποιεῦντο ὑπὸ νεῶν ὀλιγέων ἐς φυγὴν τρέπεσθαι .
for they could not bear to be put to flight by a few ships.


8.16.3
8557
πολλαὶ μὲν δὴ τῶν Ἑλλήνων νέες διεφθείροντο πολλοὶ δὲ ἄνδρες , πολλῷ δ’ ἔτι πλεῦνες νέες τε τῶν βαρβάρων καὶ ἄνδρες , οὕτω δὲ ἀγωνιζόμενοι διέστησαν χωρὶς ἑκάτεροι .
Many were the Greek ships and men that perished there, and far more yet of the foreigners' ships and men; this is how they fought until they drew off and parted from each other.


8.17.1
8558
ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ναυμαχίῃ Αἰγύπτιοι μὲν τῶν Ξέρξεω στρατιωτέων ἠρίστευσαν , οἳ ἄλλα τε μεγάλα ἔργα ἀπεδέξαντο καὶ νέας αὐτοῖσι ἀνδράσι εἷλον Ἑλληνίδας πέντε .
In that sea-fight of all Xerxes' fighters the Egyptians conducted themselves with the greatest valor; besides other great feats of arms which they achieved, they took five Greek ships together with their crews.


8.17.1
8559
τῶν δὲ Ἑλλήνων κατὰ ταύτην τὴν ἡμέρην ἠρίστευσαν Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ Ἀθηναίων Κλεινίης ὁ Ἀλκιβιάδεω , ὃς δαπάνην οἰκηίην παρεχόμενος ἐστρατεύετο ἀνδράσι τε διηκοσίοισι καὶ οἰκηίῃ νηί .
As regards the Greeks, it was the Athenians who bore themselves best on that day, and of the Athenians Clinias son of Alcibiades. He brought to the war two hundred men and a ship of his own, all at his own expense.


8.18.1
8560
ὡς δὲ διέστησαν , ἄσμενοι ἑκάτεροι ἐς ὅρμον ἠπείγοντο .
So they parted, and each hurried gladly to his own place of anchorage.


8.18.1
8561
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες ὡς διακριθέντες ἐκ τῆς ναυμαχίης ἀπηλλάχθησαν , τῶν μὲν νεκρῶν καὶ τῶν ναυηγίων ἐπεκράτεον , τρηχέως δὲ περιεφθέντες , καὶ οὐκ ἥκιστα Ἀθηναῖοι τῶν αἱ ἡμίσεαι τῶν νεῶν τετρωμέναι ἦσαν , δρησμὸν δὴ ἐβούλευον ἔσω ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
When the Greeks had withdrawn and come out of the battle, they were left in possession of the dead and the wrecks. They had, however, had a rough time of it themselves, chiefly the Athenians, half of whose ships had suffered some damage. Now their counsel was to flee to the inner waters of Hellas.


8.19.1
8562
νόῳ δὲ λαβὼν ὁ Θεμιστοκλέης ὡς εἰ ἀπορραγείη ἀπὸ τοῦ βαρβάρου τό τε Ἰωνικὸν φῦλον καὶ τὸ Καρικόν , οἷοί τε εἴησαν ἂν τῶν λοιπῶν κατύπερθε γενέσθαι , ἐλαυνόντων τῶν Εὐβοέων πρόβατα ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν ταύτην , συλλέξας τοὺς στρατηγοὺς ἔλεγέ σφι ὡς δοκέοι ἔχειν τινὰ παλάμην , τῇ ἐλπίζοι τῶν βασιλέος συμμάχων ἀποστήσειν τοὺς ἀρίστους .
Themistocles thought that if the Ionian and Carian nations were removed from the forces of the barbarians, the Greeks might be strong enough to prevail over the rest. Now it was the custom of the Euboeans to drive their flocks down to the sea there. Gathering the admirals together, he told them that he thought he had a device whereby he hoped to draw away the best of the king's allies.


8.19.2
8563
ταῦτα μέν νυν ἐς τοσοῦτο παρεγύμνου , ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖσι κατήκουσι πρήγμασι τάδε ποιητέα σφι εἶναι ἔλεγε , τῶν τε προβάτων τῶν Εὐβοϊκῶν καταθύειν ὅσα τις ἐθέλοι ·
So much he revealed for the moment, but merely advised them to let everyone slay as many from the Euboean flocks as he wanted;


8.19.2
8564
κρέσσον γὰρ εἶναι τὴν στρατιὴν ἔχειν ἢ τοὺς πολεμίους ·
it was better that the fleet should have them, than the enemy.


8.19.2
8565
παραίνεέ τε προειπεῖν τοῖσι ἑωυτῶν ἑκάστους πῦρ ἀνακαίειν ·
Moreover, he counselled them each to order his men to light a fire;


8.19.2
8566
κομιδῆς δὲ πέρι τὴν ὥρην αὐτῷ μελήσειν , ὥστε ἀσινέας ἀπικέσθαι ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
as for the time of their departure from that place, he would see to it that they would return to Hellas unscathed.


8.19.2
8567
ταῦτα ἤρεσέ σφι ποιέειν , καὶ αὐτίκα πῦρ ἀνακαυσάμενοι ἐτράποντο πρὸς τὰ πρόβατα .
All this they agreed to do and immediately lit fires and set upon the flocks.


8.20.1
8568
οἱ γὰρ Εὐβοέες , παραχρησάμενοι τὸν Βάκιδος χρησμὸν ὡς οὐδὲν λέγοντα , οὔτε τι ἐξεκομίσαντο οὐδὲν οὔτε προσεσάξαντο ὡς παρεσομένου σφι πολέμου , περιπετέα τε ἐποιήσαντο σφίσι αὐτοῖσι τὰ πρήγματα .
Now the Euboeans had neglected the oracle of Bacis, believing it to be empty of meaning, and neither by carrying away nor by bringing in anything had they shown that they feared an enemy's coming. In so doing they were the cause of their own destruction,


8.20.2
8569
Βάκιδι γὰρ ὧδε ἔχει περὶ τούτων ὁ χρησμός .
for Bacis' oracle concerning this matter runs as follows


8.20.2
8570
φράζεο , βαρβαρόφωνος ὅταν ζυγὸν εἰς ἅλα βάλλῃ βύβλινον , Εὐβοίης ἀπέχειν πολυμηκάδας αἶγας .
"When a strange-tongued man casts a yoke of papyrus on the waves, Then take care to keep bleating goats far from the coasts of Euboea"


8.20.2
8571
τούτοισι οὐδὲν τοῖσι ἔπεσι χρησαμένοισι ἐν τοῖσι τότε παρεοῦσί τε καὶ προσδοκίμοισι κακοῖσι παρῆν σφι συμφορῇ χρᾶσθαι πρὸς τὰ μέγιστα .
To these verses the Euboeans gave no heed; but in the evils then present and soon to come they suffered the greatest calamity.


8.21.1
8572
οἳ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἔπρησσον , παρῆν δὲ ὁ ἐκ Τρηχῖνος κατάσκοπος .
While the Greeks were doing as I have said, there came to them their lookout from Trachis.


8.21.1
8573
ἦν μὲν γὰρ ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ κατάσκοπος Πολύας , γένος Ἀντικυρεύς , τῷ προσετέτακτο , καὶ εἶχε πλοῖον κατῆρες ἕτοιμον , εἰ παλήσειε ὁ ναυτικὸς στρατός , σημαίνειν τοῖσι ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι ἐοῦσι ·
There was a scout at Artemisium, one Polyas, a native of Anticyra, who was charged (and had a rowing boat standing ready for it), if the fleet should suffer a reverse to declare it to the men at Thermopylae.


8.21.1
8574
ὣς δ’ αὕτως ἦν Ἀβρώνιχος ὁ Λυσικλέος Ἀθηναῖος καὶ παρὰ Λεωνίδῃ ἕτοιμος τοῖσι ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίω ἐοῦσι ἀγγέλλειν τριηκοντέρῳ , ἤν τι καταλαμβάνῃ νεώτερον τὸν πεζόν .
Similarly, if any ill should befall the land army, Abronichus son of Lysicles, an Athenian, was with Leonidas, ready for his part to bring the news in a thirty-oared bark to the Greeks at Artemisium.


8.21.2
8575
οὗτος ὦν ὁ Ἀβρώνιχος ἀπικόμενός σφι ἐσήμαινε τὰ γεγονότα περὶ Λεωνίδην καὶ τὸν στρατὸν αὐτοῦ .
So this Abronichus came and declared to them the fate of Leonidas and his army.


8.21.2
8576
οἳ δὲ ὡς ἐπύθοντο ταῦτα , οὐκέτι ἐς ἀναβολὰς ἐποιεῦντο τὴν ἀποχώρησιν , ἐκομίζοντο δὲ ὡς ἕκαστοι ἐτάχθησαν , Κορίνθιοι πρῶτοι , ὕστατοι δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι .
When the Greeks learned this, they no longer delayed their departure but went their ways in their appointed order, the Corinthians first and last of all the Athenians.


8.22.1
8577
Ἀθηναίων δὲ νέας τὰς ἄριστα πλεούσας ἐπιλεξάμενος Θεμιστοκλέης ἐπορεύετο περὶ τὰ πότιμα ὕδατα , ἐντάμνων ἐν τοῖσι λίθοισι γράμματα .
Themistocles, however, picked out the seaworthiest Athenian ships and made his way to the places where drinking water could be found.


8.22.1
8578
τὰ Ἴωνες ἐπελθόντες τῇ ὑστεραίῃ ἡμέρῃ ἐπὶ τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον ἐπελέξαντο .
Here he engraved on the rocks words which the Ionians read on the next day when they came to Artemisium.


8.22.1
8579
τὰ δὲ γράμματα τάδε ἔλεγε .
This was what the writing said:


8.22.1
8580
" ἄνδρες Ἴωνες , οὐ ποιέετε δίκαια ἐπὶ τοὺς πατέρας στρατευόμενοι καὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα καταδουλούμενοι .
“Men of Ionia, you do wrongly to fight against the land of your fathers and bring slavery upon Hellas.


8.22.2
8581
ἀλλὰ μάλιστα μὲν πρὸς ἡμέων γίνεσθε ·
It would best for you to join yourselves to us,


8.22.2
8582
εἰ δὲ ὑμῖν ἐστι τοῦτο μὴ δυνατὸν ποιῆσαι , ὑμεῖς δὲ ἔτι καὶ νῦν ἐκ τοῦ μέσου ἡμῖν ἕζεσθε καὶ αὐτοὶ καὶ τῶν Καρῶν δέεσθε τὰ αὐτὰ ὑμῖν ποιέειν .
but if that should be impossible for you, then at least now withdraw from the war, and entreat the Carians to do the same as you.


8.22.2
8583
εἰ δὲ μηδέτερον τούτων οἷόν τε γίνεσθαι , ἀλλ’ ὑπ’ ἀναγκαίης μέζονος κατέζευχθε ἢ ὥστε ἀπίστασθαι , ὑμεῖς δὲ ἐν τῷ ἔργῳ , ἐπεὰν συμμίσγωμεν , ἐθελοκακέετε μεμνημένοι ὅτι ἀπ’ ἡμέων γεγόνατε καὶ ὅτι ἀρχῆθεν ἡ ἔχθρη πρὸς τὸν βάρβαρον ἀπ’ ὑμέων ἡμῖν γέγονε " .
If neither of these things may be and you are fast bound by such constraint that you cannot rebel, yet we ask you not to use your full strength in the day of battle. Remember that you are our sons and that our quarrel with the barbarian was of your making in the beginning.”


8.22.3
8584
Θεμιστοκλέης δὲ ταῦτα ἔγραφε , δοκέειν ἐμοί , ἐπ’ ἀμφότερα νοέων , ἵνα ἢ λαθόντα τὰ γράμματα βασιλέα Ἴωνας ποιήσῃ μεταβαλεῖν καὶ γενέσθαι πρὸς ἑωυτῶν , ἢ ἐπείτε ἀνενειχθῇ καὶ διαβληθῇ πρὸς Ξέρξην , ἀπίστους ποιήσῃ τοὺς Ἴωνας καὶ τῶν ναυμαχιέων αὐτοὺς ἀπόσχῃ .
To my thinking Themistocles wrote this with a double intent, namely that if the king knew nothing of the writing, it might induce the Ionians to change sides and join with the Greeks, while if the writing were maliciously reported to Xerxes, he might thereby be led to mistrust the Ionians and keep them out of the sea-fights.


8.23.1
8585
Θεμιστοκλέης μὲν ταῦτα ἐνέγραψε ·
Such was Themistocles' writing.


8.23.1
8586
τοῖσι δὲ βαρβάροισι αὐτίκα μετὰ ταῦτα πλοίῳ ἦλθε ἀνὴρ Ἱστιαιεὺς ἀγγέλλων τὸν δρησμὸν τὸν ἀπ’ Ἀρτεμισίου τῶν Ἑλλήνων .
Immediately after this there came to the barbarians a man of Histiaea in a boat, telling them of the flight of the Greeks from Artemisium.


8.23.1
8587
οἳ δ’ ὑπ’ ἀπιστίης τὸν μὲν ἀγγέλλοντα εἶχον ἐν φυλακῇ , νέας δὲ ταχέας ἀπέστειλαν προκατοψομένας ·
Not believing this, they kept the bringer of the news in confinement and sent swift ships to spy out the matter.


8.23.1
8588
ἀπαγγειλάντων δὲ τούτων τὰ ἦν , οὕτω δὴ ἅμα ἡλίῳ σκιδναμένῳ πᾶσα ἡ στρατιὴ ἐπέπλεε ἁλὴς ἐπὶ τὸ Ἀρτεμίσιον .
When the crews of these brought word of the truth, the whole armada sailed all together to Artemisium at the crack of dawn.


8.23.1
8589
ἐπισχόντες δὲ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χώρῳ μέχρι μέσου ἡμέρης , τὸ ἀπὸ τούτου ἔπλεον ἐς Ἱστιαίην ·
Here they waited till midday and then sailed to Histiaea.


8.23.1
8590
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ τὴν πόλιν ἔσχον τῶν Ἱστιαιέων , καὶ τῆς Ἐλλοπίης μοίρης γῆς δὲ τῆς Ἱστιαιώτιδος τὰς παραθαλασσίας χώρας πάσας ἐπέδραμον .
Upon their arrival they took possession of the Histiaeans' city and overran all the villages on the seaboard of the Ellopian region, which is a district belonging to Histiaea.


8.24.1
8591
ἐνθαῦτα δὲ τούτων ἐόντων , Ξέρξης ἑτοιμασάμενος τὰ περὶ τοὺς νεκροὺς ἔπεμπε ἐς τὸν ναυτικὸν στρατὸν κήρυκα , προετοιμάσατο δὲ τάδε ·
While they were there, Xerxes sent a herald to the fleet.


8.24.1
8592
ὅσοι τοῦ στρατοῦ τοῦ ἑωυτοῦ ἦσαν νεκροὶ ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι ( ἦσαν δὲ καὶ δύο μυριάδες ) , ὑπολιπόμενος τούτων ὡς χιλίους , τοὺς λοιποὺς τάφρους ὀρυξάμενος ἔθαψε , φυλλάδα τε ἐπιβαλὼν καὶ γῆν ἐπαμησάμενος , ἵνα μὴ ὀφθείησαν ὑπὸ τοῦ ναυτικοῦ στρατοῦ .
Before sending him, Xerxes had made the following preparations: of all his own soldiers who had fallen at Thermopylae (that is, as many as twenty thousand) he left about a thousand, and the rest he buried in trenches, which he covered with leaves and heaped earth so that the men of the fleet might not see them.


8.24.2
8593
ὡς δὲ διέβη ἐς τὴν Ἱστιαίην ὁ κῆρυξ , σύλλογον ποιησάμενος παντὸς τοῦ στρατοπέδου ἔλεγε τάδε .
When the herald had crossed over to Histiaea, he assembled all the men of the fleet and said:


8.24.2
8594
" ἄνδρες σύμμαχοι , βασιλεὺς Ξέρξης τῷ βουλομένῳ ὑμέων παραδίδωσι ἐκλιπόντα τὴν τάξιν καὶ ἐλθόντα θεήσασθαι ὅκως μάχεται πρὸς τοὺς ἀνοήτους τῶν ἀνθρώπων , οἳ ἤλπισαν τὴν βασιλέος δύναμιν ὑπερβαλέεσθαι " .
“Men of our allies, King Xerxes permits any one of you who should so desire to leave his place and come to see how he fights against those foolish men who thought they could overcome the king's power.”


8.25.1
8595
ταῦτα ἐπαγγειλαμένου , μετὰ ταῦτα οὐδὲν ἐγίνετο πλοίων σπανιώτερον ·
After this proclamation, there was nothing so hard to get as a boat,


8.25.1
8596
οὕτω πολλοὶ ἤθελον θεήσασθαι .
so many were they who wanted to see this.


8.25.1
8597
διαπεραιωθέντες δὲ ἐθηεῦντο διεξιόντες τοὺς νεκρούς ·
They crossed over and went about viewing the dead.


8.25.1
8598
πάντες δὲ ἠπιστέατο τοὺς κειμένους εἶναι πάντας Λακεδαιμονίους καὶ Θεσπιέας , ὁρῶντες καὶ τοὺς εἵλωτας .
All of them supposed that the fallen Greeks were all Lacedaemonians and Thespians, though helots were also there for them to see.


8.25.2
8599
οὐ μὲν οὐδ’ ἐλάνθανε τοὺς διαβεβηκότας Ξέρξης ταῦτα πρήξας περὶ τοὺς νεκροὺς τοὺς ἑωυτοῦ ·
For all that, however, those who crossed over were not deceived by what Xerxes had done with his own dead,


8.25.2
8600
καὶ γὰρ δὴ καὶ γελοῖον ἦν ·
for the thing was truly ridiculous;


8.25.2
8601
τῶν μὲν χίλιοι ἐφαίνοντο νεκροὶ κείμενοι , οἳ δὲ πάντες ἐκέατο ἁλέες συγκεκομισμένοι ἐς τ- αὐτὸ χωρίον , τέσσερες χιλιάδες .
of the Persians a thousand lay dead before their eyes, but the Greeks lay all together assembled in one place, to the number of four thousand.


8.25.3
8602
ταύτην μὲν τὴν ἡμέρην πρὸς θέην ἐτράποντο , τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίῃ οἳ μὲν ἀπέπλεον ἐς Ἱστιαίην ἐπὶ τὰς νέας , οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ Ξέρξην ἐς ὁδὸν ὁρμέατο .
All that day they spent in observation, and on the next the shipmen returned to their fleet at Histiaea while Xerxes' army set forth on its march.


8.26.1
8603
ἧκον δέ σφι αὐτόμολοι ἄνδρες ἀπ’ Ἀρκαδίης ὀλίγοι τινές , βίου τε δεόμενοι καὶ ἐνεργοὶ βουλόμενοι εἶναι .
There had come to them a few deserters, men of Arcadia, lacking a livelihood and desirous to find some service.


8.26.1
8604
ἄγοντες δὲ τούτους ἐς ὄψιν τὴν βασιλέος ἐπυνθάνοντο οἱ Πέρσαι περὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων τί ποιέοιεν ·
Bringing these men into the king's presence, the Persians inquired of them what the Greeks were doing.


8.26.1
8605
εἷς δέ τις πρὸ πάντων ἦν ὁ εἰρωτῶν αὐτοὺς ταῦτα .
Some individual who put this question in the name of all.


8.26.2
8606
οἳ δέ σφι ἔλεγον ὡς Ὀλύμπια ἄγουσι καὶ θεωρέοιεν ἀγῶνα γυμνικὸν καὶ ἱππικόν .
When the Arcadians told them that the Greeks were holding the Olympic festival and viewing sports and horseraces,


8.26.2
8607
ὁ δὲ ἐπείρετο ὅ τι τὸ ἄεθλον εἴη σφι κείμενον περὶ ὅτευ ἀγωνίζονται ·
the Persian asked what was the prize offered, for which they contended.


8.26.2
8608
οἳ δ’ εἶπον τῆς ἐλαίης τὸν διδόμενον στέφανον .
They told him of the crown of olive that was given to the victor.


8.26.2
8609
ἐνθαῦτα εἴπας γνώμην γενναιοτάτην Τιγράνης ὁ Ἀρταβάνου δειλίην ὦφλε πρὸς βασιλέος .
Then Tigranes son of Artabanus uttered a most noble saying (but the king deemed him a coward for it);


8.26.3
8610
πυνθανόμενος γὰρ τὸ ἄεθλον ἐὸν στέφανον ἀλλ’ οὐ χρήματα , οὔτε ἠνέσχετο σιγῶν εἶπέ τε ἐς πάντας τάδε .
when he heard that the prize was not money but a crown, he could not hold his peace, but cried,


8.26.3
8611
" παπαῖ Μαρδόνιε , κοίους ἐπ’ ἄνδρας ἤγαγες μαχησομένους ἡμέας , οἳ οὐ περὶ χρημάτων τὸν ἀγῶνα ποιεῦνται ἀλλὰ περὶ ἀρετῆς " .
“Good heavens, Mardonius, what kind of men are these that you have pitted us against? It is not for money they contend but for glory of achievement!”


8.26.3
8612
τούτῳ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα εἴρητο .
Such was Tigranes' saying.


8.27.1
8613
ἐν δὲ τῷ διὰ μέσου χρόνῳ , ἐπείτε τὸ ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι τρῶμα ἐγεγόνεε , αὐτίκα Θεσσαλοὶ πέμπουσι κήρυκα ἐς Φωκέας , ἅτε σφι ἔχοντες αἰεὶ χόλον , ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ ὑστάτου τρώματος καὶ τὸ κάρτα .
In the meantime, immediately after the misfortune at  Thermopylae, the Thessalians sent a herald to the Phocians, because they bore an old grudge against them and still more because of their latest disaster.


8.27.2
8614
ἐσβαλόντες γὰρ πανστρατιῇ αὐτοί τε οἱ Θεσσαλοὶ καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι αὐτῶν ἐς τοὺς Φωκέας , οὐ πολλοῖσι ἔτεσι πρότερον ταύτης τῆς βασιλέος στρατηλασίης , ἑσσώθησαν ὑπὸ τῶν Φωκέων καὶ περιέφθησαν τρηχέως .
Now a few years before the king's expedition, the Thessalians and their allies had invaded  Phocis with their whole army but had been worsted and roughly handled by the Phocians.


8.27.3
8615
ἐπείτε γὰρ κατειλήθησαν ἐς τὸν Παρνησὸν οἱ Φωκέες ἔχοντες μάντιν Τελλίην τὸν Ἠλεῖον , ἐνθαῦτα ὁ Τελλίης οὗτος σοφίζεται αὐτοῖσι τοιόνδε .
When the Phocians were besieged on Parnassus, they had with them the diviner Tellias of Elis;


8.27.3
8616
γυψώσας ἄνδρας ἑξακοσίους τῶν φωκέων τοὺς , ἀρίστους , αὐτούς τε τούτους καὶ τὰ ὅπλα αὐτῶν , νυκτὸς ἐπεθήκατο τοῖσι Θεσσαλοῖσι , προείπας αὐτοῖσι , τὸν ἂν μὴ λευκανθίζοντα ἴδωνται , τοῦτον κτείνειν .
Tellias devised a stratagem for them: he covered six hundred of the bravest Phocians with gypsum, themselves and their armor, and led them to attack the Thessalians by night, bidding them slay whomever they should see not whitened.


8.27.4
8617
τούτους ὦν αἵ τε φυλακαὶ τῶν Θεσσαλῶν πρῶται ἰδοῦσαι ἐφοβήθησαν , δόξασαι ἄλλο τι εἶναι τέρας , καὶ μετὰ τὰς φυλακὰς αὐτὴ ἡ στρατιὴ οὕτω ὥστε τετρακισχιλίων κρατῆσαι νεκρῶν καὶ ἀσπίδων Φωκέας , τῶν τὰς μὲν ἡμισέας ἐς Ἄβας ἀνέθεσαν τὰς δὲ ἐς Δελφούς ·
The Thessalian sentinels were the first to see these men and to flee for fear, supposing falsely that it was something supernatural, and after the sentinels the whole army fled as well. The Phocians made themselves masters of four thousand dead, and their shields, of which they dedicated half at  Abae and the rest at  Delphi.


8.27.5
8618
ἡ δὲ δεκάτη ἐγένετο τῶν χρημάτων ἐκ ταύτης τῆς μάχης οἱ μεγάλοι ἀνδριάντες οἱ περὶ τὸν τρίποδα συνεστεῶτες ἔμπροσθε τοῦ νηοῦ τοῦ ἐν Δελφοῖσι , καὶ ἕτεροι τοιοῦτοι ἐν Ἄβῃσι ἀνακέαται .
A tithe of what they won in that fight went to the making of the great statues that stand around the tripod in front of the shrine at  Delphi, and there are others like them dedicated at  Abae.


8.28.1
8619
ταῦτα μέν νυν τὸν πεζὸν ἐργάσαντο τῶν Θεσσαλῶν οἱ Φωκέες πολιορκέοντας ἑωυτούς ·
This is what the besieged Phocians did with the Thessalian footsoldiers.


8.28.1
8620
ἐσβαλοῦσαν δὲ ἐς τὴν χώρην τὴν ἵππον αὐτῶν ἐλυμήναντο ἀνηκέστως .
When the Thessalian horsemen rode into their country, the Phocians did them mortal harm;


8.28.1
8621
ἐν γὰρ τῇ ἐσβολῇ ἣ ἐστὶ κατὰ Ὑάμπολιν , ἐν ταύτῃ τάφρον μεγάλην ὀρύξαντες ἀμφορέας κενεοὺς ἐς αὐτὴν κατέθηκαν , χοῦν δὲ ἐπιφορήσαντες καὶ ὁμοιώσαντες τῷ ἄλλῳ χώρῳ ἐδέκοντο τοὺς Θεσσαλοὺς ἐσβάλλοντας .
they dug a great pit in the pass near Hyampolis and put empty jars inside it.


8.28.1
8622
οἳ δὲ ὡς ἀναρπασόμενοι τοὺς Φωκέας φερόμενοι ἐσέπεσον ἐς τοὺς ἀμφορέας .
They then covered it with earth till all was like the rest of the ground and awaited the onset of the Thessalians.


8.28.1
8623
ἐνθαῦτα οἱ ἵπποι τὰ σκέλεα διεφθάρησαν .
These rode on intending to sweep the Phocians before them, and fell in among the jars, whereby their horses' legs were broken.


8.29.1
8624
τούτων δή σφι ἀμφοτέρων ἔχοντες ἔγκοτον οἱ Θεσσαλοὶ πέμψαντες κήρυκα ἠγόρευον τάδε .
These two deeds had never been forgiven by the Thessalians, and now they sent a herald with this message:


8.29.1
8625
" ὦ Φωκέες , ἤδη τι μᾶλλον γνωσιμαχέετε μὴ εἶναι ὅμοιοι ἡμῖν .
“Men of Phocis, it is time now that you confess yourselves to be no match for us.


8.29.2
8626
πρόσθε τε γὰρ ἐν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι , ὅσον χρόνον ἐκεῖνα ἡμῖν ἥνδανε , πλέον αἰεί κοτε ὑμέων ἐφερόμεθα ·
We were even formerly preferred to you by the Greeks, as long as we were on their side,


8.29.2
8627
νῦν τε παρὰ τῷ βαρβάρῳ τοσοῦτο δυνάμεθα ὥστε ἐπ’ ἡμῖν ἐστι τῆς γῆς ἐστερῆσθαι καὶ πρὸς ἠνδραποδίσθαι ὑμέας .
and now we bear such weight with the foreigner that it lies in our power to have you deprived of your lands and to have you enslaved.


8.29.2
8628
ἡμεῖς μέντοι τὸ πᾶν ἔχοντες οὐ μνησικακέομεν , ἀλλ’ ἡμῖν γενέσθω ἀντ’ αὐτῶν πεντήκοντα τάλαντα ἀργυρίου , καὶ ὑμῖν ὑποδεκόμεθα τὰ ἐπιόντα ἐπὶ τὴν χώρην ἀποτρέψειν " .
Nevertheless, although we could easily do these things, we bear you no ill-will for the past. Pay us fifty talents of silver for what you did, and we promise to turn aside what threatens your land.”


8.30.1
8629
ταῦτά σφι ἐπαγγέλλοντο οἱ Θεσσαλοί .
This was the Thessalians' offer.


8.30.1
8630
οἱ γὰρ Φωκέες μοῦνοι τῶν ταύτῃ ἀνθρώπων οὐκ ἐμήδιζον , κατ’ ἄλλο μὲν οὐδέν , ὡς ἐγὼ συμβαλλόμενος εὑρίσκω , κατὰ δὲ τὸ ἔχθος τὸ Θεσσαλῶν ·
The Phocians alone of all that region would not take the Persians' side, and that for no other reason (if I argue correctly) than their hatred of the Thessalians.


8.30.2
8631
εἰ δὲ Θεσσαλοὶ τὰ Ἑλλήνων ηὖξον , ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέειν , ἐμήδιζον ἂν οἱ Φωκέες .
Had the Thessalians aided the Greek side, then the Phocians would certainly have stood for the Persians.


8.30.2
8632
ταῦτα ἐπαγγελλομένων Θεσσαλῶν , οὔτε δώσειν ἔφασαν χρήματα , παρέχειν τε σφίσι Θεσσαλοῖσι ὁμοίως μηδίζειν , εἰ ἄλλως βουλοίατο ·
They replied to the offer of the Thessalians that they would give no money; they could do as the Thessalians did and take the Persian part, if for any cause they so wished,


8.30.2
8633
ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἔσεσθαι ἑκόντες εἶναι προδόται τῆς Ἑλλάδος .
but they would not willingly betray the cause of Hellas.


8.31.1
8634
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἀνηνείχθησαν οὗτοι οἱ λόγοι , οὕτω δὴ οἱ Θεσσαλοὶ κεχολωμένοι τοῖσι Φωκεῦσι ἐγένοντο ἡγεμόνες τῷ βαρβάρῳ τῆς ὁδοῦ .
When this answer was returned to them, the Thessalians in their wrath against the Phocians began to guide the barbarian on his march.


8.31.1
8635
ἐκ μὲν δὴ τῆς Τρηχινίης ἐς τὴν Δωρίδα ἐσέβαλον ·
From the lands of Trachis they broke into Doris;


8.31.1
8636
τῆς γὰρ Δωρίδος χώρης ποδεὼν στεινὸς ταύτῃ κατατείνει , ὡς τριήκοντα σταδίων μάλιστά κῃ εὖρος , κείμενος μεταξὺ τῆς τε Μηλίδος καὶ Φωκίδος χώρης , ἥ περ ἦν τὸ παλαιὸν Δρυοπίς ·
there is a narrow tongue of Dorian land stretching that way, about thirty furlongs wide, between the Malian territory and the Phocian, which in old time was Dryopian.


8.31.1
8637
ἡ δὲ χώρη αὕτη ἐστὶ μητρόπολις Δωριέων τῶν ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ .
This region is the motherland of the Dorians of the Peloponnese.


8.31.1
8638
ταύτην ὦν τὴν Δωρίδα γῆν οὐκ ἐσίναντο ἐσβαλόντες οἱ βάρβαροι ·
To this Dorian territory the barbarians did no harm at their invasion,


8.31.1
8639
ἐμήδιζόν τε γὰρ καὶ οὐκ ἐδόκεε Θεσσαλοῖσι .
for the people took the Persian side, and the Thessalians would not have them harmed.


8.32.1
8640
ὡς δὲ ἐκ τῆς Δωρίδος ἐς τὴν Φωκίδα ἐσέβαλον , αὐτοὺς μὲν τοὺς Φωκέας οὐκ αἱρέουσι .
When they entered Phocis from Doris, they could not take the Phocians themselves,


8.32.1
8641
οἳ μὲν γὰρ τῶν Φωκέων ἐς τὰ ἄκρα τοῦ Παρνησοῦ ἀνέβησαν .
for some of the Phocians ascended to the heights of Parnassus.


8.32.1
8642
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἐπιτηδέη δέξασθαι ὅμιλον τοῦ Παρνησοῦ ἡ κορυφή , κατὰ Νέωνα πόλιν κειμένη ἐπ’ ἑωυτῆς ·
There is a peak of Parnassus  which rises by itself near the town Neon, has room enough for a multitude of people.


8.32.1
8643
Τιθορέα οὔνομα αὐτῇ ·
It is called Tithorea,


8.32.1
8644
ἐς τὴν δὴ ἀνηνείκαντο καὶ αὐτοὶ ἀνέβησαν .
It was there that they carried their goods and themselves ascended to it,


8.32.2
8645
οἳ δὲ πλεῦνες αὐτῶν ἐς τοὺς Ὀζόλας Λοκροὺς ἐξεκομίσαντο , ἐς Ἄμφισσαν πόλιν τὴν ὑπὲρ τοῦ Κρισαίου πεδίου οἰκημένην .
but most of them made their way out of the country to the Ozolian Locrians, where the town of Amphissa lies above the Crisaean plain.


8.32.2
8646
οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι τὴν χώρην πᾶσαν ἐπέδραμον τὴν Φωκίδα ·
The barbarians, while the Thessalians so guided their army, overran the whole of Phocis.


8.32.2
8647
Θεσσαλοὶ γὰρ οὕτω ἦγον τὸν στρατόν ·
All that came within their power they laid waste to and burnt,


8.32.2
8648
ὁκόσα δὲ ἐπέσχον , πάντα ἐπέφλεγον καὶ ἔκειρον , καὶ ἐς τὰς πόλις ἐνιέντες πῦρ καὶ ἐς τὰ ἱρά .
setting fire to towns and temples.


8.33.1
8649
πορευόμενοι γὰρ ταύτῃ παρὰ τὸν Κηφισὸν ποταμὸν ἐδηίουν πάντα , καὶ κατὰ μὲν ἔκαυσαν Δρυμὸν πόλιν κατὰ δὲ Χαράδραν καὶ Ἔρωχον καὶ Τεθρώνιον καὶ Ἀμφίκαιαν καὶ Νέωνα καὶ Πεδιέας καὶ Τριτέας καὶ Ἐλάτειαν καὶ Ὑάμπολιν καὶ Παραποταμίους καὶ Ἄβας , ἔνθα ἦν ἱρὸν Ἀπόλλωνος πλούσιον , θησαυροῖσί τε καὶ ἀναθήμασι πολλοῖσι κατεσκευασμένον ·
Marching this way down the river Cephisus, they ravaged everything that lay in their way,


8.33.1
8650
ἦν δὲ καὶ τότε καὶ νῦν ἔτι χρηστήριον αὐτόθι .
burning the towns of Drymus, Charadra, Erochus, Tethronium, Amphicaea, Neon, Pediea, Tritea, Elatea, Hyampolis, Parapotamii, and Abas, where there was a richly endowed temple of Apollo, provided with wealth of treasure and offerings.


8.33.1
8651
καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἱρὸν συλήσαντες ἐνέπρησαν .
There was also then as now a place of divination at this place.


8.33.1
8652
καί τινας διώκοντες εἷλον τῶν Φωκέων πρὸς τοῖσι ὄρεσι , καὶ γυναῖκας τινὰς διέφθειραν μισγόμενοι ὑπὸ πλήθεος .
This temple, too, they plundered and burnt, and they pursued and caught some of the Phocians near the mountains.


8.34.1
8653
παραποταμίους δὲ παραμειβόμενοι οἱ βάρβαροι ἀπίκοντο ἐς Πανοπέας .
Certain women too perished because of the multitude of their violators.


8.34.1
8654
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ἤδη διακρινομένη ἡ στρατιὴ αὐτῶν ἐσχίζετο .
Passing Parapotamii, the foreigners came to Panopea.


8.34.1
8655
τὸ μὲν πλεῖστον καὶ δυνατώτατον τοῦ στρατοῦ ἅμα αὐτῷ Ξέρξῃ πορευόμενον ἐπ’ Ἀθήνας ἐσέβαλε ἐς Βοιωτούς , ἐς γῆν τὴν Ὀρχομενίων .
There their army parted into two companies.


8.34.1
8656
Βοιωτῶν δὲ πᾶν τὸ πλῆθος ἐμήδιζε , τὰς δὲ πόλις αὐτῶν ἄνδρες Μακεδόνες διατεταγμένοι ἔσωζον , ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἀποπεμφθέντες ·
The greater and stronger part of the host marched with Xerxes himself towards Athens and broke into the territory of Orchomenus in Boeotia.


8.34.1
8657
ἔσωζον δὲ τῇδε , δῆλον βουλόμενοι ποιέειν Ξέρξῃ ὅτι τὰ Μήδων Βοιωτοὶ φρονέοιεν .
Now the whole population of Boeotia took the Persian side, and men of Macedonia sent by Alexander safeguarded their towns, each in his appointed place;


8.35.1
8658
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ τῶν βαρβάρων ταύτῃ ἐτράποντο , ἄλλοι δὲ αὐτῶν ἡγεμόνας ἔχοντες ὁρμέατο ἐπὶ τὸ ἱρὸν τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖσι , ἐν δεξιῇ τὸν Παρνησὸν ἀπέργοντες .
the reason of the safeguarding was that Xerxes should see that the Boeotians were on the Persian side.


8.35.1
8659
ὅσα δὲ καὶ οὗτοι ἐπέσχον τῆς Φωκίδος , πάντα ἐσιναμώρεον ·
So this part of the barbarian army marched as I have said, and others set forth with guides for the temple at Delphi, keeping Parnassus on their right.


8.35.1
8660
καὶ γὰρ τῶν Πανοπέων τὴν πόλιν ἐνέπρησαν καὶ Δαυλίων καὶ Αἰολιδέων .
These, too, laid waste to every part of Phocis which they occupied, burning the towns of the Panopeans and Daulii and Aeolidae.


8.35.2
8661
ἐπορεύοντο δὲ ταύτῃ ἀποσχισθέντες τῆς ἄλλης στρατιῆς τῶνδε εἵνεκα , ὅκως συλήσαντες τὸ ἱρὸν τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖσι βασιλέι Ξέρξῃ ἀποδέξαιεν τὰ χρήματα .
The purpose of their parting from the rest of the army and marching this way was that they might plunder the temple at Delphi and lay its wealth before Xerxes,


8.35.2
8662
πάντα δ’ ἠπίστατο τὰ ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ ὅσα λόγου ἦν ἄξια Ξέρξης , ὡς ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι , ἄμεινον ἢ τὰ ἐν τοῖσι οἰκίοισι ἔλιπε , πολλῶν αἰεὶ λεγόντων , καὶ μάλιστα τὰ Κροίσου τοῦ Ἀλυάττεω ἀναθήματα .
who (as I have been told) had better knowledge of the most notable possessions in the temple than of what he had left in his own palace, chiefly the offerings of Croesus son of Alyattes; so many had always spoken of them.


8.36.1
8663
οἱ Δελφοὶ δὲ πυνθανόμενοι ταῦτα ἐς πᾶσαν ἀρρωδίην ἀπίκατο , ἐν δείματι δὲ μεγάλῳ κατεστεῶτες ἐμαντεύοντο περὶ τῶν ἱρῶν χρημάτων , εἴτε σφέα κατὰ γῆς κατορύξωσι εἴτε ἐκκομίσωσι ἐς ἄλλην χώρην .
When the Delphians learned all this, they were very much afraid, and in their great fear they inquired of the oracle whether they should bury the sacred treasure in the ground or take it away to another country.


8.36.1
8664
ὁ δὲ θεός σφεας οὐκ ἔα κινέειν , φὰς αὐτὸς ἱκανὸς εἶναι τῶν ἑωυτοῦ προκατῆσθαι .
The god told them to move nothing, saying that he was able to protect what belonged to him.


8.36.2
8665
Δελφοὶ δὲ ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες σφέων αὐτῶν πέρι ἐφρόντιζον .
Upon hearing that, the Delphians took thought for themselves.


8.36.2
8666
τέκνα μέν νυν καὶ γυναῖκας πέρην ἐς τὴν Ἀχαιίην διέπεμψαν , αὐτῶν δὲ οἱ μὲν πλεῖστοι ἀνέβησαν ἐς τοῦ Παρνησοῦ τὰς κορυφὰς καὶ ἐς τὸ Κωρύκιον ἄντρον ἀνηνείκαντο , οἳ δὲ ἐς Ἄμφισσαν τὴν Λοκρίδα ὑπεξῆλθον .
They sent their children and women overseas to Achaia. Most of the men went up to the peaks of Parnassus and carried their goods into the Corycian cave, but some escaped to Amphissa in Locris.


8.36.2
8667
πάντες δὲ ὦν οἱ Δελφοὶ ἐξέλιπον τὴν πόλιν , πλὴν ἑξήκοντα ἀνδρῶν καὶ τοῦ προφήτεω .
In short, all the Delphians left the town save sixty men and the prophet.


8.37.1
8668
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀγχοῦ ἦσαν οἱ βάρβαροι ἐπιόντες καὶ ἀπώρων τὸ ἱρόν , ἐν τούτῳ ὁ προφήτης , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Ἀκήρατος , ὁρᾷ πρὸ τοῦ νηοῦ ὅπλα προκείμενα ἔσωθεν ἐκ τοῦ μεγάρου ἐξενηνειγμένα ἱρά , τῶν οὐκ ὅσιον ἦν ἅπτεσθαι ἀνθρώπων οὐδενί .
Now when the barbarians drew near and could see the temple, the prophet, whose name was Aceratus, saw certain sacred arms, which no man might touch without sacrilege, brought out of the chamber within and laid before the shrine.


8.37.2
8669
ὃ μὲν δὴ ἤιε Δελφῶν τοῖσι παρεοῦσι σημανέων τὸ τέρας ·
So he went to tell the Delphians of this miracle,


8.37.2
8670
οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι ἐπειδὴ ἐγίνοντο ἐπειγόμενοι κατὰ τὸ ἱρὸν τῆς Προναίης Ἀθηναίης , ἐπιγίνεταί σφι τέρεα ἔτι μέζονα τοῦ πρὶν γενομένου τέρεος .
but when the barbarians came with all speed near to the temple of Athena Pronaea, they were visited by miracles yet greater than the aforesaid.


8.37.2
8671
θῶμα μὲν γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο κάρτα ἐστί , ὅπλα ἀρήια αὐτόματα φανῆναι ἔξω προκείμενα τοῦ νηοῦ ·
Marvellous indeed it is, that weapons of war should of their own motion appear lying outside in front of the shrine,


8.37.2
8672
τὰ δὲ δὴ ἐπὶ τούτῳ δεύτερα ἐπιγενόμενα καὶ διὰ πάντων φασμάτων ἄξια θωμάσαι μάλιστα .
but the visitation which followed was more wondrous than anything else ever seen.


8.37.3
8673
ἐπεὶ γὰρ δὴ ἦσαν ἐπιόντες οἱ βάρβαροι κατὰ τὸ ἱρὸν τῆς Προναίης Ἀθηναίης , ἐν τούτῳ ἐκ μὲν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ κεραυνοὶ αὐτοῖσι ἐνέπιπτον , ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ Παρνησοῦ ἀπορραγεῖσαι δύο κορυφαὶ ἐφέροντο πολλῷ πατάγῳ ἐς αὐτοὺς καὶ κατέβαλον συχνούς σφεων , ἐκ δὲ τοῦ ἱροῦ τῆς Προναίης βοή τε καὶ ἀλαλαγμὸς ἐγίνετο .
When the barbarians were near to the temple of Athena Pronaea, they were struck by thunderbolts from the sky, and two peaks broken off from  Parnassus came rushing among them with a mighty noise and overwhelmed many of them. In addition to this a shout and a cry of triumph were heard from the temple of Athena.


8.38.1
8674
συμμιγέντων δὲ τούτων πάντων , φόβος τοῖσι βαρβάροισι ἐνεπεπτώκεε .
All of this together struck panic into the barbarians,


8.38.1
8675
μαθόντες δὲ οἱ Δελφοὶ φεύγοντας σφέας , ἐπικαταβάντες ἀπέκτειναν πλῆθός τι αὐτῶν .
and the Delphians, perceiving that they fled, descended upon them and killed a great number.


8.38.1
8676
οἱ δὲ περιεόντες ἰθὺ Βοιωτῶν ἔφευγον .
The survivors fled straight to Boeotia.


8.38.1
8677
ἔλεγον δὲ οἱ ἀπονοστήσαντες οὗτοι τῶν βαρβάρων , ὡς ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι , ὡς πρὸς τούτοισι καὶ ἄλλα ὥρων θεῖα ·
Those of the barbarians who returned said (as I have been told) that they had seen other divine signs besides what I have just described:


8.38.1
8678
δύο γὰρ ὁπλίτας μέζονας ἢ κατ’ ἀνθρώπων φύσιν ἔχοντας ἕπεσθαί σφι κτείνοντας καὶ διώκοντας .
two men-at-arms of stature greater than human, they said, had come after them, slaying and pursuing.


8.39.1
8679
τούτους δὲ τοὺς δύο Δελφοὶ λέγουσι εἶναι ἐπιχωρίους ἥρωας , Φύλακόν τε καὶ Αὐτόνοον , τῶν τὰ τεμένεα ἐστὶ περὶ τὸ ἱρόν , Φυλάκου μὲν παρ’ αὐτὴν τὴν ὁδὸν κατύπερθε τοῦ ἱροῦ τῆς Προναίης , Αὐτονόου δὲ πέλας τῆς Κασταλίης ὑπὸ τῇ Ὑαμπείῃ κορυφῇ .
These two, say the Delphians, were the native heroes Phylacus and Autonous, whose precincts are near the temple, Phylacus' by the road itself above the shrine of Athena Pronaea, and Autonous' near the Castalian spring, under the Hyarapean Peak.


8.39.2
8680
οἱ δὲ πεσόντες ἀπὸ τοῦ Παρνησοῦ λίθοι ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἡμέας ἦσαν σόοι , ἐν τῷ τεμένεϊ τῆς Προναίης Ἀθηναίης κείμενοι , ἐς τὸ ἐνέσκηψαν διὰ τῶν βαρβάρων φερόμενοι .
The rocks that fell from Parnassus were yet to be seen in my day, lying in the precinct of Athena Pronaea, from where their descent through the foreigners' ranks had hurled them.


8.39.2
8681
τούτων μέν νυν τῶν ἀνδρῶν αὕτη ἀπὸ τοῦ ἱροῦ ἀπαλλαγὴ γίνεται .
Such, then, was the manner of those men's departure from the temple.


8.40.1
8682
ὁ δὲ Ἑλλήνων ναυτικὸς στρατὸς ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἀρτεμισίου Ἀθηναίων δεηθέντων ἐς Σαλαμῖνα κατίσχει τὰς νέας .
At the request of the Athenians, the fleet of the Hellenes came from Artemisium and put in at Salamis.


8.40.1
8683
τῶνδε δὲ εἵνεκα προσεδεήθησαν αὐτῶν σχεῖν πρὸς Σαλαμῖνα Ἀθηναῖοι , ἵνα αὐτοὶ παῖδάς τε καὶ γυναῖκας ὑπεξαγάγωνται ἐκ τῆς Ἀττικῆς , πρὸς δὲ καὶ βουλεύσωνται τὸ ποιητέον αὐτοῖσι ἔσται .
The Athenians requested them to put in at Salamis so that they take their children and women out of Attica and also take counsel what they should do.


8.40.1
8684
ἐπὶ γὰρ τοῖσι κατήκουσι πρήγμασι βουλὴν ἔμελλον ποιήσασθαι ὡς ἐψευσμένοι γνώμης .
They had been disappointed in their plans, so they were going to hold a council about the current state of affairs.


8.40.2
8685
δοκέοντες γὰρ εὑρήσειν Πελοποννησίους πανδημεὶ ἐν τῇ Βοιωτίῃ ὑποκατημένους τὸν βάρβαρον , τῶν μὲν εὗρον οὐδὲν ἐόν , οἳ δὲ ἐπυνθάνοντο τὸν Ἰσθμὸν αὐτοὺς τειχέοντας , ὡς τὴν Πελοπόννησον περὶ πλείστου τε ποιευμένους περιεῖναι καὶ ταύτην ἔχοντας ἐν φυλακῇ , τὰ ἄλλα δὲ ἀπιέναι .
They expected to find the entire population of the Peloponnese in Boeotia awaiting the barbarian,


8.40.2
8686
ταῦτα πυνθανόμενοι οὕτω δὴ προσεδεήθησαν σφέων σχεῖν πρὸς τὴν Σαλαμῖνα .
but they found no such thing. They learned that they were fortifying the Isthmus instead and considered the defense of the Peloponnese the most important thing, disregarding all the rest. When the Athenians learned this, they asked the fleet to put in at Salamis.


8.41.1
8687
οἱ μὲν δὴ ἄλλοι κατέσχον ἐς τὴν Σαλαμῖνα , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ἐς τὴν ἑωυτῶν .
While the others put in at Salamis, the Athenians landed in their own country.


8.41.1
8688
μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἄπιξιν κήρυγμα ἐποιήσαντο , Ἀθηναίων τῇ τις δύναται σώζειν τέκνα τε καὶ τοὺς οἰκέτας .
When they arrived, they made a proclamation that every Athenian should save his children and servants as he best could.


8.41.1
8689
ἐνθαῦτα οἱ μὲν πλεῖστοι ἐς Τροίζηνα ἀπέστειλαν , οἳ δὲ ἐς Αἴγιναν , οἳ δὲ ἐς Σαλαμῖνα .
Thereupon most of them sent the members of their households to Troezen, and some to Aegina and Salamis.


8.41.2
8690
ἔσπευσαν δὲ ταῦτα ὑπεκθέσθαι τῷ χρηστηρίῳ τε βουλόμενοι ὑπηρετέειν καὶ δὴ καὶ τοῦδε εἵνεκα οὐκ ἥκιστα .
They were anxious to get everything out safely because they wished to obey the oracle,


8.41.2
8691
λέγουσι Ἀθηναῖοι ὄφιν μέγαν φύλακα τῆς ἀκροπόλιος ἐνδιαιτᾶσθαι ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ ·
and also not least because of this: the Athenians say that a great snake lives in the sacred precinct guarding the acropolis.


8.41.2
8692
λέγουσί τε ταῦτα καὶ δὴ ὡς ἐόντι ἐπιμήνια ἐπιτελέουσι προτιθέντες ·
They say this and even put out monthly offerings for it as if it really existed.


8.41.2
8693
τὰ δ’ ἐπιμήνια μελιτόεσσα ἐστί .
The monthly offering is a honey-cake.


8.41.3
8694
αὕτη δὴ ἡ μελιτόεσσα ἐν τῷ πρόσθε αἰεὶ χρόνῳ ἀναισιμουμένη τότε ἦν ἄψαυστος .
In all the time before this the honey-cake had been consumed,


8.41.3
8695
σημηνάσης δὲ ταῦτα τῆς ἱρείης , μᾶλλόν τι οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ προθυμότερον ἐξέλιπον τὴν πόλιν , ὡς καὶ τῆς θεοῦ ἀπολελοιπυίης τὴν ἀκρόπολιν .
but this time it was untouched. When the priestess interpreted the significance of this, the Athenians were all the more eager to abandon the city since the goddess had deserted the acropolis.


8.41.3
8696
ὡς δέ σφι πάντα ὑπεξέκειτο , ἔπλεον ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον .
When they had removed everything to safety, they returned to the camp.


8.42.1
8697
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ ἀπ’ Ἀρτεμισίου ἐς Σαλαμῖνα κατέσχον τὰς νέας , συνέρρεε καὶ ὁ λοιπὸς πυνθανόμενος ὁ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ναυτικὸς στρατὸς ἐκ Τροίζηνος ·
When those from Artemisium had put in at Salamis, the rest of the Hellenic fleet learned of this and streamed in from Troezen,


8.42.1
8698
ἐς γὰρ Πώγωνα τὸν Τροιζηνίων λιμένα προείρητο συλλέγεσθαι .
for they had been commanded to assemble at Pogon, the harbor of Troezen.


8.42.1
8699
συνελέχθησάν τε δὴ πολλῷ πλεῦνες νέες ἢ ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ ἐναυμάχεον καὶ ἀπὸ πολίων πλεύνων .
Many more ships assembled now than had fought at Artemisium, and from more cities.


8.42.2
8700
ναύαρχος μέν νυν ἐπῆν ὡυτὸς ὅς περ ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ , Εὐρυβιάδης ὁ Εὐρυκλείδεω ἀνὴρ Σπαρτιήτης , οὐ μέντοι γένεος τοῦ βασιληίου ἐών ·
The admiral was the same as at Artemisium, Eurybiades son of Euryclides, a Spartan but not of royal descent.


8.42.2
8701
νέας δὲ πολλῷ πλείστας τε καὶ ἄριστα πλεούσας παρείχοντο Ἀθηναῖοι .
The ships provided by the Athenians were by far the most numerous and the most seaworthy.


8.43.1
8702
ἐστρατεύοντο δὲ οἵδε ·
The following took part in the war:


8.43.1
8703
ἐκ μὲν Πελοποννήσου Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἑκκαίδεκα νέας παρεχόμενοι , Κορίνθιοι δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ πλήρωμα παρεχόμενοι καὶ ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ ·
from the Peloponnese, the Lacedaemonians provided sixteen ships; the Corinthians the same number as at Artemisium;


8.43.1
8704
Σικυώνιοι δὲ πεντεκαίδεκα παρείχοντο νέας , Ἐπιδαύριοι δὲ δέκα , Τροιζήνιοι δὲ πέντε , Ἑρμιονέες δὲ τρεῖς , ἐόντες οὗτοι πλὴν Ἑρμιονέων Δωρικόν τε καὶ Μακεδνὸν ἔθνος , ἐξ Ἐρινεοῦ τε καὶ Πίνδου καὶ τῆς Δρυοπίδος ὕστατα ὁρμηθέντες .
the Sicyonians furnished fifteen ships, the Epidaurians ten, the Troezenians five, the Hermioneans three. All of these except the Hermioneans are Dorian and Macedonian and had last come from Erineus and Pindus and the Dryopian region.


8.43.1
8705
οἱ δὲ Ἑρμιονέες εἰσὶ Δρύοπες , ὑπὸ Ἡρακλέος τε καὶ Μηλιέων ἐκ τῆς νῦν Δωρίδος καλεομένης χώρης ἐξαναστάντες .
The Hermioneans are Dryopians, driven out of the country now called Doris by Herakles and the Malians.


8.44.1
8706
οὗτοι μέν νυν Πελοποννησίων ἐστρατεύοντο , οἱ δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἔξω ἠπείρου , Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν πρὸς πάντας τοὺς ἄλλους παρεχόμενοι νέας ὀγδώκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν , μοῦνοι ·
These, then, were the Peloponnesians who took part in the war.


8.44.1
8707
ἐν Σαλαμῖνι γὰρ οὐ συνεναυμάχησαν Πλαταιέες Ἀθηναίοισι διὰ τοιόνδε τι πρῆγμα ·
From the mainland outside the Peloponnese came the following: the Athenians provided more than all the rest, one hundred and eighty ships. They provided these alone, since the Plataeans did not fight with the Athenians at Salamis for this reason:


8.44.1
8708
ἀπαλλασσομένων τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἀρτεμισίου , ὡς ἐγίνοντο κατὰ Χαλκίδα , οἱ Πλαταιέες ἀποβάντες ἐς τὴν περαίην τῆς Βοιωτίης χώρης πρὸς ἐκκομιδὴν ἐτράποντο τῶν οἰκετέων .
when the Hellenes departed from Artemisium and were off Chalcis, the Plataeans landed on the opposite shore of Boeotia and attended to the removal of their households.


8.44.1
8709
οὗτοι μέν νυν τούτους σώζοντες ἐλείφθησαν .
In bringing these to safety they were left behind.


8.44.2
8710
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ἐπὶ μὲν Πελασγῶν ἐχόντων τὴν νῦν Ἑλλάδα καλεομένην ἦσαν Πελασγοί , ὀνομαζόμενοι Κραναοί , ἐπὶ δὲ Κέκροπος βασιλέος ἐκλήθησαν Κεκροπίδαι , ἐκδεξαμένου δὲ Ἐρεχθέος τὴν ἀρχὴν Ἀθηναῖοι μετωνομάσθησαν , Ἴωνος δὲ τοῦ Ξούθου στρατάρχεω γενομένου Ἀθηναίοισι ἐκλήθησαν ἀπὸ τούτου Ἴωνες .
The Athenians, while the Pelasgians ruled what is now called  Hellas, were Pelasgians, bearing the name of Cranai. When Cecrops was their king they were called Cecropidae, and when Erechtheus succeeded to the rule, they changed their name and became Athenians. When, however, Ion son of Xuthus was commander of the Athenian army, they were called after him Ionians.


8.45.1
8711
Μεγαρέες δὲ τ- αὐτὸ πλήρωμα παρείχοντο καὶ ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ , Ἀμπρακιῶται δὲ ἑπτὰ νέας ἔχοντες ἐπεβοήθησαν , Λευκάδιοι δὲ τρεῖς , ἔθνος ἐόντες οὗτοι Δωρικὸν ἀπὸ Κορίνθου .
The Megarians provided the same number as at  Artemisium. The Ampraciots came to help with seven ships, and the Leucadians, who are Dorians from  Corinth, with three.


8.46.1
8712
νησιωτέων δὲ Αἰγινῆται τριήκοντα παρείχοντο .
Of the islanders, the Aeginetans provided thirty ships.


8.46.1
8713
ἦσαν μέν σφι καὶ ἄλλαι πεπληρωμέναι νέες , ἀλλὰ τῇσι μὲν τὴν ἑωυτῶν ἐφύλασσον , τριήκοντα δὲ τῇσι ἄριστα πλεούσῃσι ἐν Σαλαμῖνι ἐναυμάχησαν .
They had other manned ships, but they guarded their own land with these and fought at Salamis with the thirty most seaworthy.


8.46.1
8714
Αἰγινῆται δὲ εἰσὶ Δωριέες ἀπὸ Ἐπιδαύρου ·
The Aeginetans are Dorians from Epidaurus.


8.46.2
8715
τῇ δὲ νήσῳ πρότερον οὔνομα ἦν Οἰνώνη .
Their island was formerly called Oenone.


8.46.2
8716
μετὰ δὲ Αἰγινήτας Χαλκιδέες τὰς ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ εἴκοσι παρεχόμενοι καὶ Ἐρετριέες τὰς ἑπτά ·
After the Aeginetans came the Chalcidians with their twenty ships from Artemisium, and the Eretrians with the same seven;


8.46.2
8717
οὗτοι δὲ Ἴωνες εἰσί .
these are Ionians.


8.46.2
8718
μετὰ δὲ Κήιοι τὰς αὐτὰς παρεχόμενοι , ἔθνος ἐὸν Ἰωνικὸν ἀπὸ Ἀθηνέων .
Next were the Ceans, Ionians from Athens, with the same ships as before.


8.46.3
8719
Νάξιοι δὲ παρείχοντο τέσσερας , ἀποπεμφθέντες μὲν ἐς τοὺς Μήδους ὑπὸ τῶν πολιητέων κατά περ οἱ ἄλλοι νησιῶται , ἀλογήσαντες δὲ τῶν ἐντολέων ἀπίκατο ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας Δημοκρίτου σπεύσαντος , ἀνδρὸς τῶν ἀστῶν δοκίμου καὶ τότε τριηραρχέοντος .
The Naxians provided four ships. They had been sent by their fellow citizens to the Persians, like the rest of the islanders, but they disregarded their orders and came to the Hellenes at the urging of Democritus, an esteemed man among the townsmen and at that time captain of a trireme.


8.46.3
8720
Νάξιοι δὲ εἰσὶ Ἴωνες ἀπὸ Ἀθηνέων γεγονότες .
The Naxians are Ionians descended from Athens.


8.46.4
8721
Στυρέες δὲ τὰς αὐτὰς παρείχοντο νέας τάς περ ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ , Κύθνιοι δὲ μίαν καὶ πεντηκόντερον , ἐόντες συναμφότεροι οὗτοι Δρύοπες .
The Styrians provided the same number of ships as at Artemisium, and the Cythnians one trireme and a fifty-oared boat; these are both Dryopians.


8.46.4
8722
καὶ Σερίφιοί τε καὶ Σίφνιοι καὶ Μήλιοι ἐστρατεύοντο ·
The Seriphians, Siphnians, and Melians also took part,


8.46.4
8723
οὗτοι γὰρ οὐκ ἔδοσαν μοῦνοι νησιωτέων τῷ βαρβάρῳ γῆν τε καὶ ὕδωρ .
since they were the only islanders who had not given earth and water to the barbarian.


8.47.1
8724
οὗτοι μὲν ἅπαντες ἐντὸς οἰκημένοι Θεσπρωτῶν καὶ Ἀχέροντος ποταμοῦ ἐστρατεύοντο ·
All these people who live this side of Thesprotia and the Acheron river took part in the war.


8.47.1
8725
Θεσπρωτοὶ γὰρ εἰσὶ ὁμουρέοντες Ἀμπρακιώτῃσι καὶ Λευκαδίοισι , οἳ ἐξ ἐσχατέων χωρέων ἐστρατεύοντο .
The Thesprotians border on the Ampraciots and Leucadians, who were the ones who came from the most distant countries to take part in the war.


8.47.1
8726
τῶν δὲ ἐκτὸς τούτων οἰκημένων Κροτωνιῆται μοῦνοι ἦσαν οἳ ἐβοήθησαν τῇ Ἑλλάδι κινδυνευούσῃ μιῇ νηί , τῆς ἦρχε ἀνὴρ τρὶς πυθιονίκης Φάυλλος ·
The only ones living beyond these to help Hellas in its danger were the Crotonians, with one ship.


8.47.1
8727
Κροτωνιῆται δὲ γένος εἰσὶ Ἀχαιοί .
Its captain was Phayllus, three times victor in the Pythian games. The Crotonians are Achaeans by birth.


8.48.1
8728
οἱ μέν νυν ἄλλοι τριήρεας παρεχόμενοι ἐστρατεύοντο , Μήλιοι δὲ καὶ Σίφνιοι καὶ Σερίφιοι πεντηκοντέρους ·
All of these came to the war providing triremes, except the Melians and Siphnians and Seriphians, who brought fifty-oared boats.


8.48.1
8729
Μήλιοι μὲν γένος ἐόντες ἀπὸ Λακεδαίμονος δύο παρείχοντο , Σίφνιοι δὲ καὶ Σερίφιοι Ἴωνες ἐόντες ἀπ’ Ἀθηνέων μίαν ἑκάτεροι .
The Melians (who are of Lacedaemonian stock) provided two; the Siphnians and Seriphians, who are Ionians from Athens, one each.


8.48.1
8730
ἀριθμὸς δὲ ἐγένετο ὁ πᾶς τῶν νεῶν , πάρεξ τῶν πεντηκοντέρων , τριηκόσιαι καὶ ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ ὀκτώ .
The total number of ships, besides the fifty-oared boats, was three hundred and seventy-eight.


8.49.1
8731
ὡς δὲ ἐς τὴν Σαλαμῖνα συνῆλθον οἱ στρατηγοὶ ἀπὸ τῶν εἰρημενέων πολίων , ἐβουλεύοντο , προθέντος Εὐρυβιάδεω γνώμην ἀποφαίνεσθαι τὸν βουλόμενον , ὅκου δοκέοι ἐπιτηδεότατον εἶναι ναυμαχίην ποιέεσθαι τῶν αὐτοὶ χωρέων ἐγκρατέες εἰσί ·
When the generals from the aforementioned cities, met at Salamis, they held a council and Eurybiades proposed that whoever wanted to should give his opinion on what place under their control was most suitable for a sea battle.


8.49.1
8732
ἡ γὰρ Ἀττικὴ ἀπεῖτο ἤδη , τῶν δὲ λοιπέων πέρι προετίθεε .
Attica was already lost, and he proposed that they consider the places which were left.


8.49.2
8733
αἱ γνῶμαι δὲ τῶν λεγόντων αἱ πλεῖσται συνεξέπιπτον πρὸς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν πλώσαντας ναυμαχέειν πρὸ τῆς Πελοποννήσου , ἐπιλέγοντες τὸν λόγον τόνδε , ὡς εἰ νικηθέωσι τῇ ναυμαχίῃ , ἐν Σαλαμῖνι μὲν ἐόντες πολιορκήσονται ἐν νήσῳ , ἵνα σφι τιμωρίη οὐδεμία ἐπιφανήσεται , πρὸς δὲ τῷ Ἰσθμῷ ἐς τοὺς ἑωυτῶν ἐξοίσονται .
The consensus of most of the speakers was to sail to the Isthmus and fight at sea for the  Peloponnese, giving this reason: if they were defeated in the fight at  Salamis they would be besieged on an island, where no help could come to them, but if they were at the Isthmus they could go ashore to their own lands.


8.50.1
8734
ταῦτα τῶν ἀπὸ Πελοποννήσου στρατηγῶν ἐπιλεγομένων , ἐληλύθεε ἀνὴρ Ἀθηναῖος ἀγγέλλων ἥκειν τὸν βάρβαρον ἐς τὴν Ἀττικὴν καὶ πᾶσαν αὐτὴν πυρπολέεσθαι .
While the generals from the  Peloponnese considered this argument, an Athenian came with the message that the barbarians had reached  Attica and were destroying all of it by fire.


8.50.2
8735
ὁ γὰρ διὰ Βοιωτῶν τραπόμενος στρατὸς ἅμα Ξέρξῃ , ἐμπρήσας Θεσπιέων τὴν πόλιν , αὐτῶν ἐκλελοιπότων ἐς Πελοπόννησον , καὶ τὴν Πλαταιέων ὡσαύτως , ἧκέ τε ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας καὶ πάντα ἐκεῖνα ἐδηίου .
The army with Xerxes had made its way through Boeotia and burnt the city of the Thespians, who had abandoned it and gone to the Peloponnese, and Plataea likewise.


8.50.2
8736
ἐνέπρησε δὲ Θέσπειάν τε καὶ Πλάταιαν πυθόμενος Θηβαίων ὅτι οὐκ ἐμήδιζον .
Now the army had come to Athens and was devastating everything there. The army burnt Thespia and Plataea upon learning from the Thebans that they had not medized.


8.51.1
8737
ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς διαβάσιος τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου , ἔνθεν πορεύεσθαι ἤρξαντο οἱ βάρβαροι , ἕνα αὐτοῦ διατρίψαντες μῆνα ἐν τῷ διέβαινον ἐς τὴν Εὐρώπην , ἐν τρισὶ ἑτέροισι μησὶ ἐγένοντο ἐν τῇ Ἀττικῇ , Καλλιάδεω ἄρχοντος Ἀθηναίοισι .
Since the crossing of the  Hellespont, where the barbarians began their journey, they had spent one month there crossing into  Europe and in three more months were in  Attica, when Calliades was archon at  Athens.


8.51.2
8738
καὶ αἱρέουσι ἔρημον τὸ ἄστυ , καί τινας ὀλίγους εὑρίσκουσι τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἐν τῷ ἱρῷ ἐόντας , ταμίας τε τοῦ ἱροῦ καὶ πένητας ἀνθρώπους , οἳ φραξάμενοι τὴν ἀκρόπολιν θύρῃσί τε καὶ ξύλοισι ἠμύνοντο τοὺς ἐπιόντας , ἅμα μὲν ὑπ’ ἀσθενείης βίου οὐκ ἐκχωρήσαντες ἐς Σαλαμῖνα , πρὸς δὲ αὐτοὶ δοκέοντες ἐξευρηκέναι τὸ μαντήιον τὸ ἡ Πυθίη σφι ἔχρησε , τὸ ξύλινον τεῖχος ἀνάλωτον ἔσεσθαι ·
When they took the town it was deserted, but in the sacred precinct they found a few Athenians, stewards of the sacred precinct and poor people, who defended themselves against the assault by fencing the acropolis with doors and logs.


8.51.2
8739
αὐτὸ δὴ τοῦτο εἶναι τὸ κρησφύγετον κατὰ τὸ μαντήιον καὶ οὐ τὰς νέας .
They had not withdrawn to Salamis not only because of poverty but also because they thought they had discovered the meaning of the oracle the Pythia had given, namely that the wooden wall would be impregnable. They believed that according to the oracle this, not the ships, was the refuge.


8.52.1
8740
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ἱζόμενοι ἐπὶ τὸν καταντίον τῆς ἀκροπόλιος ὄχθον , τὸν Ἀθηναῖοι καλέουσι Ἀρήιον πάγον , ἐπολιόρκεον τρόπον τοιόνδε ·
The Persians took up a position on the hill opposite the acropolis, which the Athenians call the Areopagus, and besieged them in this way:


8.52.1
8741
ὅκως στυππεῖον περὶ τοὺς ὀιστοὺς περιθέντες ἅψειαν , ἐτόξευον ἐς τὸ φράγμα .
they wrapped arrows in tar and set them on fire, and then shot them at the barricade.


8.52.1
8742
ἐνθαῦτα Ἀθηναίων οἱ πολιορκεόμενοι ὅμως ἠμύνοντο , καίπερ ἐς τὸ ἔσχατον κακοῦ ἀπιγμένοι καὶ τοῦ φράγματος προδεδωκότος ·
Still the besieged Athenians defended themselves, although they had come to the utmost danger and their barricade had failed them.


8.52.2
8743
οὐδὲ λόγους τῶν Πεισιστρατιδέων προσφερόντων περὶ ὁμολογίης ἐνεδέκοντο , ἀμυνόμενοι δὲ ἄλλα τε ἀντεμηχανῶντο καὶ δὴ καὶ προσιόντων τῶν βαρβάρων πρὸς τὰς πύλας ὀλοιτρόχους ἀπίεσαν , ὥστε Ξέρξην ἐπὶ χρόνον συχνὸν ἀπορίῃσι ἐνέχεσθαι οὐ δυνάμενον σφέας ἑλεῖν .
When the Pisistratids proposed terms of surrender, they would not listen but contrived defenses such as rolling down boulders onto the barbarians when they came near the gates. For a long time Xerxes was at a loss, unable to capture them.


8.53.1
8744
χρόνῳ δ’ ἐκ τῶν ἀπόρων ἐφάνη δή τις ἔξοδος τοῖσι βαρβάροισι ·
In time a way out of their difficulties was revealed to the barbarians,


8.53.1
8745
ἔδεε γὰρ κατὰ τὸ θεοπρόπιον πᾶσαν τὴν Ἀττικὴν τὴν ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ γενέσθαι ὑπὸ Πέρσῃσι .
since according to the oracle all the mainland of Attica had to become subject to the Persians.


8.53.1
8746
ἔμπροσθε ὦν πρὸ τῆς ἀκροπόλιος , ὄπισθε δὲ τῶν πυλέων καὶ τῆς ἀνόδου , τῇ δὴ οὔτε τις ἐφύλασσε οὔτ’ ἂν ἤλπισε μή κοτέ τις κατὰ ταῦτα ἀναβαίη ἀνθρώπων , ταύτῃ ἀνέβησαν τινὲς κατὰ τὸ ἱρὸν τῆς Κέκροπος θυγατρὸς Ἀγλαύρου , καίτοι περ ἀποκρήμνου ἐόντος τοῦ χώρου .
In front of the acropolis, and behind the gates and the ascent, was a place where no one was on guard, since no one thought any man could go up that way. Here some men climbed up, near the sacred precinct of Cecrops' daughter Aglaurus, although the place was a sheer cliff.


8.53.2
8747
ὡς δὲ εἶδον αὐτοὺς ἀναβεβηκότας οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐπὶ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν , οἳ μὲν ἐρρίπτεον ἑωυτοὺς κατὰ τοῦ τείχεος κάτω καὶ διεφθείροντο , οἳ δὲ ἐς τὸ μέγαρον κατέφευγον .
When the Athenians saw that they had ascended to the acropolis, some threw themselves off the wall and were killed, and others fled into the chamber.


8.53.2
8748
τῶν δὲ Περσέων οἱ ἀναβεβηκότες πρῶτον μὲν ἐτράποντο πρὸς τὰς πύλας , ταύτας δὲ ἀνοίξαντες τοὺς ἱκέτας ἐφόνευον ·
The Persians who had come up first turned to the gates, opened them, and murdered the suppliants.


8.53.2
8749
ἐπεὶ δέ σφι πάντες κατέστρωντο , τὸ ἱρὸν συλήσαντες ἐνέπρησαν πᾶσαν τὴν ἀκρόπολιν .
When they had levelled everything, they plundered the sacred precinct and set fire to the entire acropolis.


8.54.1
8750
σχὼν δὲ παντελέως τὰς Ἀθήνας Ξέρξης ἀπέπεμψε ἐς Σοῦσα ἄγγελον ἱππέα Ἀρταβάνῳ ἀγγελέοντα τὴν παρεοῦσάν σφι εὐπρηξίην .
So it was that Xerxes took complete possession of  Athens, and he sent a horseman to  Susa to announce his present success to Artabanus.


8.54.1
8751
ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς πέμψιος τοῦ κήρυκος δευτέρῃ ἡμέρῃ συγκαλέσας Ἀθηναίων τοὺς φυγάδας , ἑωυτῷ δὲ ἑπομένους , ἐκέλευε τρόπῳ τῷ σφετέρῳ θῦσαι τὰ ἱρὰ ἀναβάντας ἐς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν , εἴτε δὴ ὦν ὄψιν τινὰ ἰδὼν ἐνυπνίου ἐνετέλλετο ταῦτα , εἴτε καὶ ἐνθύμιόν οἱ ἐγένετο ἐμπρήσαντι τὸ ἱρόν .
On the day after the messenger was sent, he called together the Athenian exiles who accompanied him and asked them go up to the acropolis and perform sacrifices in their customary way, an order given because he had been inspired by a dream or because he felt remorse after burning the sacred precinct.


8.54.1
8752
οἱ δὲ φυγάδες τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἐποίησαν τὰ ἐντεταλμένα .
The Athenian exiles did as they were commanded.


8.55.1
8753
τοῦ δὲ εἵνεκεν τούτων ἐπεμνήσθην , φράσω .
I will tell why I have mentioned this.


8.55.1
8754
ἔστι ἐν τῇ ἀκροπόλι ταύτῃ Ἐρεχθέος τοῦ γηγενέος λεγομένου εἶναι νηός , ἐν τῷ ἐλαίη τε καὶ θάλασσα ἔνι , τὰ λόγος παρὰ Ἀθηναίων Ποσειδέωνά τε καὶ Ἀθηναίην ἐρίσαντας περὶ τῆς χώρης μαρτύρια θέσθαι .
In that acropolis is a shrine of Erechtheus, called the “Earthborn,” and in the shrine are an olive tree and a pool of salt water. The story among the Athenians is that they were set there by Poseidon and Athena as tokens when they contended for the land.


8.55.1
8755
ταύτην ὦν τὴν ἐλαίην ἅμα τῷ ἄλλῳ ἱρῷ κατέλαβε ἐμπρησθῆναι ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων ·
It happened that the olive tree was burnt by the barbarians with the rest of the sacred precinct.


8.55.1
8756
δευτέρῃ δὲ ἡμέρῃ ἀπὸ τῆς ἐμπρήσιος Ἀθηναίων οἱ θύειν ὑπὸ βασιλέος κελευόμενοι ὡς ἀνέβησαν ἐς τὸ ἱρόν , ὥρων βλαστὸν ἐκ τοῦ στελέχεος ὅσον τε πηχυαῖον ἀναδεδραμηκότα .
But on the day after its burning, when the Athenians ordered by the king to sacrifice went up to the sacred precinct, they saw a shoot of about a cubit's length sprung from the stump, and they reported this.


8.55.1
8757
οὗτοι μέν νυν ταῦτα ἔφρασαν .
They reported these things.


8.56.1
8758
οἱ δὲ ἐν Σαλαμῖνι Ἕλληνες , ὥς σφι ἐξηγγέλθη ὡς ἔσχε τὰ περὶ τὴν Ἀθηναίων ἀκρόπολιν , ἐς τοσοῦτον θόρυβον ἀπίκοντο ὡς ἔνιοι τῶν στρατηγῶν οὐδὲ κυρωθῆναι ἔμενον τὸ προκείμενον πρῆγμα , ἀλλ’ ἔς τε τὰς νέας ἐσέπιπτον καὶ ἱστία ἀείροντο ὡς ἀποθευσόμενοι ·
When this business concerning the Athenian acropolis was announced to the Hellenes at  Salamis, some of the Peloponnesian generals became so alarmed that they did not even wait for the proposed matter to be decided, but jumped into their ships and hoisted their sails for flight.


8.56.1
8759
τοῖσί τε ὑπολειπομένοισι αὐτῶν ἐκυρώθη πρὸ τοῦ Ἰσθμοῦ ναυμαχέειν .
Those left behind resolved that the fleet should fight for the Isthmus.


8.56.1
8760
νύξ τε ἐγίνετο καὶ οἳ διαλυθέντες ἐκ τοῦ συνεδρίου ἐσέβαινον ἐς τὰς νέας .
Night fell, and they dissolved the assembly and boarded their ships.


8.57.1
8761
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ Θεμιστοκλέα ἀπικόμενον ἐπὶ τὴν νέα εἴρετο Μνησίφιλος ἀνὴρ Ἀθηναῖος ὅ τι σφι εἴη βεβουλευμένον .
When Themistocles returned to his ship, Mnesiphilus, an Athenian, asked him what had been decided.


8.57.1
8762
πυθόμενος δὲ πρὸς αὐτοῦ ὡς εἴη δεδογμένον ἀνάγειν τὰς νέας πρὸς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν καὶ πρὸ τῆς Πελοποννήσου ναυμαχέειν , εἶπε " οὔτ’ ἄρα , ἤν ἀπαείρωσι τὰς νέας ἀπὸ Σαλαμῖνος , περὶ οὐδεμιῆς ἔτι πατρίδος ναυμαχήσεις ·
Learning from him that they had resolved to sail to the Isthmus and fight for the  Peloponnese, he said,


8.57.2
8763
κατὰ γὰρ πόλις ἕκαστοι τρέψονται , καὶ οὔτε σφέας Εὐρυβιάδης κατέχειν δυνήσεται οὔτε τις ἀνθρώπων ἄλλος ὥστε μὴ οὐ διασκεδασθῆναι τὴν στρατιήν ·
“If they depart from  Salamis, you will no longer be fighting for one country.


8.57.2
8764
ἀπολέεταί τε ἡ Ἑλλὰς ἀβουλίῃσι .
Each will make his way to his own city, and neither Eurybiades nor any other man will be able to keep them from disbanding the army.


8.57.2
8765
ἀλλ’ εἴ τις ἐστὶ μηχανή , ἴθι καὶ πειρῶ διαχέαι τὰ βεβουλευμένα , ἤν κως δύνῃ ἀναγνῶσαι Εὐρυβιάδην μεταβουλεύσασθαι ὥστε αὐτοῦ μένειν " .
Hellas will be destroyed by bad planning. If there is any way at all that you could persuade Eurybiades to change his decision and remain here, go try to undo this resolution.”


8.58.1
8766
κάρτα τε τῷ Θεμιστοκλέι ἤρεσε ἡ ὑποθήκη , καὶ οὐδὲν πρὸς ταῦτα ἀμειψάμενος ἤιε ἐπὶ τὴν νέα τὴν Εὐρυβιάδεω .
This advice greatly pleased Themistocles.


8.58.1
8767
ἀπικόμενος δὲ ἔφη ἐθέλειν οἱ κοινόν τι πρῆγμα συμμῖξαι ·
He made no answer and went to the ship of Eurybiades.


8.58.1
8768
ὃ δ’ αὐτὸν ἐς τὴν νέα ἐκέλευε ἐσβάντα λέγειν , εἴ τι θέλει .
When he arrived there, he said he wanted to talk with him on a matter of common interest, so Eurybiades bade him come aboard and say what he wanted.


8.58.2
8769
ἐνθαῦτα ὁ Θεμιστοκλέης παριζόμενός οἱ καταλέγει ἐκεῖνά τε πάντα τὰ ἤκουσε Μνησιφίλου , ἑωυτοῦ ποιεύμενος , καὶ ἄλλα πολλὰ προστιθείς , ἐς ὃ ἀνέγνωσε χρηίζων ἔκ τε τῆς νεὸς ἐκβῆναι συλλέξαι τε τοὺς στρατηγοὺς ἐς τὸ συνέδριον .
Themistocles sat next to him and told him all that he had heard from Mnesiphilus, pretending it was his own idea and adding many other things. Finally by his entreaty he persuaded him to disembark and gather the generals for a council of war.


8.59.1
8770
ὡς δὲ ἄρα συνελέχθησαν , πρὶν ἢ τὸν Εὐρυβιάδην προθεῖναι τὸν λόγον τῶν εἵνεκα συνήγαγε τοὺς στρατηγούς , πολλὸς ἦν ὁ Θεμιστοκλέης ἐν τοῖσι λόγοισι οἷα κάρτα δεόμενος ·
When they were assembled and before Eurybiades had a chance to put forward the reason he had called the generals together, Themistocles spoke at length in accordance with the urgency of his request.


8.59.1
8771
λέγοντος δὲ αὐτοῦ , ὁ Κορίνθιος στρατηγὸς Ἀδείμαντος ὁ Ὠκύτου εἶπε " ὦ Θεμιστόκλεες , ἐν τοῖσι ἀγῶσι οἱ προεξανιστάμενοι ῥαπίζονται " .
While he was speaking, the Corinthian general Adeimantus son of Ocytus said, “Themistocles, at the games those who start before the signal are beaten with rods.”


8.59.1
8772
ὁ δὲ ἀπολυόμενος ἔφη " οἱ δέ γε ἐγκαταλειπόμενοι οὐ στεφανοῦνται " .
Themistocles said in justification, “Those left behind win no crown.”


8.60.1
8773
τότε μὲν ἠπίως πρὸς τὸν Κορίνθιον ἀμείψατο , πρὸς δὲ τὸν Εὐρυβιάδην ἔλεγε ἐκείνων μὲν ἔτι οὐδὲν τῶν πρότερον λεχθέντων , ὡς ἐπεὰν ἀπαείρωσι ἀπὸ Σαλαμῖνος διαδρήσονται ·
He answered the Corinthian mildly and said to Eurybiades nothing of what he had said before, how if they put out from  Salamis they would flee different ways.


8.60.1
8774
παρεόντων γὰρ τῶν συμμάχων οὐκ ἔφερέ οἱ κόσμον οὐδένα κατηγορέειν ·
For it would be unbecoming for him to accuse the allies in their presence.


8.60.1
8775
ὁ δὲ ἄλλου λόγου εἴχετο , λέγων τάδε .
Instead he relied on a different argument and said,


8.60A.1
8776
" ἐν σοὶ νῦν ἐστὶ σῶσαι τὴν Ἑλλάδα , ἢν ἐμοὶ πείθῃ ναυμαχίην αὐτοῦ μένων ποιέεσθαι , μηδὲ πειθόμενος τούτων τοῖσι λόγοισι ἀναζεύξῃς πρὸς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν τὰς νέας .
“It is in your hands to save Hellas, if you will obey me and remain here to fight, and not obey the words of these others and move your ships back to the Isthmus.


8.60A.1
8777
ἀντίθες γὰρ ἑκάτερον ἀκούσας .
Compare each plan after you have heard.


8.60A.1
8778
πρὸς μὲν τῷ Ἰσθμῷ συμβάλλων ἐν πελάγεϊ ἀναπεπταμένῳ ναυμαχήσεις , ἐς τὸ ἥκιστα ἡμῖν σύμφορον ἐστὶ νέας ἔχουσι βαρυτέρας καὶ ἀριθμὸν ἐλάσσονας ·
If you join battle at the Isthmus, you will fight in the open sea where it is least to our advantage, since our ships are heavier and fewer in number.


8.60A.1
8779
τοῦτο δὲ ἀπολέεις Σαλαμῖνά τε καὶ Μέγαρα καὶ Αἴγιναν , ἤν περ καὶ τὰ ἄλλα εὐτυχήσωμεν .
You will also lose Salamis and Megara and Aegina, even if we succeed in all else.


8.60A.1
8780
ἅμα δὲ τῷ ναυτικῷ αὐτῶν ἕψεται καὶ ὁ πεζὸς στρατός , καὶ οὕτω σφέας αὐτὸς ἄξεις ἐπὶ τὴν Πελοπόννησον , κινδυνεύσεις τε ἁπάσῃ τῇ Ἑλλάδι " .
Their land army will accompany their fleet, and so you will lead them to the Peloponnese and risk all Hellas.


8.60B.1
8781
" ἢν δὲ τὰ ἐγὼ λέγω ποιήσῃς , τοσάδε ἐν αὐτοῖσι χρηστὰ εὑρήσεις ·
But if you do what I say, you will find it useful in these ways:


8.60B.1
8782
πρῶτα μὲν ἐν στεινῷ συμβάλλοντες νηυσὶ ὀλίγῃσι πρὸς πολλάς , ἢν τὰ οἰκότα ἐκ τοῦ πολέμου ἐκβαίνῃ , πολλὸν κρατήσομεν ·
first, by engaging many ships with our few in the strait, we shall win a great victory, if the war turns out reasonably, for it is to our advantage to fight in a strait and to their advantage to fight in a wide area.


8.60B.1
8783
τὸ γὰρ ἐν στεινῷ ναυμαχέειν πρὸς ἡμέων ἐστί , ἐν εὐρυχωρίῃ δὲ πρὸς ἐκείνων .
Salamis will survive, where we have carried our children and women to safety.


8.60B.1
8784
αὖτις δὲ Σαλαμὶς περιγίνεται , ἐς τὴν ἡμῖν ὑπέκκειται τέκνα τε καὶ γυναῖκες .
It also has in it something you are very fond of:


8.60B.1
8785
καὶ μὲν καὶ τόδε ἐν αὐτοῖσι ἔνεστι , τοῦ καὶ περιέχεσθε μάλιστα ·
by remaining here you will be fighting for the Peloponnese just as much as at the Isthmus,


8.60B.1
8786
ὁμοίως αὐτοῦ τε μένων προναυμαχήσεις Πελοποννήσου καὶ πρὸς τῷ Ἰσθμῷ , οὐδὲ σφέας , εἴ περ εὖ φρονέεις , ἄξεις ἐπὶ τὴν Πελοπόννησον " .
and you will not lead them to the Peloponnese, if you exercise good judgment.


8.60C.1
8787
" ἢν δέ γε καὶ τὰ ἐγὼ ἐλπίζω γένηται καὶ νικήσωμεν τῇσι νηυσί , οὔτε ὑμῖν ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν παρέσονται οἱ βάρβαροι οὔτε προβήσονται ἑκαστέρω τῆς Ἀττικῆς , ἀπίασί τε οὐδενὶ κόσμῳ , Μεγάροισί τε κερδανέομεν περιεοῦσι καὶ Αἰγίνῃ καὶ Σαλαμῖνι , ἐν τῇ ἡμῖν καὶ λόγιον ἐστὶ τῶν ἐχθρῶν κατύπερθε γενέσθαι .
If what I expect happens and we win the victory with our ships, you will not have the barbarians upon you at the Isthmus.


8.60C.1
8788
οἰκότα μέν νυν βουλευομένοισι ἀνθρώποισι ὡς τὸ ἐπίπαν ἐθέλει γίνεσθαι ·
They will advance no further than Attica and depart in no order, and we shall gain an advantage by the survival of Megara, Aegina, and Salamis, where it is prophesied that we will prevail against our enemies.


8.60C.1
8789
μὴ δὲ οἰκότα βουλευομένοισι οὐκ ἐθέλει οὐδὲ ὁ θεὸς προσχωρέειν πρὸς τὰς ἀνθρωπηίας γνώμας " .
Men usually succeed when they have reasonable plans. If their plans are unreasonable, the god does not wish to assent to human intentions.”


8.61.1
8790
ταῦτα λέγοντος Θεμιστοκλέος αὖτις ὁ Κορίνθιος Ἀδείμαντος ἐπεφέρετο , σιγᾶν τε κελεύων τῷ μὴ ἐστὶ πατρὶς καὶ Εὐρυβιάδην οὐκ ἐῶν ἐπιψηφίζειν ἀπόλι ἀνδρί ·
As Themistocles said this, Adeimantus the Corinthian attacked him again, advising that a man without a city should keep quiet and that Eurybiades should not ask the vote of a man without a city.


8.61.1
8791
πόλιν γὰρ τὸν Θεμιστοκλέα παρεχόμενον οὕτω ἐκέλευε γνώμας συμβάλλεσθαι .
He advised Themistocles to contribute his opinion when he provided a city.


8.61.1
8792
ταῦτα δέ οἱ προέφερε ὅτι ἡλώκεσάν τε καὶ κατείχοντο αἱ Ἀθῆναι .
This time Themistocles said many things against him and the Corinthians, declaring that so long as they had two hundred manned ships, the Athenians had both a city and a land greater than theirs.


8.61.2
8793
τότε δὴ ὁ Θεμιστοκλέης κεῖνόν τε καὶ τοὺς Κορινθίους πολλά τε καὶ κακὰ ἔλεγε , ἑωυτοῖσι τε ἐδήλου λόγῳ ὡς εἴη καὶ πόλις καὶ γῆ μέζων ἤ περ ἐκείνοισι , ἔστ’ ἂν διηκόσιαι νέες σφι ἔωσι πεπληρωμέναι ·
He (Adeimantus) was making these attacks against him  because Athens was captured and occupied


8.61.2
8794
οὐδαμοὺς γὰρ Ἑλλήνων αὐτοὺς ἐπιόντας ἀποκρούσεσθαι .
None of the Hellenes could repel them if they attacked.


8.62.1
8795
σημαίνων δὲ ταῦτα τῷ λόγῳ διέβαινε ἐς Εὐρυβιάδην , λέγων μᾶλλον ἐπεστραμμένα .
Next he turned his argument to Eurybiades, saying more vehemently than before,


8.62.1
8796
" σὺ εἰ μενέεις αὐτοῦ καὶ μένων ἔσεαι ἀνὴρ ἀγαθός ·
“If you remain here, you will be a noble man.


8.62.1
8797
εἰ δὲ μή , ἀνατρέψεις τὴν Ἑλλάδα ·
If not, you will ruin Hellas.


8.62.1
8798
τὸ πᾶν γὰρ ἡμῖν τοῦ πολέμου φέρουσι αἱ νέες .
All our strength for war is in our ships,


8.62.1
8799
ἀλλ’ ἐμοὶ πείθεο .
so listen to me.


8.62.2
8800
εἰ δὲ ταῦτα μὴ ποιήσῃς , ἡμεῖς μὲν ὡς ἔχομεν ἀναλαβόντες τοὺς οἰκέτας κομιεύμεθα ἐς Σῖριν τὴν ἐν Ἰταλίῃ , ἥ περ ἡμετέρη τε ἐστὶ ἐκ παλαιοῦ ἔτι , καὶ τὰ λόγια λέγει ὑπ’ ἡμέων αὐτὴν δέειν κτισθῆναι ·
If you do not do this, we will immediately gather up our households and travel to Siris in Italy, which has been ours since ancient times, and the prophecies say we must found a colony there.


8.62.2
8801
ὑμεῖς δὲ συμμάχων τοιῶνδε μουνωθέντες μεμνήσεσθε τῶν ἐμῶν λόγων " .
You will remember these words when you are without such allies.”


8.63.1
8802
ταῦτα δὲ Θεμιστοκλέος λέγοντος ἀνεδιδάσκετο Εὐρυβιάδης ·
When Themistocles said this, Eurybiades changed his mind.


8.63.1
8803
δοκέειν δέ μοι , ἀρρωδήσας μάλιστα τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ἀνεδιδάσκετο , μή σφεας ἀπολίπωσι , ἢν πρὸς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν ἀγάγῃ τὰς νέας ·
I think he did so chiefly out of fear that the Athenians might desert them if they set sail for the Isthmus.


8.63.1
8804
ἀπολιπόντων γὰρ Ἀθηναίων οὐκέτι ἐγίνοντο ἀξιόμαχοι οἱ λοιποί .
If the Athenians left, the rest would be no match for the enemy,


8.63.1
8805
ταύτην δὲ αἱρέεται τὴν γνώμην , αὐτοῦ μένοντας διαναυμαχέειν .
so he made the choice to remain there and fight.


8.64.1
8806
οὕτω μὲν οἱ περὶ Σαλαμῖνα ἔπεσι ἀκροβολισάμενοι , ἐπείτε Εὐρυβιάδῃ ἔδοξε , αὐτοῦ παρεσκευάζοντο ὡς ναυμαχήσοντες .
After this skirmish of words, since Eurybiades had so resolved, the men at  Salamis prepared to fight where they were.


8.64.1
8807
ἡμέρη τε ἐγίνετο καὶ ἅμα τῷ ἡλίῳ ἀνιόντι σεισμὸς ἐγένετο ἔν τε τῇ γῇ καὶ τῇ θαλάσσῃ .
At sunrise on the next day there was an earthquake on land and sea,


8.64.2
8808
ἔδοξε δέ σφι εὔξασθαι τοῖσι θεοῖσι καὶ ἐπικαλέσασθαι τοὺς Αἰακίδας συμμάχους .
and they resolved to pray to the gods and summon the sons of Aeacus as allies.


8.64.2
8809
ὡς δέ σφι ἔδοξε , καὶ ἐποίευν ταῦτα ·
When they had so resolved, they did as follows:


8.64.2
8810
εὐξάμενοι γὰρ πᾶσι τοῖσι θεοῖσι , αὐτόθεν μὲν ἐκ Σαλαμῖνος Αἴαντά τε καὶ Τελαμῶνα ἐπεκαλέοντο , ἐπὶ δὲ Αἰακὸν καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους Αἰακίδας νέα ἀπέστελλον ἐς Αἴγιναν .
they prayed to all the gods, called Ajax and Telamon to come straight from  Salamis, and sent a ship to  Aegina for Aeacus and his sons.


8.65.1
8811
ἔφη δὲ Δίκαιος ὁ Θεοκύδεος , ἀνὴρ Ἀθηναῖος φυγάς τε καὶ παρὰ Μήδοισι λόγιμος γενόμενος τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον , ἐπείτε ἐκείρετο ἡ Ἀττικὴ χώρη ὑπὸ τοῦ πεζοῦ στρατοῦ τοῦ Ξέρξεω ἐοῦσα ἔρημος Ἀθηναίων , τυχεῖν τότε ἐὼν ἅμα Δημαρήτῳ τῷ Λακεδαιμονίῳ ἐν τῷ Θριασίῳ πεδίῳ , ἰδεῖν δὲ κονιορτὸν χωρέοντα ἀπ’ Ἐλευσῖνος ὡς ἀνδρῶν μάλιστά κῃ τρισμυρίων , ἀποθωμάζειν τε σφέας τὸν κονιορτὸν ὅτεων κοτὲ εἴη ἀνθρώπων , καὶ πρόκατε φωνῆς ἀκούειν , καί οἱ φαίνεσθαι τὴν φωνὴν εἶναι τὸν μυστικὸν ἴακχον .
Dicaeus son of Theocydes, an Athenian exile who had become important among the Medes, said that at the time when the land of  Attica was being laid waste by Xerxes' army and there were no Athenians in the country, he was with Demaratus the Lacedaemonian on the Thriasian plain and saw advancing from  Eleusis a cloud of dust as if raised by the feet of about thirty thousand men. They marvelled at what men might be raising such a cloud of dust and immediately heard a cry. The cry seemed to be the “Iacchus” of the mysteries,


8.65.2
8812
εἶναι δ’ ἀδαήμονα τῶν ἱρῶν τῶν ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι γινομένων τὸν Δημάρητον , εἰρέσθαί τε αὐτὸν ὅ τι τὸ φθεγγόμενον εἴη τοῦτο .
and when Demaratus, ignorant of the rites of  Eleusis, asked him what was making this sound,


8.65.2
8813
αὐτὸς δὲ εἰπεῖν " Δημάρητε , οὐκ ἔστι ὅκως οὐ μέγα τι σίνος ἔσται τῇ βασιλέος στρατιῇ ·
Dicaeus said, “Demaratus, there is no way that some great disaster will not befall the king's army.


8.65.2
8814
τάδε γὰρ ἀρίδηλα , ἐρήμου ἐούσης τῆς Ἀττικῆς , ὅτι θεῖον τὸ φθεγγόμενον , ἀπ’ Ἐλευσῖνος ἰὸν ἐς τιμωρίην Ἀθηναίοισί τε καὶ τοῖσι συμμάχοισι .
Since  Attica is deserted, it is obvious that this voice is divine and comes from  Eleusis to help the Athenians and their allies.


8.65.3
8815
καὶ ἢν μέν γε κατασκήψῃ ἐς τὴν Πελοπόννησον , κίνδυνος αὐτῷ τε βασιλέι καὶ τῇ στρατιῇ τῇ ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ ἔσται , ἢν δὲ ἐπὶ τὰς νέας τράπηται τὰς ἐν Σαλαμῖνι , τὸν ναυτικὸν στρατὸν κινδυνεύσει βασιλεὺς ἀποβαλεῖν .
If it descends upon the  Peloponnese, the king himself and his army on the mainland will be endangered. If, however, it turns towards the ships at  Salamis, the king will be in danger of losing his fleet.


8.65.4
8816
τὴν δὲ ὁρτὴν ταύτην ἄγουσι Ἀθηναῖοι ἀνὰ πάντα ἔτεα τῇ Μητρὶ καὶ τῇ Κούρῃ , καὶ αὐτῶν τε ὁ βουλόμενος καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων μυεῖται ·
Every year the Athenians observe this festival for the Mother and the Maiden, and any Athenian or other Hellene who wishes is initiated.


8.65.4
8817
καὶ τὴν φωνὴν τῆς ἀκούεις ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ὁρτῇ ἰακχάζουσι " .
The voice which you hear is the ‘Iacchus’ they cry at this festival.”


8.65.4
8818
πρὸς ταῦτα εἰπεῖν Δημάρητον " σίγα τε καὶ μηδενὶ ἄλλῳ τὸν λόγον τοῦτον εἴπῃς ·
To this Demaratus replied, “Keep silent and tell this to no one else.


8.65.5
8819
ἢν γάρ τοι ἐς βασιλέα ἀνενειχθῇ τὰ ἔπεα ταῦτα , ἀποβαλέεις τὴν κεφαλήν , καὶ σε οὔτε ἐγὼ δυνήσομαι ῥύσασθαι οὔτ’ ἄλλος ἀνθρώπων οὐδὲ εἶς .
If these words of yours are reported to the king, you will lose your head, and neither I nor any other man will be able to save you,


8.65.5
8820
ἀλλ’ ἔχ’ ἥσυχος , περὶ δὲ στρατιῆς τῆσδε θεοῖσι μελήσει " .
so be silent. The gods will see to the army.”


8.65.6
8821
τὸν μὲν δὴ ταῦτα παραινέειν , ἐκ δὲ τοῦ κονιορτοῦ καὶ τῆς φωνῆς γενέσθαι νέφος καὶ μεταρσιωθὲν φέρεσθαι ἐπὶ Σαλαμῖνος ἐπὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον τὸ τῶν Ἑλλήνων .
Thus he advised, and after the dust and the cry came a cloud, which rose aloft and floated away towards  Salamis to the camp of the Hellenes.


8.65.6
8822
οὕτω δὴ αὐτοὺς μαθεῖν ὅτι τὸ ναυτικὸν τὸ Ξέρξεω ἀπολέεσθαι μέλλοι .
In this way they understood that Xerxes' fleet was going to be destroyed.


8.65.6
8823
ταῦτα μὲν Δίκαιος ὁ Θεοκύδεος ἔλεγε , Δημαρήτου τε καὶ ἄλλων μαρτύρων καταπτόμενος .
Dicaeus son of Theocydes used to say this, appealing to Demaratus and others as witnesses.


8.66.1
8824
οἱ δὲ ἐς τὸν Ξέρξεω ναυτικὸν στρατὸν ταχθέντες , ἐπειδὴ ἐκ Τρηχῖνος θεησάμενοι τὸ τρῶμα τὸ Λακωνικὸν διέβησαν ἐς τὴν Ἱστιαίην , ἐπισχόντες ἡμέρας τρεῖς ἔπλεον δι’ Εὐρίπου , καὶ ἐν ἑτέρῃσι τρισὶ ἡμέρῃσι ἐγένοντο ἐν Φαλήρῳ .
When those stationed with Xerxes' fleet had been to see the Laconian disaster at  Thermopylae, they crossed over from  Trachis to Histiaea, waited three days, and then sailed through the Euripus, and in three more days they were at Phalerum, the port of  Athens.


8.66.1
8825
ὡς μὲν ἐμοὶ δοκέειν , οὐκ ἐλάσσονες ἐόντες ἀριθμὸν ἐσέβαλον ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας , κατά τε ἤπειρον καὶ τῇσι νηυσὶ ἀπικόμενοι , ἢ ἐπί τε Σηπιάδα ἀπίκοντο καὶ ἐς Θερμοπύλας ·
I think no less a number invaded  Athens by land and sea than came to Sepias and  Thermopylae.


8.66.2
8826
ἀντιθήσω γὰρ τοῖσί τε ὑπὸ τοῦ χειμῶνος αὐτῶν ἀπολομένοισι καὶ τοῖσι ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι καὶ τῇσι ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ ναυμαχίῃσι τούσδε τοὺς τότε οὔκω ἑπομένους βασιλέι , Μηλιέας καὶ Δωριέας καὶ Λοκροὺς καὶ Βοιωτοὺς πανστρατιῇ ἑπομένους πλὴν Θεσπιέων καὶ Πλαταιέων , καὶ μάλα Καρυστίους τε καὶ Ἀνδρίους καὶ Τηνίους τε καὶ τοὺς λοιποὺς νησιώτας πάντας , πλὴν τῶν πέντε πολίων τῶν ἐπεμνήσθημεν πρότερον τὰ οὐνόματα .
Those killed by the storm, at  Thermopylae, and in the naval battles at  Artemisium, I offset with those who did not yet follow the king: the Melians and Dorians and Locrians and the whole force of  Boeotia except the Thespians and Plataeans; and the Carystians and Andrians and Teneans and all the rest of the islanders, except the five cities whose names I previously mentioned.


8.66.2
8827
ὅσῳ γὰρ δὴ προέβαινε ἐσωτέρω τῆς Ἑλλάδος ὁ Πέρσης , τοσούτῳ πλέω ἔθνεά οἱ εἵπετο .
The farther into  Hellas the Persian advanced, the more nations followed him.


8.67.1
8828
ἐπεὶ ὦν ἀπίκατο ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας πάντες οὗτοι πλὴν Παρίων ( Πάριοι δὲ ὑπολειφθέντες ἐν Κύθνῳ ἐκαραδόκεον τὸν πόλεμον κῇ ἀποβήσεται ) , οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ ὡς ἀπίκοντο ἐς τὸ Φάληρον , ἐνθαῦτα κατέβη αὐτὸς Ξέρξης ἐπὶ τὰς νέας , ἐθέλων σφι συμμῖξαί τε καὶ πυθέσθαι τῶν ἐπιπλεόντων τὰς γνώμας .
All these came to  Athens except the Parians. The Parians stayed behind in Cythnus watching to see which way the war turned out. When the rest of them reached Phalerum, Xerxes himself went down to the ships, wishing to mix with the sailors and hear their opinions.


8.67.2
8829
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπικόμενος προΐζετο , παρῆσαν μετάπεμπτοι οἱ τῶν ἐθνέων τῶν σφετέρων τύραννοι καὶ ταξίαρχοι ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν , καὶ ἵζοντο ὥς σφι βασιλεὺς ἑκάστῳ τιμὴν ἐδεδώκεε , πρῶτος μὲν ὁ Σιδώνιος βασιλεύς , μετὰ δὲ ὁ Τύριος , ἐπὶ δὲ ὧλλοι .
He came and sat on his throne, and present at his summons were the tyrants of all the peoples and the company leaders from the fleet.


8.67.2
8830
ὡς δὲ κόσμῳ ἐπεξῆς ἵζοντο , πέμψας Ξέρξης Μαρδόνιον εἰρώτα ἀποπειρώμενος ἑκάστου εἰ ναυμαχίην ποιέοιτο .
They sat according to the honor which the king had granted each of them, first the king of  Sidon, then the king of  Tyre, then the rest.


8.68.1
8831
ἐπεὶ δὲ περιιὼν εἰρώτα ὁ Μαρδόνιος ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ τοῦ Σιδωνίου , οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ γνώμην ἐξεφέροντο κελεύοντες ναυμαχίην ποιέεσθαι , Ἀρτεμισίη δὲ τάδε ἔφη .
Mardonius went about questioning them, starting with the Sidonian, and all the others were unanimous, advising to fight at sea, but Artemisia said,


8.68A.1
8832
" εἰπεῖν μοι πρὸς βασιλέα , Μαρδόνιε , ὡς ἐγὼ τάδε λέγω , οὔτε κακίστη γενομένη ἐν τῇσι ναυμαχίῃσι τῇσι πρὸς Εὐβοίῃ οὔτε ἐλάχιστα ἀποδεξαμένη .
“Tell the king, Mardonius, that I, who neither was most cowardly in the sea battles off  Euboea nor performed the least feats of arms, say this:


8.68A.1
8833
δέσποτα , τὴν δὲ ἐοῦσαν γνώμην με δίκαιον ἐστὶ ἀποδείκνυσθαι , τὰ τυγχάνω φρονέουσα ἄριστα ἐς πρήγματα τὰ σά .
‘Master, it is just for me to declare my real opinion, what I consider to be best for your cause.


8.68A.1
8834
καὶ τοι τάδε λέγω , φείδεο τῶν νεῶν μηδὲ ναυμαχίην ποιέο .
And I say to you this: spare your ships, and do not fight at sea.


8.68A.1
8835
οἱ γὰρ ἄνδρες τῶν σῶν ἀνδρῶν κρέσσονες τοσοῦτο εἰσὶ κατὰ θάλασσαν ὅσον ἄνδρες γυναικῶν .
Their men are as much stronger than your men by sea as men are stronger than women.


8.68A.2
8836
τί δὲ πάντως δέει σε ναυμαχίῃσι ἀνακινδυνεύειν ;
Why is it so necessary for you to risk everything by fighting at sea?


8.68A.2
8837
οὐκ ἔχεις μὲν τὰς Ἀθήνας , τῶν περ εἵνεκα ὁρμήθης στρατεύεσθαι , ἔχεις δὲ τὴν ἄλλην Ἑλλάδα ;
Do you not possess  Athens, for which you set out on this march, and do you not have the rest of  Hellas?


8.68A.2
8838
ἐμποδὼν δέ τοι ἵσταται οὐδείς ·
No one stands in your way.


8.68A.2
8839
οἳ δέ τοι ἀντέστησαν , ἀπήλλαξαν οὕτω ὡς κείνους ἔπρεπε " .
Those who opposed you have received what they deserved.


8.68B.1
8840
" τῇ δὲ ἐγὼ δοκέω ἀποβήσεσθαι τὰ τῶν ἀντιπολέμων πρήγματα , τοῦτο φράσω .
I will tell you how I think the affairs of your enemies will turn out:


8.68B.1
8841
ἢν μὲν μὴ ἐπειχθῇς ναυμαχίην ποιεύμενος , ἀλλὰ τὰς νέας αὐτοῦ ἔχῃς πρὸς γῇ μένων ἢ καὶ προβαίνων ἐς τὴν Πελοπόννησον , εὐπετέως τοι δέσποτα χωρήσει τὰ νοέων ἐλήλυθας .
If you do not hurry to fight at sea, but keep your ships here and stay near land, or even advance into the  Peloponnese, then, my lord, you will easily accomplish what you had in mind on coming here.


8.68B.2
8842
οὐ γὰρ οἷοί τε πολλὸν χρόνον εἰσί τοι ἀντέχειν οἱ Ἕλληνες , ἀλλὰ σφέας διασκεδᾷς , κατὰ πόλις δὲ ἕκαστοι φεύξονται .
The Hellenes are not able to hold out against you for a long time, but you will scatter them, and they will each flee to their own cities.


8.68B.2
8843
οὔτε γὰρ σῖτος πάρα σφι ἐν τῇ νήσῳ ταύτῃ , ὡς ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι , οὔτε αὐτοὺς οἰκός , ἢν σὺ ἐπὶ τὴν Πελοπόννησον ἐλαύνῃς τὸν πεζὸν στρατόν , ἀτρεμιεῖν τοὺς ἐκεῖθεν αὐτῶν ἥκοντας , οὐδέ σφι μελήσει πρὸ τῶν Ἀθηνέων ναυμαχέειν " .
I have learned that they have no food on this island, and it is not likely, if you lead your army against the  Peloponnese, that those of them who have come from there will sit still, nor will they care to fight at sea for  Athens.


8.68C.1
8844
" ἢν δὲ αὐτίκα ἐπειχθῇς ναυμαχῆσαι , δειμαίνω μὴ ὁ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς κακωθεὶς τὸν πεζὸν προσδηλήσηται .
But if you hurry to fight at sea immediately, I fear that your fleet if reduced to cowardice may also injure your army on land.


8.68C.1
8845
πρὸς δὲ , ὦ βασιλεῦ , καὶ τόδε ἐς θυμὸν βάλευ , ὡς τοῖσι μὲν χρηστοῖσι τῶν ἀνθρώπων κακοὶ δοῦλοι φιλέουσι γίνεσθαι , τοῖσι δὲ κακοῖσι χρηστοί .
In addition, my King, take this to heart: Good people's slaves tend to be base, and the slaves of the base tend to be good.


8.68C.1
8846
σοὶ δὲ ἐόντι ἀρίστῳ ἀνδρῶν πάντων κακοὶ δοῦλοι εἰσί , οἳ ἐν συμμάχων λόγῳ λέγονται εἶναι ἐόντες Αἰγύπτιοί τε καὶ Κύπριοι καὶ Κίλικες καὶ Πάμφυλοι , τῶν ὄφελος ἐστὶ οὐδέν " .
You, who are best among men, have base slaves, who are accounted your allies, the Egyptians and Cyprians and Cilicians and Pamphylians, who are of no use at all.’”


8.69.1
8847
ταῦτα λεγούσης πρὸς Μαρδόνιον , ὅσοι μὲν ἦσαν εὔνοοι τῇ Ἀρτεμισίῃ , συμφορὴν ἐποιεῦντο τοὺς λόγους ὡς κακόν τι πεισομένης πρὸς βασιλέος , ὅτι οὐκ ἔα ναυμαχίην ποιέεσθαι ·
When she said this to Mardonius, all who were well disposed towards Artemisia lamented her words, thinking she would suffer some ill from the king because she advised against fighting at sea.


8.69.1
8848
οἳ δὲ ἀγαιόμενοί τε καὶ φθονέοντες αὐτῇ , ἅτε ἐν πρώτοισι τετιμημένης διὰ πάντων τῶν συμμάχων , ἐτέρποντο τῇ ἀνακρίσι ὡς ἀπολεομένης αὐτῆς .
Those who were jealous and envied her, because she was given honor among the chief of all the allies, were glad at her answer, thinking she would be killed.


8.69.2
8849
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀνηνείχθησαν αἱ γνῶμαι ἐς Ξέρξην , κάρτα τε ἥσθη τῇ γνώμῃ τῇ Ἀρτεμισίης , καὶ νομίζων ἔτι πρότερον σπουδαίην εἶναι τότε πολλῷ μᾶλλον αἴνεε .
But when the counsels were reported to Xerxes, he was greatly pleased by Artemisia's opinion.


8.69.2
8850
ὅμως δὲ τοῖσι πλέοσι πείθεσθαι ἐκέλευε , τάδε καταδόξας , πρὸς μὲν Εὐβοίῃ σφέας ἐθελοκακέειν ὡς οὐ παρεόντος αὐτοῦ , τότε δὲ αὐτὸς παρεσκεύαστο θεήσασθαι ναυμαχέοντας .
Even before this he had considered her of excellent character, and now he praised her much more highly. Still he ordered that the majority be obeyed, for he believed that at  Euboea they had purposely fought badly because he was not there. This time he had made preparations to see the battle in person.


8.70.1
8851
ἐπεὶ δὲ παρήγγελλον ἀναπλέειν , ἀνῆγον τὰς νέας ἐπὶ τὴν Σαλαμῖνα καὶ παρεκρίθησαν διαταχθέντες κατ’ ἡσυχίην .
When the command to put out to sea was given, they set sail for  Salamis and were calmly marshalled in line.


8.70.1
8852
τότε μέν νυν οὐκ ἐξέχρησέ σφι ἡ ἡμέρη ναυμαχίην ποιήσασθαι ·
There was not enough daylight left for them to fight,


8.70.1
8853
νὺξ γὰρ ἐπεγένετο ·
since night came on,


8.70.1
8854
οἳ δὲ παρεσκευάζοντο ἐς τὴν ὑστεραίην .
so they made preparations for the next day.


8.70.2
8855
τοὺς δὲ Ἕλληνας εἶχε δέος τε καὶ ἀρρωδίη , οὐκ ἥκιστα δὲ τοὺς ἀπὸ Πελοποννήσου ·
Fear and dread possessed the Hellenes, especially those from the  Peloponnese.


8.70.2
8856
ἀρρώδεον δὲ ὅτι αὐτοὶ μὲν ἐν Σαλαμῖνι κατήμενοι ὑπὲρ γῆς τῆς Ἀθηναίων ναυμαχέειν μέλλοιεν , νικηθέντες τε ἐν νήσῳ ἀπολαμφθέντες πολιορκήσονται , ἀπέντες τὴν ἑωυτῶν ἀφύλακτον ·
They were afraid because they were stationed in  Salamis and were about to fight at sea on behalf of the land of the Athenians, and if they were defeated they would be trapped on an island and besieged, leaving their own land unguarded.


8.70.2
8857
τῶν δὲ βαρβάρων ὁ πεζὸς ὑπὸ τὴν παρεοῦσαν νύκτα ἐπορεύετο ἐπὶ τὴν Πελοπόννησον .
That very night the land army of the barbarians began marching to the  Peloponnese.


8.71.1
8858
καίτοι τὰ δυνατὰ πάντα ἐμεμηχάνητο ὅκως κατ’ ἤπειρον μὴ ἐσβάλοιεν οἱ βάρβαροι .
Yet every possible device had been used to prevent the barbarians from invading by the mainland.


8.71.1
8859
ὡς γὰρ ἐπύθοντο τάχιστα Πελοποννήσιοι τοὺς ἀμφὶ Λεωνίδην ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι τετελευτηκέναι , συνδραμόντες ἐκ τῶν πολίων ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν ἵζοντο , καί σφι ἐπῆν στρατηγὸς Κλεόμβροτος ὁ Ἀναξανδρίδεω , Λεωνίδεω δὲ ἀδελφεός .
As soon as the Peloponnesians learned that Leonidas and his men at  Thermopylae were dead, they ran together from their cities and took up their position at the Isthmus. Their general was Cleombrotus son of Anaxandrides, the brother of Leonidas.


8.71.2
8860
ἱζόμενοι δὲ ἐν τῷ Ἰσθμῷ καὶ συγχώσαντες τὴν Σκιρωνίδα ὁδόν , μετὰ τοῦτο ὥς σφι ἔδοξε βουλευομένοισι , οἰκοδόμεον διὰ τοῦ Ἰσθμοῦ τεῖχος .
When they were in position at the Isthmus, they demolished the Scironian road and then, after resolving in council, built a wall across the Isthmus.


8.71.2
8861
ἅτε δὲ ἐουσέων μυριάδων πολλέων καὶ παντὸς ἀνδρὸς ἐργαζομένου , ἤνετο τὸ ἔργον ·
Since there were many tens of thousands and everyone worked, the task was completed,


8.71.2
8862
καὶ γὰρ λίθοι καὶ πλίνθοι καὶ ξύλα καὶ φορμοὶ ψάμμου πλήρεες ἐσεφέροντο , καὶ ἐλίνυον οὐδένα χρόνον οἱ βοηθήσαντες ἐργαζόμενοι , οὔτε νυκτὸς οὔτε ἡμέρης .
as they brought in stones and bricks and logs and baskets full of sand. At no moment of the day or night did those who had marched out there rest from their work.


8.72.1
8863
οἱ δὲ βοηθήσαντες ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν πανδημεὶ οἵδε ἦσαν Ἑλλήνων , Λακεδαιμόνιοί τε καὶ Ἀρκάδες πάντες καὶ Ἠλεῖοι καὶ Κορίνθιοι καὶ Ἐπιδαύριοι καὶ Φλιάσιοι καὶ Τροιζήνιοι καὶ Ἑρμιονέες .
These were the Hellenes who marched out in a body to the Isthmus: the Lacedaemonians and all the Arcadians, the Eleans and Corinthians and Sicyonians and Epidaurians and Phliasians and Troezenians and Hermioneans.


8.72.1
8864
οὗτοι μὲν ἦσαν οἱ βοηθήσαντες καὶ ὑπεραρρωδέοντες τῇ Ἑλλάδι κινδυνευούσῃ ·
These were the ones who marched out and feared for  Hellas in her peril.


8.72.1
8865
τοῖσι δὲ ἄλλοισι Πελοποννησίοισι ἔμελε οὐδέν .
The rest of the Peloponnesians cared nothing,


8.72.1
8866
Ὀλύμπια δὲ καὶ Κάρνεια παροιχώκεε ἤδη .
though the Olympian and Carnean festivals were now past.


8.73.1
8867
οἰκέει δὲ τὴν Πελοπόννησον ἔθνεα ἑπτά .
Seven nations inhabit the  Peloponnese.


8.73.1
8868
τούτων δὲ τὰ μὲν δύο αὐτόχθονα ἐόντα κατὰ χώρην ἵδρυται νῦν τε καὶ τὸ πάλαι οἴκεον , Ἀρκάδες τε καὶ Κυνούριοι ·
Two of these are aboriginal and are now settled in the land where they lived in the old days, the Arcadians and Cynurians.


8.73.1
8869
ἓν δὲ ἔθνος τὸ Ἀχαιϊκὸν ἐκ μὲν Πελοποννήσου οὐκ ἐξεχώρησε , ἐκ μέντοι τῆς ἑωυτῶν , οἰκέει δὲ τὴν ἀλλοτρίην .
One nation, the Achaean, has never left the  Peloponnese, but it has left its own country and inhabits another nation's land.


8.73.2
8870
τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ ἔθνεα τῶν ἑπτὰ τέσσερα ἐπήλυδα ἐστί , Δωριέες τε καὶ Αἰτωλοὶ καὶ Δρύοπες καὶ Λήμνιοι .
The four remaining nations of the seven are immigrants, the Dorians and Aetolians and Dryopians and Lemnians.


8.73.2
8871
Δωριέων μὲν πολλαί τε καὶ δόκιμοι πόλιες , Αἰτωλῶν δὲ Ἦλις μούνη , Δρυόπων δὲ Ἑρμιών τε καὶ Ἀσίνη ἡ πρὸς Καρδαμύλῃ τῇ Λακωνικῇ , Λημνίων δὲ Παρωρεῆται πάντες .
The Dorians have many famous cities, the Aetolians only  Elis, the Dryopians Hermione and  Asine near Laconian Cardamyle, the Lemnians all the Paroreatae.


8.73.3
8872
οἱ δὲ Κυνούριοι αὐτόχθονες ἐόντες δοκέουσι μοῦνοι εἶναι Ἴωνες , ἐκδεδωρίευνται δὲ ὑπό τε Ἀργείων ἀρχόμενοι καὶ τοῦ χρόνου , ἐόντες Ὀρνεῆται καὶ οἱ περίοικοι .
The Cynurians are aboriginal and seem to be the only Ionians, but they have been Dorianized by time and by Argive rule. They are the Orneatae and the perioikoi.


8.73.3
8873
τούτων ὦν τῶν ἑπτὰ ἐθνέων αἱ λοιπαὶ πόλιες , πάρεξ τῶν κατέλεξα , ἐκ τοῦ μέσου κατέατο ·
All the remaining cities of these seven nations, except those I enumerated, stayed neutral.


8.73.3
8874
εἰ δὲ ἐλευθέρως ἔξεστι εἰπεῖν , ἐκ τοῦ κατήμενοι ἐμήδιζον .
If I may speak freely, by staying neutral they medized.


8.74.1
8875
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἐν τῷ Ἰσθμῷ τοιούτῳ πόνῳ συνέστασαν , ἅτε περὶ τοῦ παντὸς ἤδη δρόμου θέοντες καὶ τῇσι νηυσὶ οὐκ ἐλπίζοντες ἐλλάμψεσθαι ·
Those at the Isthmus were involved in so great a labor, since all they had was at stake and they did not expect the ships to win distinction.


8.74.1
8876
οἳ δὲ ἐν Σαλαμῖνι ὅμως ταῦτα πυνθανόμενοι ἀρρώδεον , οὐκ οὕτω περὶ σφίσι αὐτοῖσι δειμαίνοντες ὡς περὶ τῇ Πελοποννήσῳ .
Those at  Salamis heard of their labors but still were full of dread, fearing not for themselves but for the  Peloponnese.


8.74.2
8877
τέως μὲν δὴ αὐτῶν ἀνὴρ ἀνδρὶ παραστὰς σιγῇ λόγον ἐποιέετο , θῶμα ποιεύμενοι τὴν Εὐρυβιάδεω ἀβουλίην ·
For a time each man talked quietly to his neighbor, wondering at Eurybiades' folly,


8.74.2
8878
τέλος δὲ ἐξερράγη ἐς τὸ μέσον .
but finally it came out into the open.


8.74.2
8879
σύλλογός τε δὴ ἐγίνετο καὶ πολλὰ ἐλέγετο τῶν αὐτῶν , οἳ μὲν ὡς ἐς τὴν Πελοπόννησον χρεὸν εἴη ἀποπλέειν καὶ περὶ ἐκείνης κινδυνεύειν μηδὲ πρὸ χώρης δοριαλώτου μένοντας μάχεσθαι , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ καὶ Αἰγινῆται καὶ Μεγαρέες αὐτοῦ μένοντας ἀμύνεσθαι .
They held an assembly and talked at length on the same matters as before: some said they must sail away to the  Peloponnese and risk battle for that country, not stay and fight for a captured land; but the Athenians and Aeginetans and Megarians said they must stay and defend themselves.


8.75.1
8880
ἐνθαῦτα Θεμιστοκλέης ὡς ἑσσοῦτο τῇ γνώμῃ ὑπὸ τῶν Πελοποννησίων , λαθὼν ἐξέρχεται ἐκ τοῦ συνεδρίου , ἐξελθὼν δὲ πέμπει ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον τὸ Μήδων ἄνδρα πλοίῳ ἐντειλάμενος τὰ λέγειν χρεόν , τῷ οὔνομα μὲν ἦν Σίκιννος , οἰκέτης δὲ καὶ παιδαγωγὸς ἦν τῶν Θεμιστοκλέος παίδων ·
When the Peloponnesians were outvoting him, Themistocles secretly left the assembly, and sent a man by boat to the Median fleet after ordering him what to say. His name was Sicinnus, and he was Themistocles' servant and his sons' attendant.


8.75.1
8881
τὸν δὴ ὕστερον τούτων τῶν πρηγμάτων Θεμιστοκλέης Θεσπιέα τε ἐποίησε , ὡς ἐπεδέκοντο οἱ Θεσπιέες πολιήτας , καὶ χρήμασι ὄλβιον .
Later Themistocles enrolled him as a Thespian, when the Thespians were adopting citizens, and made him wealthy with money.


8.75.2
8882
ὃς τότε πλοίῳ ἀπικόμενος ἔλεγε πρὸς τοὺς στρατηγοὺς τῶν βαρβάρων τάδε .
He now came by boat and said to the generals of the barbarians,


8.75.2
8883
" ἔπεμψέ με στρατηγὸς ὁ Ἀθηναίων λάθρῃ τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων ( τυγχάνει γὰρ φρονέων τὰ βασιλέος καὶ βουλόμενος μᾶλλον τὰ ὑμέτερα κατύπερθε γίνεσθαι ἢ τὰ τῶν Ἑλλήνων πρήγματα ) φράσοντα ὅτι οἱ Ἕλληνες δρησμὸν βουλεύονται καταρρωδηκότες , καὶ νῦν παρέχει κάλλιστον ὑμέας ἔργων ἁπάντων ἐξεργάσασθαι , ἢν μὴ περιίδητε διαδράντας αὐτούς .
“The Athenian general has sent me without the knowledge of the other Hellenes. He is on the king's side and prefers that your affairs prevail, not the Hellenes'. I am to tell you that the Hellenes are terrified and plan flight, and you can now perform the finest deed of all if you do not allow them to escape.


8.75.3
8884
οὔτε γὰρ ἀλλήλοισι ὁμοφρονέουσι οὔτε ἀντιστήσονται ὑμῖν , πρὸς ἑωυτούς τε σφέας ὄψεσθε ναυμαχέοντας τοὺς τὰ ὑμέτερα φρονέοντας καὶ τοὺς μή " .
They do not all have the same intent, and they will no longer oppose you. Instead you will see them fighting against themselves, those who are on your side against those who are not.” After indicating this to them he departed.


8.76.1
8885
ὃ μὲν ταῦτά σφι σημήνας ἐκποδὼν ἀπαλλάσσετο ·
Finding the message credible, they first landed many of the Persians on the islet of Psyttalea, which lies between  Salamis and the mainland.


8.76.1
8886
τοῖσι δὲ ὡς πιστὰ ἐγίνετο τὰ ἀγγελθέντα , τοῦτο μὲν ἐς τὴν νησῖδα τὴν Ψυττάλειαν , μεταξὺ Σαλαμῖνός τε κειμένην καὶ τῆς ἠπείρου , πολλοὺς τῶν Περσέων ἀπεβιβάσαντο ·
When it was midnight, they brought their western wing in a circle towards  Salamis,


8.76.1
8887
τοῦτο δέ , ἐπειδὴ ἐγίνοντο μέσαι νύκτες , ἀνῆγον μὲν τὸ ἀπ’ ἑσπέρης κέρας κυκλούμενοι πρὸς τὴν Σαλαμῖνα , ἀνῆγον δὲ οἱ ἀμφὶ τὴν Κέον τε καὶ τὴν Κυνόσουραν τεταγμένοι , κατεῖχόν τε μέχρι Μουνυχίης πάντα τὸν πορθμὸν τῇσι νηυσί .
and those stationed at  Ceos and Cynosura also put out to sea, occupying all the passage as far as Munychia with their ships.


8.76.2
8888
τῶνδε δὲ εἵνεκα ἀνῆγον τὰς νέας , ἵνα δὴ τοῖσι Ἕλλησι μηδὲ φυγεῖν ἐξῇ , ἀλλ’ ἀπολαμφθέντες ἐν τῇ Σαλαμῖνι δοῖεν τίσιν τῶν ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ ἀγωνισμάτων .
They launched their ships in this way so that the Hellenes would have no escape: they would be trapped at  Salamis and pay the penalty for the battles at  Artemisium.


8.76.2
8889
ἐς δὲ τὴν νησῖδα τὴν Ψυττάλειαν καλεομένην ἀπεβίβαζον τῶν Περσέων τῶνδε εἵνεκεν , ὡς ἐπεὰν γίνηται ναυμαχίη , ἐνθαῦτα μάλιστα ἐξοισομένων τῶν τε ἀνδρῶν καὶ τῶν ναυηγίων ( ἐν γὰρ δὴ πόρῳ τῆς ναυμαχίης τῆς μελλούσης ἔσεσθαι ἔκειτο ἡ νῆσος ) , ἵνα τοὺς μὲν περιποιέωσι τοὺς δὲ διαφθείρωσι .
The purpose of their landing Persians on the islet called Psyttalea was this: when the battle took place, it was chiefly there that the men and wrecks would be washed ashore, for the island lay in the path of the impending battle. The Persians would be able to save some of those who washed up and kill the others.


8.76.3
8890
ἐποίευν δὲ σιγῇ ταῦτα , ὡς μὴ πυνθανοίατο οἱ ἐναντίοι .
They did this in silence for fear that their enemies hear,


8.76.3
8891
οἱ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα τῆς νυκτὸς οὐδὲν ἀποκοιμηθέντες παραρτέοντο .
making their preparations at night without sleep.


8.77.1
8892
χρησμοῖσι δὲ οὐκ ἔχω ἀντιλέγειν ὡς οὐκ εἰσὶ ἀληθέες , οὐ βουλόμενος ἐναργέως λέγοντας πειρᾶσθαι καταβάλλειν , ἐς τοιάδε πρήγματα ἐσβλέψας .
I cannot say against oracles that they are not true, and I do not wish to try to discredit them when they speak plainly.


8.77.1
8893
ἀλλ’ ὅταν Ἀρτέμιδος χρυσαόρου ἱερὸν ἀκτήν νηυσὶ γεφυρώσωσι καὶ εἰναλίην Κυνόσουραν ἐλπίδι μαινομένῃ , λιπαρὰς πέρσαντες Ἀθήνας , δῖα δίκη σβέσσει κρατερὸν κόρον , ὕβριος υἱόν , δεινὸν μαιμώοντα , δοκεῦντ’ ἀνὰ πάντα πίεσθαι .
Look at the following matter: " When the sacred headland of golden-sworded Artemis and Cynosura by the sea they bridge with ships, After sacking shiny  Athens in mad hope, Divine Justice will extinguish mighty Greed the son of Insolence Lusting terribly, thinking to devour all. "


8.77.2
8894
χαλκὸς γὰρ χαλκῷ συμμίξεται , αἵματι δ’ Ἄρης πόντον φοινίξει .
" Bronze will come together with bronze, and Ares


8.77.2
8895
τότ’ ἐλεύθερον Ἑλλάδος ἦμαρ εὐρύοπα Κρονίδης ἐπάγει καὶ πότνια Νίκη .
Will redden the sea with blood. To  Hellas the day of freedom Far-seeing Zeus and august Victory will bring. "


8.77.2
8896
ἐς τοιαῦτα μὲν καὶ οὕτω ἐναργέως λέγοντι Βάκιδι ἀντιλογίης χρησμῶν πέρι οὔτε αὐτὸς λέγειν τολμέω οὔτε παρ’ ἄλλων ἐνδέκομαι .
Considering this, I dare to say nothing against Bacis concerning oracles when he speaks so plainly, nor will I consent to it by others.


8.78.1
8897
τῶν δὲ ἐν Σαλαμῖνι στρατηγῶν ἐγίνετο ὠθισμὸς λόγων πολλός ·
Among the generals at  Salamis there was fierce argument.


8.78.1
8898
ᾔδεσαν δὲ οὔκω ὅτι σφέας περιεκυκλοῦντο τῇσι νηυσὶ οἱ βάρβαροι , ἀλλ’ ὥσπερ τῆς ἡμέρης ὥρων αὐτοὺς τεταγμένους , ἐδόκεον κατὰ χώρην εἶναι .
They did not yet know that the barbarians had encircled them with their ships, supposing them still marshalled in the place where they had seen them by day.


8.79.1
8899
συνεστηκότων δὲ τῶν στρατηγῶν , ἐξ Αἰγίνης διέβη Ἀριστείδης ὁ Λυσιμάχου , ἀνὴρ Ἀθηναῖος μὲν ἐξωστρακισμένος δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου ·
As the generals disputed, Aristides son of Lysimachus, an Athenian, crossed over from  Aegina, an Athenian man who had been ostracized by the people.


8.79.1
8900
τὸν ἐγὼ νενόμικα , πυνθανόμενος αὐτοῦ τὸν τρόπον , ἄριστον ἄνδρα γενέσθαι ἐν Ἀθήνῃσι καὶ δικαιότατον .
I, learning by inquiry of his character, have come to believe that he was the best and most just man in  Athens.


8.79.2
8901
οὗτος ὡνὴρ στὰς ἐπὶ τὸ συνέδριον ἐξεκαλέετο Θεμιστοκλέα , ἐόντα μὲν ἑωυτῷ οὐ φίλον ἐχθρὸν δὲ τὰ μάλιστα ·
This man stood at the assembly and called Themistocles out, although he was no friend of his, but his bitter enemy.


8.79.2
8902
ὑπὸ δὲ μεγάθεος τῶν παρεόντων κακῶν λήθην ἐκείνων ποιεύμενος ἐξεκαλέετο , θέλων αὐτῷ συμμῖξαι ·
Because of the magnitude of the present ills, he deliberately forgot all that and called him out, wanting to talk to him.


8.79.2
8903
προακηκόεε δὲ ὅτι σπεύδοιεν οἱ ἀπὸ Πελοποννήσου ἀνάγειν τὰς νέας πρὸς τὸν Ἰσθμόν .
He had already heard that those from the  Peloponnese were anxious to set sail for the Isthmus,


8.79.3
8904
ὡς δὲ ἐξῆλθέ οἱ Θεμιστοκλέης , ἔλεγε Ἀριστείδης τάδε .
so when Themistocles came out he said,


8.79.3
8905
" ἡμέας στασιάζειν χρεόν ἐστι ἔν τε τῷ ἄλλῳ καιρῷ καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐν τῷδε περὶ τοῦ ὁκότερος ἡμέων πλέω ἀγαθὰ τὴν πατρίδα ἐργάσεται .
“On all occasions and especially now our contention must be over which of us will do our country more good.


8.79.4
8906
λέγω δέ τοι ὅτι ἴσον ἐστὶ πολλά τε καὶ ὀλίγα λέγειν περὶ ἀποπλόου τοῦ ἐνθεῦτεν Πελοποννησίοισι .
I say that it is all the same for the Peloponnesians to speak much or little about sailing away from here,


8.79.4
8907
ἐγὼ γὰρ αὐτόπτης τοι λέγω γενόμενος ὅτι νῦν οὐδ’ ἢν θέλωσι Κορίνθιοί τε καὶ αὐτὸς Εὐρυβιάδης οἷοί τε ἔσονται ἐκπλῶσαι ·
for I have seen with my own eyes that even if the Corinthians and Eurybiades himself wanted to, they would not be able to escape.


8.79.4
8908
περιεχόμεθα γὰρ ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων κύκλῳ .
We are encircled by the enemy.


8.79.4
8909
ἀλλ’ ἐσελθών σφι ταῦτα σήμηνον " .
Go in and indicate this to them.”


8.79.4
8910
ὃ δ’ ἀμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
Themistocles answered,


8.80.1
8911
" κάρτα τε χρηστὰ διακελεύεαι καὶ εὖ ἤγγειλας ·
“Your exhortation is most useful and you bring good news.


8.80.1
8912
τὰ γὰρ ἐγὼ ἐδεόμην γενέσθαι , αὐτὸς αὐτόπτης γενόμενος ἥκεις .
You have come as an eyewitness of just what I wanted to happen.


8.80.1
8913
ἴσθι γὰρ ἐξ ἐμέο τὰ ποιεύμενα ὑπὸ Μήδων ·
Know that I am the cause of what the Medes are doing.


8.80.1
8914
ἔδεε γάρ , ὅτε οὐκ ἑκόντες ἤθελον ἐς μάχην κατίστασθαι οἱ Ἕλληνες , ἀέκοντας παραστήσασθαι .
When the Hellenes would not willingly enter battle, it was necessary to force them against their will.


8.80.1
8915
σὺ δὲ ἐπεί περ ἥκεις χρηστὰ ἀπαγγέλλων , αὐτός σφι ἄγγειλον .
Since you have come bringing good news, tell it to them yourself.


8.80.2
8916
ἢν γὰρ ἐγὼ αὐτὰ λέγω , δόξω πλάσας λέγειν καὶ οὐ πείσω , ὡς οὐ ποιεύντων τῶν βαρβάρων ταῦτα .
If I say these things, they will think I invented it, and they will not believe that the barbarians are doing this.


8.80.2
8917
ἀλλά σφι σήμηνον αὐτὸς παρελθὼν ὡς ἔχει .
Go in yourself and let them know how it stands.


8.80.2
8918
ἐπεὰν δὲ σημήνῃς , ἢν μὲν πείθωνται , ταῦτα δὴ τὰ κάλλιστα , ἢν δὲ αὐτοῖσι μὴ πιστὰ γένηται , ὅμοιον ἡμῖν ἔσται ·
It would be best if they believe you when you tell them, but if they find these things incredible it is all the same to us.


8.80.2
8919
οὐ γὰρ ἔτι διαδρήσονται , εἴ περ περιεχόμεθα πανταχόθεν , ὡς σὺ λέγεις " .
They will not be able to run away, if indeed we are surrounded on all sides as you say.”


8.81.1
8920
ἐνθαῦτα ἔλεγε παρελθὼν ὁ Ἀριστείδης , φάμενος ἐξ Αἰγίνης τε ἥκειν καὶ μόγις ἐκπλῶσαι λαθὼν τοὺς ἐπορμέοντας ·
Aristides went in and told them, saying that he had come from  Aegina and had barely made it past the blockade when he sailed out,


8.81.1
8921
περιέχεσθαι γὰρ πᾶν τὸ στρατόπεδον τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν ὑπὸ τῶν νεῶν τῶν Ξέρξεω ·
since all the Hellenic camp was surrounded by Xerxes' ships.


8.81.1
8922
παραρτέεσθαι τε συνεβούλευε ὡς ἀλεξησομένους .
He advised them to prepare to defend themselves.


8.81.1
8923
καὶ ὃ μὲν ταῦτα εἴπας μετεστήκεε , τῶν δὲ αὖτις ἐγίνετο λόγων ἀμφισβασίη ·
He said this and left, and again a dispute arose among them.


8.81.1
8924
οἱ γὰρ πλεῦνες τῶν στρατηγῶν οὐκ ἐπείθοντο τὰ ἐσαγγελθέντα .
The majority of the generals did not believe the news.


8.82.1
8925
ἀπιστεόντων δὲ τούτων ἧκε τριήρης ἀνδρῶν Τηνίων αὐτομολέουσα , τῆς ἦρχε ἀνὴρ Παναίτιος ὁ Σωσιμένεος , ἥ περ δὴ ἔφερε τὴν ἀληθείην πᾶσαν .
While they were still held by disbelief, a trireme of Tenian deserters arrived, captained by Panaetius son of Sosimenes, which brought them the whole truth.


8.82.1
8926
διὰ δὲ τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον ἐνεγράφησαν Τήνιοι ἐν Δελφοῖσι ἐς τὸν τρίποδα ἐν τοῖσι τὸν βάρβαρον κατελοῦσι .
For this deed the Tenians were engraved on the tripod at  Delphi with those who had conquered the barbarian.


8.82.2
8927
σὺν δὲ ὦν ταύτῃ τῇ νηὶ τῇ αὐτομολησάσῃ ἐς Σαλαμῖνα καὶ τῇ πρότερον ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμίσιον τῇ Λημνίῃ ἐξεπληροῦτο τὸ ναυτικὸν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι ἐς τὰς ὀγδώκοντα καὶ τριηκοσίας νέας ·
With this ship that deserted at  Salamis and the Lemnian which deserted earlier at  Artemisium, the Hellenic fleet reached its full number of three hundred and eighty ships,


8.82.2
8928
δύο γὰρ δὴ νεῶν τότε κατέδεε ἐς τὸν ἀριθμόν .
for it had fallen short of the number by two ships.


8.83.1
8929
τοῖσι δὲ Ἕλλησι ὡς πιστὰ δὴ τὰ λεγόμενα ἦν τῶν Τηνίων ῥήματα , παρεσκευάζοντο ὡς ναυμαχήσοντες .
When they found the words of the Tenians worthy of belief, the Hellenes prepared to fight at sea.


8.83.1
8930
ἠώς τε διέφαινε καὶ οἳ σύλλογον τῶν ἐπιβατέων ποιησάμενοι , προηγόρευε εὖ ἔχοντα μὲν ἐκ πάντων Θεμιστοκλέης , τὰ δὲ ἔπεα ἦν πάντα κρέσσω τοῖσι ἥσσοσι ἀντιτιθέμενα , ὅσα δὴ ἐν ἀνθρώπου φύσι καὶ καταστάσι ἐγγίνεται ·
As dawn glimmered, they held an assembly of the fighting men, and Themistocles gave the best address among the others. His entire speech involved comparing the better and lesser elements in human nature and the human condition.


8.83.2
8931
παραινέσας δὲ τούτων τὰ κρέσσω αἱρέεσθαι καὶ καταπλέξας τὴν ῥῆσιν , ἐσβαίνειν ἐκέλευε ἐς τὰς νέας .
He concluded his speech by advising them to choose the better of these, then gave the command to mount the ships.


8.83.2
8932
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν δὴ ἐσέβαινον , καὶ ἧκε ἡ ἀπ’ Αἰγίνης τριήρης , ἣ κατὰ τοὺς Αἰακίδας ἀπεδήμησε .
Just as they embarked, the trireme which had gone after the sons of Aeacus arrived from  Aegina.


8.84.1
8933
ἐνθαῦτα ἀνῆγον τὰς νέας ἁπάσας Ἕλληνες , ἀναγομένοισι δέ σφι αὐτίκα ἐπεκέατο οἱ βάρβαροι .
Then the Hellenes set sail with all their ships, and as they were putting out to sea the barbarians immediately attacked them.


8.84.1
8934
οἱ μὲν δὴ ἄλλοι Ἕλληνες ἐπὶ πρύμνην ἀνεκρούοντο καὶ ὤκελλον τὰς νέας , Ἀμεινίης δὲ Παλληνεὺς ἀνὴρ Ἀθηναῖος ἐξαναχθεὶς νηὶ ἐμβάλλει ·
The rest of the Hellenes began to back water and tried to beach their ships, but Ameinias of  Pallene, an Athenian, charged and rammed a ship.


8.84.1
8935
συμπλακείσης δὲ τῆς νεὸς καὶ οὐ δυναμένων ἀπαλλαγῆναι , οὕτω δὴ οἱ ἄλλοι Ἀμεινίῃ βοηθέοντες συνέμισγον .
When his ship became entangled and the crew could not free it, the others came to help Ameinias and joined battle.


8.84.2
8936
Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν οὕτω λέγουσι τῆς ναυμαχίης γενέσθαι τὴν ἀρχήν , Αἰγινῆται δὲ τὴν κατὰ τοὺς Αἰακίδας ἀποδημήσασαν ἐς Αἴγιναν , ταύτην εἶναι τὴν ἄρξασαν .
The Athenians say that the fighting at sea began this way, but the Aeginetans say that the ship which had been sent to  Aegina after the sons of Aeacus was the one that started it.


8.84.2
8937
λέγεται δὲ καὶ τάδε , ὡς φάσμα σφι γυναικὸς ἐφάνη , φανεῖσαν δὲ διακελεύσασθαι ὥστε καὶ ἅπαν ἀκοῦσαι τὸ τῶν Ἑλλήνων στρατόπεδον , ὀνειδίσασαν πρότερον τάδε , " ὦ δαιμόνιοι , μέχρι κόσου ἔτι πρύμνην ἀνακρούεσθε " ;
The story is also told that the phantom of a woman appeared to them, who cried commands loud enough for all the Hellenic fleet to hear, reproaching them first with, “Men possessed, how long will you still be backing water?”


8.85.1
8938
κατὰ μὲν δὴ Ἀθηναίους ἐτετάχατο Φοίνικες ( οὗτοι γὰρ εἶχον τὸ πρὸς Ἐλευσῖνός τε καὶ ἑσπέρης κέρας ) , κατὰ δὲ Λακεδαιμονίους Ἴωνες ·
The Phoenicians were marshalled against the Athenians, holding the western wing toward  Eleusis.


8.85.1
8939
οὗτοι δ’ εἶχον τὸ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ τε καὶ τὸν Πειραιέα .
Against the Lacedaemonians were the Ionians, on the eastern wing toward  Piraeus,


8.85.1
8940
ἐθελοκάκεον μέντοι αὐτῶν κατὰ τὰς Θεμιστοκλέος ἐντολὰς ὀλίγοι , οἱ δὲ πλεῦνες οὔ .
and a few of them fought badly according to Themistocles' instructions, but the majority did not.


8.85.2
8941
ἔχω μέν νυν συχνῶν οὐνόματα τριηράρχων καταλέξαι τῶν νέας Ἑλληνίδας ἑλόντων , χρήσομαι δὲ αὐτοῖσι οὐδὲν πλὴν Θεομήστορός τε τοῦ Ἀνδροδάμαντος καὶ Φυλάκου τοῦ Ἱστιαίου , Σαμίων ἀμφοτέρων .
I can list the names of many captains who captured Hellenic ships, but I will mention none except Theomestor son of Androdamas and Phylacus son of Histiaeus, both Samians.


8.85.3
8942
τοῦδε δὲ εἵνεκα μέμνημαι τούτων μούνων , ὅτι Θεομήστωρ μὲν διὰ τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον Σάμου ἐτυράννευσε καταστησάντων τῶν Περσέων , Φύλακος δὲ εὐεργέτης βασιλέος ἀνεγράφη καὶ χώρῃ ἐδωρήθη πολλῇ .
I mention only these because Theomestor was appointed tyrant of  Samos by the Persians for this feat, and Phylacus was recorded as a benefactor of the king and granted much land.


8.85.3
8943
οἱ δ’ εὐεργέται βασιλέος ὀροσάγγαι καλέονται Περσιστί .
The king's benefactors are called “orosangae” in the Persian language.


8.86.1
8944
περὶ μέν νυν τούτους οὕτω εἶχε ·
Thus it was concerning them.


8.86.1
8945
τὸ δὲ πλῆθος τῶν νεῶν ἐν τῇ Σαλαμῖνι ἐκεραΐζετο , αἳ μὲν ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίων διαφθειρόμεναι αἳ δὲ ὑπ’ Αἰγινητέων .
But the majority of the ships at  Salamis were sunk, some destroyed by the Athenians, some by the Aeginetans.


8.86.1
8946
ἅτε γὰρ τῶν μὲν Ἑλλήνων σὺν κόσμῳ ναυμαχεόντων καὶ κατὰ τάξιν , τῶν δὲ βαρβάρων οὔτε τεταγμένων ἔτι οὔτε σὺν νόῳ ποιεόντων οὐδέν , ἔμελλε τοιοῦτό σφι συνοίσεσθαι οἷόν περ ἀπέβη .
Since the Hellenes fought in an orderly fashion by line, but the barbarians were no longer in position and did nothing with forethought, it was likely to turn out as it did.


8.86.1
8947
καίτοι ἦσάν γε καὶ ἐγένοντο ταύτην τὴν ἡμέρην μακρῷ ἀμείνονες αὐτοὶ ἑωυτῶν ἢ πρὸς Εὐβοίῃ , πᾶς τις προθυμεόμενος καὶ δειμαίνων Ξέρξην , ἐδόκεέ τε ἕκαστος ἑωυτὸν θεήσασθαι βασιλέα .
Yet they were brave that day, much more brave than they had been at  Euboea, for they all showed zeal out of fear of Xerxes, each one thinking that the king was watching him.


8.87.1
8948
κατὰ μὲν δὴ τοὺς ἄλλους οὐκ ἔχω μετεξετέρους εἰπεῖν ἀτρεκέως ὡς ἕκαστοι τῶν βαρβάρων ἢ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἠγωνίζοντο ·
I cannot say exactly how each of the other barbarians or Hellenes fought,


8.87.1
8949
κατὰ δὲ Ἀρτεμισίην τάδε ἐγένετο , ἀπ’ ὧν εὐδοκίμησε μᾶλλον ἔτι παρὰ βασιλέι .
but this is what happened to Artemisia, and it gave her still higher esteem with the king:


8.87.2
8950
ἐπειδὴ γὰρ ἐς θόρυβον πολλὸν ἀπίκετο τὰ βασιλέος πρήγματα , ἐν τούτῳ τῷ καιρῷ ἡ νηῦς ἡ Ἀρτεμισίης ἐδιώκετο ὑπὸ νεὸς Ἀττικῆς ·
When the king's side was all in commotion, at that time Artemisia's ship was pursued by a ship of  Attica.


8.87.2
8951
καὶ ἣ οὐκ ἔχουσα διαφυγεῖν , ἔμπροσθε γὰρ αὐτῆς ἦσαν ἄλλαι νέες φίλιαι , ἡ δὲ αὐτῆς πρὸς τῶν πολεμίων μάλιστα ἐτύγχανε ἐοῦσα , ἔδοξέ οἱ τόδε ποιῆσαι , τὸ καὶ συνήνεικε ποιησάσῃ .
She could not escape, for other allied ships were in front of her and hers was the nearest to the enemy. So she resolved to do something which did in fact benefit her:


8.87.2
8952
διωκομένη γὰρ ὑπὸ τῆς Ἀττικῆς φέρουσα ἐνέβαλε νηὶ φιλίῃ ἀνδρῶν τε Καλυνδέων καὶ αὐτοῦ ἐπιπλέοντος τοῦ Καλυνδέων βασιλέος Δαμασιθύμου .
as she was pursued by the Attic ship, she charged and rammed an allied ship, with a Calyndian crew and Damasithymus himself, king of the Calyndians, aboard.


8.87.3
8953
εἰ μὲν καί τι νεῖκος πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐγεγόνεε ἔτι περὶ Ἑλλήσποντον ἐόντων , οὐ μέντοι ἔχω γε εἰπεῖν οὔτε εἰ ἐκ προνοίης αὐτὰ ἐποίησε , οὔτε εἰ συνεκύρησε ἡ τῶν Καλυνδέων κατὰ τύχην παραπεσοῦσα νηῦς .
I cannot say if she had some quarrel with him while they were still at the  Hellespont, or whether she did this intentionally or if the ship of the Calyndians fell in her path by chance.


8.87.4
8954
ὡς δὲ ἐνέβαλέ τε καὶ κατέδυσε , εὐτυχίῃ χρησαμένη διπλᾶ ἑωυτὴν ἀγαθὰ ἐργάσατο .
But when she rammed and sank it, she had the luck of gaining two advantages.


8.87.4
8955
ὅ τε γὰρ τῆς Ἀττικῆς νεὸς τριήραρχος ὡς εἶδέ μιν ἐμβάλλουσαν νηὶ ἀνδρῶν βαρβάρων , νομίσας τὴν νέα τὴν Ἀρτεμισίης ἢ Ἑλληνίδα εἶναι ἢ αὐτομολέειν ἐκ τῶν βαρβάρων καὶ αὐτοῖσι ἀμύνειν , ἀποστρέψας πρὸς ἄλλας ἐτράπετο .
When the captain of the Attic ship saw her ram a ship with a barbarian crew, he decided that Artemisia's ship was either Hellenic or a deserter from the barbarians fighting for them, so he turned away to deal with others.


8.88.1
8956
τοῦτο μὲν τοιοῦτο αὐτῇ συνήνεικε γενέσθαι διαφυγεῖν τε καὶ μὴ ἀπολέσθαι , τοῦτο δὲ συνέβη ὥστε κακὸν ἐργασαμένην ἀπὸ τούτων αὐτὴν μάλιστα εὐδοκιμῆσαι παρὰ Ξέρξῃ .
Thus she happened to escape and not be destroyed, and it also turned out that the harmful thing which she had done won her exceptional esteem from Xerxes.


8.88.2
8957
λέγεται γὰρ βασιλέα θηεύμενον μαθεῖν τὴν νέα ἐμβαλοῦσαν , καὶ δή τινα εἰπεῖν τῶν παρεόντων " δέσποτα , ὁρᾷς Ἀρτεμισίην ὡς εὖ ἀγωνίζεται καὶ νέα τῶν πολεμίων κατέδυσε " ;
It is said that the king, as he watched the battle, saw her ship ram the other, and one of the bystanders said, “Master, do you see how well Artemisia contends in the contest and how she has sunk an enemy ship?”


8.88.2
8958
καὶ τὸν ἐπειρέσθαι εἰ ἀληθέως ἐστὶ Ἀρτεμισίης τὸ ἔργον , καὶ τοὺς φάναι , σαφέως τὸ ἐπίσημον τῆς νεὸς ἐπισταμένους ·
When he asked if the deed was truly Artemisia's, they affirmed it, knowing reliably the marking of her ship.


8.88.2
8959
τὴν δὲ διαφθαρεῖσαν ἠπιστέατο εἶναι πολεμίην .
They supposed that the ruined ship was an enemy.


8.88.3
8960
τά τε γὰρ ἄλλα , ὡς εἴρηται , αὐτῇ συνήνεικε ἐς εὐτυχίην γενόμενα , καὶ τὸ τῶν ἐκ τῆς Καλυνδικῆς νεὸς μηδένα ἀποσωθέντα κατήγορον γενέσθαι .
As I have said, all this happened to bring her luck, and also that no one from the Calyndian ship survived to accuse her.


8.88.3
8961
Ξέρξην δὲ εἰπεῖν λέγεται πρὸς τὰ φραζόμενα " οἱ μὲν ἄνδρες γεγόνασί μοι γυναῖκες , αἱ δὲ γυναῖκες ἄνδρες " .
It is said that Xerxes replied to what was told him, “My men have become women, and my women men.”


8.88.3
8962
ταῦτα μὲν Ξέρξην φασὶ εἰπεῖν .
They say this is what Xerxes said.


8.89.1
8963
ἐν δὲ τῷ πόνῳ τούτῳ ἀπὸ μὲν ἔθανε ὁ στρατηγὸς Ἀριαβίγνης ὁ Δαρείου , Ξέρξεω ἐὼν ἀδελφεός , ἀπὸ δὲ ἄλλοι πολλοί τε καὶ ὀνομαστοὶ Περσέων καὶ Μήδων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων συμμάχων , ὀλίγοι δὲ τινὲς καὶ Ἑλλήνων ·
In this struggle the general Ariabignes died, son of Darius and the brother of Xerxes. Many other famous men of the Persians and Medes and other allies also died, but only a few Hellenes,


8.89.1
8964
ἅτε γὰρ νέειν ἐπιστάμενοι , τοῖσι αἱ νέες διεφθείροντο , καὶ μὴ ἐν χειρῶν νόμῳ ἀπολλύμενοι , ἐς τὴν Σαλαμῖνα διένεον .
since they knew how to swim. Those whose ships were sunk swam across to  Salamis, unless they were killed in action,


8.89.2
8965
τῶν δὲ βαρβάρων οἱ πολλοὶ ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ διεφθάρησαν νέειν οὐκ ἐπιστάμενοι .
but many of the barbarians drowned in the sea since they did not know how to swim.


8.89.2
8966
ἐπεὶ δὲ αἱ πρῶται ἐς φυγὴν ἐτράποντο , ἐνθαῦτα αἱ πλεῖσται διεφθείροντο ·
Most of the ships were sunk when those in the front turned to flee,


8.89.2
8967
οἱ γὰρ ὄπισθε τεταγμένοι , ἐς τὸ πρόσθε τῇσι νηυσὶ παριέναι πειρώμενοι ὡς ἀποδεξόμενοί τι καὶ αὐτοὶ ἔργον βασιλέι , τῇσι σφετέρῃσι νηυσὶ φευγούσῃσι περιέπιπτον .
since those marshalled in the rear, as they tried to go forward with their ships so they too could display some feat to the king, ran afoul of their own side's ships in flight.


8.90.1
8968
ἐγένετο δὲ καὶ τόδε ἐν τῷ θορύβῳ τούτῳ .
The following also happened in this commotion.


8.90.1
8969
τῶν τινες Φοινίκων , τῶν αἱ νέες διεφθάρατο , ἐλθόντες παρὰ βασιλέα διέβαλλον τοὺς Ἴωνας , ὡς δι’ ἐκείνους ἀπολοίατο αἱ νέες , ὡς προδόντων .
Certain Phoenicians whose ships had been destroyed came to the king and accused the Ionians of treason, saying that it was by their doing that the ships had been lost.


8.90.1
8970
συνήνεικε ὦν οὕτω ὥστε Ἰώνων τε τοὺς στρατηγοὺς μὴ ἀπολέσθαι Φοινίκων τε τοὺς διαβάλλοντας λαβεῖν τοιόνδε μισθόν .
It turned out that the Ionian generals were not put to death, and those Phoenicians who slandered them were rewarded as I will show.


8.90.2
8971
ἔτι τούτων ταῦτα λεγόντων ἐνέβαλε νηὶ Ἀττικῇ Σαμοθρηικίη νηῦς .
While they were still speaking, a Samothracian ship rammed an Attic ship.


8.90.2
8972
ἥ τε δὴ Ἀττικὴ κατεδύετο καὶ ἐπιφερομένη Αἰγιναίη νηῦς κατέδυσε τῶν Σαμοθρηίκων τὴν νέα .
The Attic ship sank and an Aeginetan ship bore down and sank the Samothracian ship,


8.90.2
8973
ἅτε δὲ ἐόντες ἀκοντισταὶ οἱ Σαμοθρήικες τοὺς ἐπιβάτας ἀπὸ τῆς καταδυσάσης νεὸς βάλλοντες ἀπήραξαν καὶ ἐπέβησάν τε καὶ ἔσχον αὐτήν .
but the Samothracians, being javelin-throwers, by pelting them with missiles knocked the fighters off the ship that had sunk theirs and boarded and seized it.


8.90.3
8974
ταῦτα γενόμενα τοὺς Ἴωνας ἐρρύσατο ·
This saved the Ionians.


8.90.3
8975
ὡς γὰρ εἶδε σφέας Ξέρξης ἔργον μέγα ἐργασαμένους , ἐτράπετο πρὸς τοὺς Φοίνικας οἷα ὑπερλυπεόμενός τε καὶ πάντας αἰτιώμενος , καὶ σφεων ἐκέλευσε τὰς κεφαλὰς ἀποταμεῖν , ἵνα μὴ αὐτοὶ κακοὶ γενόμενοι τοὺς ἀμείνονας διαβάλλωσι .
In his deep vexation Xerxes blamed everyone. When he saw the Ionians performing this great feat, he turned to the Phoenicians and commanded that their heads be cut off, so that they who were base not slander men more noble.


8.90.4
8976
ὅκως γάρ τινα ἴδοι Ξέρξης τῶν ἑωυτοῦ ἔργον τι ἀποδεικνύμενον ἐν τῇ ναυμαχίῃ , κατήμενος ὑπὸ τῷ ὄρεϊ τῷ ἀντίον Σαλαμῖνος τὸ καλέεται Αἰγάλεως , ἀνεπυνθάνετο τὸν ποιήσαντα , καὶ οἱ γραμματισταὶ ἀνέγραφον πατρόθεν τὸν τριήραρχον καὶ τὴν πόλιν .
Whenever Xerxes, as he sat beneath the mountain opposite  Salamis which is called Aegaleos, saw one of his own men achieve some feat in the battle, he inquired who did it, and his scribes wrote down the captain's name with his father and city of residence.


8.90.4
8977
πρὸς δέ τι καὶ προσεβάλετο φίλος ἐὼν Ἀριαράμνης ἀνὴρ Πέρσης παρεὼν τούτου τοῦ Φοινικηίου πάθεος .
The presence of Ariaramnes, a Persian and a friend of the Ionians, contributed still more to this calamity of the Phoenicians.


8.90.4
8978
οἳ μὲν δὴ πρὸς τοὺς Φοίνικας ἐτράποντο .
Thus they dealt with the Phoenicians.


8.91.1
8979
τῶν δὲ βαρβάρων ἐς φυγὴν τραπομένων καὶ ἐκπλεόντων πρὸς τὸ Φάληρον , Αἰγινῆται ὑποστάντες ἐν τῷ πορθμῷ ἔργα ἀπεδέξαντο λόγου ἄξια .
The barbarians were routed and tried to flee by sailing out to Phalerum, but the Aeginetans lay in wait for them in the strait and then performed deeds worth telling.


8.91.1
8980
οἱ μὲν γὰρ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐν τῷ θορύβῳ ἐκεράιζον τάς τε ἀντισταμένας καὶ τὰς φευγούσας τῶν νεῶν , οἱ δὲ Αἰγινῆται τὰς ἐκπλεούσας ·
The Athenians in the commotion destroyed those ships which either resisted or tried to flee, the Aeginetans those sailing out of the strait.


8.91.1
8981
ὅκως δὲ τινὲς τοὺς Ἀθηναίους διαφύγοιεν , φερόμενοι ἐσέπιπτον ἐς τοὺς Αἰγινήτας .
Whoever escaped from the Athenians charged right into the Aeginetans.


8.92.1
8982
ἐνθαῦτα συνεκύρεον νέες ἥ τε Θεμιστοκλέος διώκουσα νέα καὶ ἡ Πολυκρίτου τοῦ Κριοῦ ἀνδρὸς Αἰγινήτεω νηὶ ἐμβαλοῦσα Σιδωνίῃ , ἥ περ εἷλε τὴν προφυλάσσουσαν ἐπὶ Σκιάθῳ τὴν Αἰγιναίην , ἐπ’ ἧς ἔπλεε Πυθέης ὁ Ἰσχενόου , τὸν οἱ Πέρσαι κατακοπέντα ἀρετῆς εἵνεκα εἶχον ἐν τῇ νηὶ ἐκπαγλεόμενοι ·
The ships of Themistocles, as he was pursuing a ship, and of Polycritus son of Crius, an Aeginetan, then met.


8.92.1
8983
τὸν δὴ περιάγουσα ἅμα τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι ἥλω ἡ νηῦς ἡ Σιδωνίη , ὥστε Πυθέην οὕτω σωθῆναι ἐς Αἴγιναν .
Polycritus had rammed a Sidonian ship, the one which had captured the Aeginetan ship that was on watch off Sciathus, and on it was Pytheas son of Ischenous, the one the Persians marvelled at when severely wounded and kept aboard their ship because of his virtue. This Sidonian ship carrying him with the Persians was now captured, so Pytheas came back safe to  Aegina.


8.92.2
8984
ὡς δὲ ἐσεῖδε τὴν νέα τὴν Ἀττικὴν ὁ Πολύκριτος , ἔγνω τὸ σημήιον ἰδὼν τῆς στρατηγίδος , καὶ βώσας τὸν Θεμιστοκλέα ἐπεκερτόμησε ἐς τῶν Αἰγινητέων τὸν μηδισμὸν ὀνειδίζων .
When Polycritus saw the Attic ship, he recognized it by seeing the flagship's marking and shouted to Themistocles, mocking and reproaching him concerning the Medizing of the Aeginetans.


8.92.2
8985
ταῦτα μέν νυν νηὶ ἐμβαλὼν ὁ Πολύκριτος ἀπέρριψε ἐς Θεμιστοκλέα ·
After ramming an enemy ship, Polycritus hurled these insults at Themistocles.


8.92.2
8986
οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι τῶν αἱ νέες περιεγένοντο , φεύγοντες ἀπίκοντο ἐς Φάληρον ὑπὸ τὸν πεζὸν στρατόν .
The barbarians whose ships were still intact fled and reached Phalerum under cover of the land army.


8.93.1
8987
ἐν δὲ τῇ ναυμαχίῃ ταύτῃ ἤκουσαν Ἑλλήνων ἄριστα Αἰγινῆται , ἐπὶ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι , ἀνδρῶν δὲ Πολύκριτός τε ὁ Αἰγινήτης καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι Εὐμένης τε ὁ Ἀναγυράσιος καὶ Ἀμεινίης Παλληνεύς , ὃς καὶ Ἀρτεμισίην ἐπεδίωξε .
In this battle the Hellenes with the reputation as most courageous were the Aeginetans, then the Athenians. Among individuals they were Polycritus the Aeginetan and the Athenians Eumenes of Anagyrus and Aminias of  Pallene, the one who pursued Artemisia.


8.93.1
8988
εἰ μέν νυν ἔμαθε ὅτι ἐν ταύτῃ πλέοι Ἀρτεμισίη , οὐκ ἂν ἐπαύσατο πρότερον ἢ εἷλέ μιν ἢ καὶ αὐτὸς ἥλω .
If he had known she was in that ship, he would not have stopped before either capturing it or being captured himself.


8.93.2
8989
τοῖσι γὰρ Ἀθηναίων τριηράρχοισι παρεκεκέλευστο , πρὸς δὲ καὶ ἄεθλον ἔκειτο μύριαι δραχμαί , ὃς ἄν μιν ζωὴν ἕλῃ ·
Such were the orders given to the Athenian captains, and there was a prize offered of ten thousand drachmas to whoever took her alive,


8.93.2
8990
δεινὸν γάρ τι ἐποιεῦντο γυναῖκα ἐπὶ τὰς Ἀθήνας στρατεύεσθαι .
since they were indignant that a woman waged war against  Athens.


8.93.2
8991
αὕτη μὲν δή , ὡς πρότερον εἴρηται , διέφυγε ·
But she escaped, as I said earlier,


8.93.2
8992
ἦσαν δὲ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι , τῶν αἱ νέες περιεγεγόνεσαν , ἐν τῷ Φαλήρῳ .
and the others whose ships survived were also in Phalerum.


8.94.1
8993
Ἀδείμαντον δὲ τὸν Κορίνθιον στρατηγὸν λέγουσι Ἀθηναῖοι αὐτίκα κατ’ ἀρχάς , ὡς συνέμισγον αἱ νέες , ἐκπλαγέντα τε καὶ ὑπερδείσαντα , τὰ ἱστία ἀειράμενον οἴχεσθαι φεύγοντα , ἰδόντας δὲ τοὺς Κορινθίους τὴν στρατηγίδα φεύγουσαν ὡσαύτως οἴχεσθαι .
The Athenians say that when the ships joined battle, the Corinthian general Adeimantus, struck with bewilderment and terror, hoisted his sails and fled away. When the Corinthians saw their flagship fleeing, they departed in the same way,


8.94.2
8994
ὡς δὲ ἄρα φεύγοντας γίνεσθαι τῆς Σαλαμινίης κατὰ ἱρὸν Ἀθηναίης Σκιράδος , περιπίπτειν σφι κέλητα θείῃ πομπῇ , τὸν οὔτε πέμψαντα φανῆναι οὐδένα , οὔτε τι τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς στρατιῆς εἰδόσι προσφέρεσθαι τοῖσι Κορινθίοισι .
but when in their flight they were opposite the sacred precinct of Athena Sciras on  Salamis, by divine guidance a boat encountered them.


8.94.2
8995
τῇδε δὲ συμβάλλονται εἶναι θεῖον τὸ πρῆγμα .
No one appeared to have sent it, and the Corinthians knew nothing about the affairs of the fleet when it approached. They reckon the affair to involve the gods because


8.94.2
8996
ὡς γὰρ ἀγχοῦ γενέσθαι τῶν νεῶν , τοὺς ἀπὸ τοῦ κέλητος λέγειν τάδε .
when the boat came near the ships, the people on the boat said,


8.94.3
8997
" Ἀδείμαντε , σὺ μὲν ἀποστρέψας τὰς νέας ἐς φυγὴν ὅρμησαι καταπροδοὺς τοὺς Ἕλληνας ·
“Adeimantus, you have turned your ships to flight and betrayed the Hellenes,


8.94.3
8998
οἳ δὲ καὶ δὴ νικῶσι ὅσον αὐτοὶ ἠρῶντο ἐπικρατήσαντες τῶν ἐχθρῶν " .
but they are overcoming their enemies to the fulfillment of their prayers for victory.”


8.94.3
8999
ταῦτα λεγόντων ἀπιστέειν γὰρ τὸν Ἀδείμαντον , αὖτις τάδε λέγειν , ὡς αὐτοὶ οἷοί τε εἶεν ἀγόμενοι ὅμηροι ἀποθνήσκειν , ἢν μὴ νικῶντες φαίνωνται οἱ Ἕλληνες .
Adeimantus did not believe them when they said this, so they spoke again, saying that they could be taken as hostages and killed if the Hellenes were not seen to be victorious.


8.94.4
9000
οὕτω δὴ ἀποστρέψαντα τὴν νέα αὐτόν τε καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἐπ’ ἐξεργασμένοισι ἐλθεῖν ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον .
So he and the others turned their ships around and came to the fleet, but it was all over.


8.94.4
9001
τούτους μὲν τοιαύτη φάτις ἔχει ὑπὸ Ἀθηναίων , οὐ μέντοι αὐτοί γε Κορίνθιοι ὁμολογέουσι , ἀλλ’ ἐν πρώτοισι σφέας αὐτοὺς τῆς ναυμαχίης νομίζουσι γενέσθαι ·
The Athenians spread this rumor about them, but the Corinthians do not agree at all, and they consider themselves to have been among the foremost in the battle.


8.94.4
9002
μαρτυρέει δέ σφι καὶ ἡ ἄλλη Ἑλλάς .
The rest of  Hellas bears them witness.


8.95.1
9003
Ἀριστείδης δὲ ὁ Λυσιμάχου ἀνὴρ Ἀθηναῖος , τοῦ καὶ ὀλίγῳ τι πρότερον τούτων ἐπεμνήσθην ὡς ἀνδρὸς ἀρίστου , οὗτος ἐν τῷ θορύβῳ τούτῳ τῷ περὶ Σαλαμῖνα γενομένῳ τάδε ἐποίεε ·
Aristides son of Lysimachus, the Athenian whom I mentioned a little before this as a valiant man, did this in the commotion that arose at  Salamis:


8.95.1
9004
παραλαβὼν πολλοὺς τῶν ὁπλιτέων οἳ παρατετάχατο παρὰ τὴν ἀκτὴν τῆς Σαλαμινίης χώρης , γένος ἐόντες Ἀθηναῖοι , ἐς τὴν Ψυττάλειαν νῆσον ἀπέβησε ἄγων , οἳ τοὺς Πέρσας τοὺς ἐν τῇ νησῖδι ταύτῃ κατεφόνευσαν πάντας .
taking many of the armed men who were arrayed along the shore of  Salamis, he brought them across and landed them on the island of Psyttalea, and they slaughtered all the Persians who were on that islet.


8.96.1
9005
ὡς δὲ ἡ ναυμαχίη διελέλυτο , κατειρύσαντες ἐς τὴν Σαλαμῖνα οἱ Ἕλληνες τῶν ναυηγίων ὅσα ταύτῃ ἐτύγχανε ἔτι ἐόντα , ἕτοιμοι ἦσαν ἐς ἄλλην ναυμαχίην , ἐλπίζοντες τῇσι περιεούσῃσι νηυσὶ ἔτι χρήσεσθαι βασιλέα .
When the battle was broken off, the Hellenes towed to  Salamis as many of the wrecks as were still there and kept ready for another battle, supposing that the king could still make use of his surviving ships.


8.96.2
9006
τῶν δὲ ναυηγίων πολλὰ ὑπολαβὼν ἄνεμος ζέφυρος ἔφερε τῆς Ἀττικῆς ἐπὶ τὴν ἠιόνα τὴν καλεομένην Κωλιάδα ·
A west wind had caught many of the wrecks and carried them to the shore in  Attica called Colias.


8.96.2
9007
ὥστε ἀποπλησθῆναι τὸν χρησμὸν τόν τε ἄλλον πάντα τὸν περὶ τῆς ναυμαχίης ταύτης εἰρημένοι Βάκιδι καὶ Μουσαίῳ , καὶ δὴ καὶ κατὰ τὰ ναυήγια τὰ ταύτῃ ἐξενειχθέντα τὸ εἰρημένον πολλοῖσι ἔτεσι πρότερον τούτων ἐν χρησμῷ Λυσιστράτῳ Ἀθηναίῳ ἀνδρὶ χρησμολόγῳ , τὸ ἐλελήθεε πάντας τοὺς Ἕλληνας , Κωλιάδες δὲ γυναῖκες ἐρετμοῖσι φρύξουσι τοῦτο δὲ ἔμελλε ἀπελάσαντος βασιλέος ἔσεσθαι .
Thus not only was all the rest of the oracle fulfilled which Bacis and Musaeus had spoken about this battle, but also what had been said many years before this in an oracle by Lysistratus, an Athenian soothsayer, concerning the wrecks carried to shore there. Its meaning had eluded all the Hellenes:  "  The Colian women will cook with oars.  But this was to happen after the king had marched away. "


8.97.1
9008
Ξέρξης δὲ ὡς ἔμαθε τὸ γεγονὸς πάθος , δείσας μή τις τῶν Ἰώνων ὑποθῆται τοῖσι Ἕλλησι ἢ αὐτοὶ νοήσωσι πλέειν ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον λύσοντες τὰς γεφύρας , καὶ ἀπολαμφθεὶς ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ κινδυνεύσῃ ἀπολέσθαι , δρησμὸν ἐβούλευε .
When Xerxes understood the calamity which had taken place, he feared that some of the Ionians might advise the Hellenes, if they did not think of it themselves, to sail to the  Hellespont and destroy the bridges. He would be trapped in  Europe in danger of destruction, so he resolved on flight.


8.97.1
9009
θέλων δὲ μὴ ἐπίδηλος εἶναι μήτε τοῖσι Ἕλλησι μήτε τοῖσι ἑωυτοῦ , ἐς τὴν Σαλαμῖνα χῶμα ἐπειρᾶτο διαχοῦν , γαύλους τε Φοινικηίους συνέδεε , ἵνα ἀντί τε σχεδίης ἔωσι καὶ τείχεος , ἀρτέετό τε ἐς πόλεμον ὡς ναυμαχίην ἄλλην ποιησόμενος .
He did not want to be detected either by the Hellenes or by his own men, so he attempted to build a dike across to  Salamis, and joined together Phoenician cargo ships to be both a bridge and a wall, making preparations as if to fight another sea battle.


8.97.2
9010
ὁρῶντες δέ μιν πάντες οἱ ἄλλοι ταῦτα πρήσσοντα εὖ ἠπιστέατο ὡς ἐκ παντὸς νόου παρεσκεύασται μένων πολεμήσειν ·
All who saw him doing this confidently supposed that he fully intended to stay and fight there,


8.97.2
9011
Μαρδόνιον δ’ οὐδὲν τούτων ἐλάνθανε ὡς μάλιστα ἔμπειρον ἐόντα τῆς ἐκείνου διανοίης .
but none of this eluded Mardonius, who had the most experience of the king's intentions. While doing all this, Xerxes sent a messenger to  Persia to announce the disaster.


8.98.1
9012
ταῦτά τε ἅμα Ξέρξης ἐποίεε καὶ ἔπεμπε ἐς Πέρσας ἀγγελέοντα τὴν παρεοῦσάν σφι συμφορήν .
While Xerxes did thus, he sent a messenger to  Persia with news of his present misfortune.


8.98.1
9013
τούτων δὲ τῶν ἀγγέλων ἐστὶ οὐδὲν ὅ τι θᾶσσον παραγίνεται θνητὸν ἐόν ·
Now there is nothing mortal that accomplishes a course more swiftly than do these messengers.


8.98.1
9014
οὕτω τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι ἐξεύρηται τοῦτο .
In such a way has this been contrived by the Persians.


8.98.1
9015
λέγουσι γὰρ ὡς ὁσέων ἂν ἡμερέων ᾖ ἡ πᾶσα ὁδός , τοσοῦτοι ἵπποι τε καὶ ἄνδρες διεστᾶσι κατὰ ἡμερησίην ὁδὸν ἑκάστην ἵππος τε καὶ ἀνὴρ τεταγμένος ·
It is said that as many days as there are in the whole journey, so many are the men and horses that stand along the road, each horse and man at the interval of a day's journey.


8.98.1
9016
τοὺς οὔτε νιφετός , οὐκ ὄμβρος , οὐ καῦμα , οὐ νὺξ ἔργει μὴ οὐ κατανύσαι τὸν προκείμενον αὐτῷ δρόμον τὴν ταχίστην .
These are stopped neither by snow nor rain nor heat nor darkness from accomplishing their appointed course with all speed.


8.98.2
9017
ὁ μὲν δὴ πρῶτος δραμὼν παραδιδοῖ τὰ ἐντεταλμένα τῷ δευτέρῳ , ὁ δὲ δεύτερος τῷ τρίτῳ ·
The first rider delivers his charge to the second, the second to the third, and thence it passes on from hand to hand,


8.98.2
9018
τὸ δὲ ἐνθεῦτεν ἤδη κατ’ ἄλλον καὶ ἄλλον διεξέρχεται παραδιδόμενα , κατά περ ἐν Ἕλλησι ἡ λαμπαδηφορίη τὴν τῷ Ἡφαίστῳ ἐπιτελέουσι .
even as in the Greek torch-bearers' race in honor of Hephaestus.


8.98.2
9019
τοῦτο τὸ δράμημα τῶν ἵππων καλέουσι Πέρσαι ἀγγαρήιον .
This riding-post is called in  Persia, angareion.


8.99.1
9020
ἡ μὲν δὴ πρώτη ἐς Σοῦσα ἀγγελίη ἀπικομένη , ὡς ἔχοι Ἀθήνας Ξέρξης , ἔτερψε οὕτω δή τι Περσέων τοὺς ὑπολειφθέντας ὡς τάς τε ὁδοὺς μυρσίνῃ πάσας ἐστόρεσαν καὶ ἐθυμίων θυμιήματα καὶ αὐτοὶ ἦσαν ἐν θυσίῃσί τε καὶ εὐπαθείῃσι .
When the first message came to  Susa, saying that Xerxes had taken  Athens, it gave such delight to the Persians who were left at home that they strewed all the roads with myrtle boughs and burnt incense and gave themselves up to sacrificial feasts and jollity.


8.99.2
9021
ἡ δὲ δευτέρη σφι ἀγγελίη ἐπεσελθοῦσα συνέχεε οὕτω ὥστε τοὺς κιθῶνας κατερρήξαντο πάντες , βοῇ τε καὶ οἰμωγῇ ἐχρέωντο ἀπλέτῳ , Μαρδόνιον ἐν αἰτίῃ τιθέντες .
The second, however, coming on the heels of the first, so confounded them that they all tore their tunics, and cried and lamented without ceasing, holding Mardonius to blame;


8.99.2
9022
οὐκ οὕτω δὲ περὶ τῶν νεῶν ἀχθόμενοι ταῦτα οἱ Πέρσαι ἐποίευν ὡς περὶ αὐτῷ Ξέρξῃ δειμαίνοντες .
it was not so much in grief for their ships that they did this as because they feared for Xerxes himself.


8.100.1
9023
καὶ περὶ Πέρσας μὲν ἦν ταῦτα τὸν πάντα μεταξὺ χρόνον γενόμενον , μέχρι οὗ Ξέρξης αὐτός σφεας ἀπικόμενος ἔπαυσε .
Such was the plight of the Persians for all the time until the coming of Xerxes himself ended it.


8.100.1
9024
Μαρδόνιος δὲ ὁρῶν μὲν Ξέρξην συμφορὴν μεγάλην ἐκ τῆς ναυμαχίης ποιεύμενον , ὑποπτεύων δὲ αὐτὸν δρησμὸν βουλεύειν ἐκ τῶν Ἀθηνέων , φροντίσας πρὸς ἑωυτὸν ὡς δώσει δίκην ἀναγνώσας βασιλέα στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , καί οἱ κρέσσον εἴη ἀνακινδυνεῦσαι ἢ κατεργάσασθαι τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἢ αὐτὸν καλῶς τελευτῆσαι τὸν βίον ὑπὲρ μεγάλων αἰωρηθέντα ·
Mardonius, however, seeing that Xerxes was greatly distressed because of the sea-fight, and suspecting that he planned flight from  Athens, thought that he would be punished for persuading the king to march against  Hellas and that it was better for him to risk the chance of either subduing  Hellas or dying honorably while engaged in a noble cause;


8.100.1
9025
πλέον μέντοι ἔφερέ οἱ ἡ γνώμη κατεργάσασθαι τὴν Ἑλλάδα ·
yet his hope rather inclined to the subduing of  Hellas.


8.100.1
9026
λογισάμενος ὦν ταῦτα προσέφερε τὸν λόγον τόνδε .
Taking all this into account, he made this proposal:


8.100.2
9027
" δέσποτα , μήτε λυπέο μήτε συμφορὴν μηδεμίαν μεγάλην ποιεῦ τοῦδε τοῦ γεγονότος εἵνεκα πρήγματος .
“Sire, be not grieved nor greatly distressed because of what has befallen us.


8.100.2
9028
οὐ γὰρ ξύλων ἀγὼν ὁ τὸ πᾶν φέρων ἐστὶ ἡμῖν , ἀλλ’ ἀνδρῶν τε καὶ ἵππων .
It is not on things of wood that the issue hangs for us, but on men and horses;


8.100.2
9029
σοὶ δὲ οὔτε τις τούτων τῶν τὸ πᾶν σφίσι ἤδη δοκεόντων κατεργάσθαι ἀποβὰς ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν πειρήσεται ἀντιωθῆναι οὔτ’ ἐκ τῆς ἠπείρου τῆσδε ·
furthermore, there is no one among these men, who thinks that he has now won a crowning victory and will disembark from his ship in an attempt to withstand you, no, nor anyone from this mainland.


8.100.2
9030
οἵ τε ἡμῖν ἠντιώθησαν , ἔδοσαν δίκας .
Those who have withstood us have paid the penalty.


8.100.3
9031
εἰ μέν νυν δοκέει , αὐτίκα πειρώμεθα τῆς Πελοποννήσου ·
If then you so desire, let us straightway attack the  Peloponnese,


8.100.3
9032
εἰ δὲ καὶ δοκέει ἐπισχεῖν , παρέχει ποιέειν ταῦτα .
or if it pleases you to wait, that also we can do.


8.100.3
9033
μηδὲ δυσθύμεε ·
Do not be downcast,


8.100.3
9034
οὐ γὰρ ἔστι Ἕλλησι οὐδεμία ἔκδυσις μὴ οὐ δόντας λόγον τῶν ἐποίησαν νῦν τε καὶ πρότερον εἶναι σοὺς δούλους .
for the Greeks have no way of escaping guilt for their former and their later deeds and from becoming your slaves.


8.100.3
9035
μάλιστα μέν νυν ταῦτα ποίεε ·
It is best then that you should do as I have said,


8.100.3
9036
εἰ δ’ ἄρα τοι βεβούλευται αὐτὸν ἀπελαύνοντα ἀπάγειν τὴν στρατιήν , ἄλλην ἔχω καὶ ἐκ τῶνδε βουλήν .
but if you have resolved to lead your army away, even then I have another plan.


8.100.4
9037
σὺ Πέρσας , βασιλεῦ , μὴ ποιήσῃς καταγελάστους γενέσθαι Ἕλλησι ·
Do not, O king, make the Persians the laughing-stock of the Greeks,


8.100.4
9038
οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐν Πέρσῃσί τοί τι δεδήληται τῶν πρηγμάτων , οὐδ’ ἐρέεις ὅκου ἐγενόμεθα ἄνδρες κακοί .
for if you have suffered harm, it is by no fault of the Persians.


8.100.4
9039
εἰ δὲ Φοίνικές τε καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι καὶ Κύπριοί τε καὶ Κίλικες κακοὶ ἐγένοντο , οὐδὲν πρὸς Πέρσας τοῦτο προσήκει τὸ πάθος .
Nor can you say that we have anywhere done less than brave men should, and if Phoenicians and Egyptians and Cyprians and Cilicians have so done, it is not the Persians who have any part in this disaster.


8.100.5
9040
ἤδη ὦν , ἐπειδὴ οὐ Πέρσαι τοι αἴτιοι ἐισί , ἐμοὶ πείθεο ·
Therefore, since the Persians are in no way to blame, be guided by me;


8.100.5
9041
εἴ τοι δέδοκται μὴ παραμένειν , σὺ μὲν ἐς ἤθεα τὰ σεωυτοῦ ἀπέλαυνε τῆς στρατιῆς ἀπάγων τὸ πολλόν , ἐμὲ δὲ σοὶ χρὴ τὴν Ἑλλάδα παρασχεῖν δεδουλωμένην , τριήκοντα μυριάδας τοῦ στρατοῦ ἀπολεξάμενον " .
if you are resolved not to remain, march homewards with the greater part of your army. It is for me, however, to enslave and deliver  Hellas to you with three hundred thousand of your host whom I will choose.”


8.101.1
9042
ταῦτα ἀκούσας Ξέρξης ὡς ἐκ κακῶν ἐχάρη τε καὶ ἥσθη , πρὸς Μαρδόνιόν τε βουλευσάμενος ἔφη ὑποκρινέεσθαι ὁκότερον ποιήσει τούτων .
When Xerxes heard that, he was as glad and joyful as a man in his situation might be and said to Mardonius that he would answer him after deliberating which of the two plans he would follow.


8.101.1
9043
ὡς δὲ ἐβουλεύετο ἅμα Περσέων τοῖσι ἐπικλήτοισι , ἔδοξέ οἱ καὶ Ἀρτεμισίην ἐς συμβουλίην μεταπέμψασθαι , ὅτι πρότερον ἐφαίνετο μούνη νοέουσα τὰ ποιητέα ἦν .
When he consulted with those Persians whom he summoned, he resolved to send for Artemisia as well, because he saw that she alone at the former sitting had discerned what was best to do.


8.101.2
9044
ὡς δὲ ἀπίκετο ἡ Ἀρτεμισίη , μεταστησάμενος τοὺς ἄλλους τούς τε συμβούλους Περσέων καὶ τοὺς δορυφόρους , ἔλεξε Ξέρξης τάδε .
When Artemisia came, Xerxes bade all others withdraw, both Persian councillors and guards, and said to her:


8.101.2
9045
" κελεύει με Μαρδόνιος μένοντα αὐτοῦ πειρᾶσαι τῆς Πελοποννήσου , λέγων ὥς μοι Πέρσαι τε καὶ ὁ πεζὸς στρατὸς οὐδενὸς μεταίτιοι πάθεος εἰσί , ἀλλὰ βουλομένοισί σφι γένοιτ’ ἂν ἀπόδεξις .
“It is Mardonius' advice that I should follow here and attack the  Peloponnese, for the Persians, he says, and the land army are not to blame for our disaster; of that they would willingly give proof.


8.101.3
9046
ἐμὲ ὦν ἢ ταῦτα κελεύει ποιέειν , ἢ αὐτὸς ἐθέλει τριήκοντα μυριάδας ἀπολεξάμενος τοῦ στρατοῦ παρασχεῖν μοι τὴν Ἑλλάδα δεδουλωμένην , αὐτὸν δέ με κελεύει ἀπελαύνειν σὺν τῷ λοιπῷ στρατῷ ἐς ἤθεα τὰ ἐμά .
Therefore he advises me to do this, or else he offers to choose three hundred thousand men of the army and deliver  Hellas to me enslaved, while I myself by his counsel march homeward with the rest of the host.


8.101.4
9047
σὺ ὦν ἐμοί , καὶ γὰρ περὶ τῆς ναυμαχίης εὖ συνεβούλευσας τῆς γενομένης οὐκ ἐῶσα ποιέεσθαι , νῦν τε συμβούλευσον ὁκότερα ποιέων ἐπιτύχω εὖ βουλευσάμενος " .
Now I ask of you, seeing that you correctly advised me against the late sea-fight, counsel me as to which of these two things would be best for me to do.”


8.102.1
9048
ὃ μὲν ταῦτα συνεβουλεύετο , ἣ δὲ λέγει τάδε .
When she was asked for advice, she replied:


8.102.1
9049
" βασιλεῦ , χαλεπὸν μὲν ἐστὶ συμβουλευομένῳ τυχεῖν τὰ ἄριστα εἴπασαν , ἐπὶ μέντοι τοῖσι κατήκουσι πρήγμασι δοκέει μοι αὐτὸν μέν σε ἀπελαύνειν ὀπίσω , Μαρδόνιον δέ , εἰ ἐθέλει τε καὶ ὑποδέκεται ταῦτα ποιήσειν , αὐτοῦ καταλιπεῖν σὺν τοῖσι ἐθέλει .
“It is difficult, O king, to answer your plea for advice by saying that which is best, but in the present turn of affairs I think it best that you march back and that Mardonius, if he so wishes and promises to do as he says, be left here with those whom he desires.


8.102.2
9050
τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ ἢν καταστρέψηται τὰ φησὶ θέλειν καί οἱ προχωρήσῃ τὰ νοέων λέγει , σὸν τὸ ἔργον ὦ δέσποτα γίνεται ·
For if he subdues all that he offers to subdue and prospers in his design, the achievement, Sire, is yours


8.102.2
9051
οἱ γὰρ σοὶ δοῦλοι κατεργάσαντο .
since it will be your servants who have accomplished it.


8.102.2
9052
τοῦτο δὲ ἢν τὰ ἐναντία τῆς Μαρδονίου γνώμης γένηται , οὐδεμία συμφορὴ μεγάλη ἔσται σέο τε περιεόντος καὶ ἐκείνων τῶν πρηγμάτων περὶ οἶκον τὸν σόν ·
If, on the other hand, the issue is contrary to Mardonius' expectation, it is no great misfortune so long as you and all that household of yours are safe;


8.102.3
9053
ἢν γὰρ σύ τε περιῇς καὶ οἶκος ὁ σός , πολλοὺς πολλάκις ἀγῶνας δραμέονται περὶ σφέων αὐτῶν οἱ Ἕλληνες .
for while you and the members of your household are safe, many a time will the Greeks have to fight for their lives.


8.102.3
9054
Μαρδονίου δέ , ἤν τι πάθῃ , λόγος οὐδεὶς γίνεται , οὐδέ τι νικῶντες οἱ Ἕλληνες νικῶσι , δοῦλον σὸν ἀπολέσαντες ·
As for Mardonius, if any disaster befalls him, it does not much matter, nor will any victory of the Greeks be a real victory when they have but slain your servant.


8.102.3
9055
σὺ δέ , τῶν εἵνεκα τὸν στόλον ἐποιήσαο , πυρώσας τὰς Ἀθήνας ἀπελᾷς " .
As for you, you will be marching home after the burning of  Athens, which thing was the whole purpose of your expedition.”


8.103.1
9056
ἥσθη τε δὴ τῇ συμβουλίῃ Ξέρξης ·
Artemisia's counsel pleased Xerxes,


8.103.1
9057
λέγουσα γὰρ ἐπετύγχανε τά περ αὐτὸς ἐνόεε .
for it happened that she spoke what he himself had in mind.


8.103.1
9058
οὐδὲ γὰρ εἰ πάντες καὶ πᾶσαι συνεβούλευον αὐτῷ μένειν , ἔμενε ἂν δοκέειν ἐμοί ·
In truth, I think that he would not have remained even if all men and women had counselled him so to do


8.103.1
9059
οὕτω καταρρωδήκεε .
so panic-stricken was he.


8.103.1
9060
ἐπαινέσας δὲ τὴν Ἀρτεμισίην , ταύτην μὲν ἀποστέλλει ἄγουσαν αὐτοῦ παῖδας ἐς Ἔφεσον ·
Having then thanked Artemisia, he sent her away to take his sons to  Ephesus,


8.103.1
9061
νόθοι γὰρ τινὲς παῖδές οἱ συνέσποντο .
for he had some bastard sons with him.


8.104.1
9062
συνέπεμπε δὲ τοῖσι παισὶ φύλακον Ἑρμότιμον , γένος μὲν ἐόντα Πηδασέα , φερόμενον δὲ οὐ τὰ δεύτερα τῶν εὐνούχων παρὰ βασιλέι ·
With these sons he sent Hermotimus as guardian.


8.104.1
9063
οἱ δὲ Πηδασέες οἰκέουσι ὑπὲρ Ἁλικαρνησσοῦ ·
This man was by birth of  Pedasa, and the most honored by Xerxes of all his eunuchs.


8.104.1
9064
ἐν δὲ τοῖσι Πηδάσοισι τούτοισι τοιόνδε συμφέρεται πρῆγμα γίνεσθαι ·
The people of  Pedasa dwell above  Halicarnassus.


8.104.1
9065
ἐπεὰν τοῖσι ἀμφικτυόσι πᾶσι τοῖσι ἀμφὶ ταύτης οἰκέουσι τῆς πόλιος μέλλῃ τι ἐντὸς χρόνου ἔσεσθαι χαλεπόν , τότε ἡ ἱρείη αὐτόθι τῆς Ἀθηναίης φύει πώγωνα μέγαν .
The following thing happens among these people: when anything untoward is about to befall those who dwell about their city, the priestess of Athena then grows a great beard.


8.104.1
9066
τοῦτο δέ σφι δὶς ἤδη ἐγένετο .
This had already happened to them twice.


8.105.1
9067
ἐκ τούτων δὴ τῶν Πηδασέων ὁ Ἑρμότιμος ἦν τῷ μεγίστη τίσις ἤδη ἀδικηθέντι ἐγένετο πάντων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν .
Hermotimus, who came from  Pedasa, had achieved a fuller vengeance for wrong done to him than had any man whom we know.


8.105.1
9068
ἁλόντα γὰρ αὐτὸν ὑπὸ πολεμίων καὶ πωλεόμενον ὠνέεται Πανιώνιος ἀνὴρ Χῖος , ὃς τὴν ζόην κατεστήσατο ἀπ’ ἔργων ἀνοσιωτάτων ·
When he had been taken captive by enemies and put up for sale, he was bought by one Panionius of  Chios, a man who had set himself to earn a livelihood out of most wicked practices.


8.105.1
9069
ὅκως γὰρ κτήσαιτο παῖδας εἴδεος ἐπαμμένους , ἐκτάμνων ἀγινέων ἐπώλεε ἐς Σάρδις τε καὶ Ἔφεσον χρημάτων μεγάλων .
He would procure beautiful boys and castrate and take them to  Sardis and  Ephesus where he sold them for a great price,


8.105.2
9070
παρὰ γὰρ τοῖσι βαρβάροισι τιμιώτεροι εἰσὶ οἱ εὐνοῦχοι πίστιος εἵνεκα τῆς πάσης τῶν ἐνορχίων .
for the barbarians value eunuchs more than perfect men, by reason of the full trust that they have in them.


8.105.2
9071
ἄλλους τε δὴ ὁ Πανιώνιος ἐξέταμε πολλούς , ἅτε ποιεύμενος ἐκ τούτου τὴν ζόην , καὶ δὴ καὶ τοῦτον .
Now among the many whom Panionius had castrated was Hermotimus, who was not entirely unfortunate; he was brought from  Sardis together with other gifts to the king,


8.105.2
9072
καὶ οὐ γὰρ τὰ πάντα ἐδυστύχεε ὁ Ἑρμότιμος , ἀπικνέεται ἐκ τῶν Σαρδίων παρὰ βασιλέα μετ’ ἄλλων δώρων , χρόνου δὲ προϊόντος πάντων τῶν εὐνούχων ἐτιμήθη μάλιστα παρὰ Ξέρξῃ .
and as time went on, he stood higher in Xerxes' favor than any other eunuch.


8.106.1
9073
ὡς δὲ τὸ στράτευμα τὸ Περσικὸν ὅρμα βασιλεὺς ἐπὶ τὰς Ἀθήνας ἐὼν ἐν Σάρδισι , ἐνθαῦτα καταβὰς κατὰ δή τι πρῆγμα ὁ Ἑρμότιμος ἐς γῆν τὴν Μυσίην , τὴν Χῖοι μὲν νέμονται Ἀταρνεὺς δὲ καλέεται , εὑρίσκει τὸν Πανιώνιον ἐνθαῦτα .
Now while the king was at  Sardis and preparing to lead his Persian army against  Athens, Hermotimus came for some business down to the part of  Mysia which is inhabited by Chians and called  Atarneus. There he found Panionius.


8.106.2
9074
ἐπιγνοὺς δὲ ἔλεγε πρὸς αὐτὸν πολλοὺς καὶ φιλίους λόγους , πρῶτα μέν οἱ καταλέγων ὅσα αὐτὸς δι’ ἐκεῖνον ἔχοι ἀγαθά , δεύτερα δέ οἱ ὑπισχνεύμενος ἀντὶ τούτων ὅσα μιν ἀγαθὰ ποιήσει ἢν κομίσας τοὺς οἰκέτας οἰκέῃ ἐκείνῃ , ὥστε ὑποδεξάμενον ἄσμενον τοὺς λόγους τὸν Πανιώνιον κομίσαι τὰ τέκνα καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα .
Perceiving who he was, he held long and friendly converse with him, telling him that it was to him that he owed all this prosperity and promising that he would make him prosperous in return if he were to bring his household and dwell there. Panionius accepted his offer gladly, and brought his children and his wife.


8.106.3
9075
ὡς δὲ ἄρα πανοικίῃ μιν περιέλαβε , ἔλεγε ὁ Ἑρμότιμος τάδε .
When Hermotimus had gotten the man and all his household into his power, he said to him:


8.106.3
9076
" ὦ πάντων ἀνδρῶν ἤδη μάλιστα ἀπ’ ἔργων ἀνοσιωτάτων τὸν βίον κτησάμενε , τί σε ἐγὼ κακὸν ἢ αὐτὸς ἢ τῶν ἐμῶν τίς σε προγόνων ἐργάσατο , ἢ σὲ ἢ τῶν σῶν τινα , ὅτι με ἀντ’ ἀνδρὸς ἐποίησας τὸ μηδὲν εἶναι ;
“Tell me, you who have made a livelihood out of the wickedest trade on earth, what harm had I or any of my forefathers done to you or yours, that you made me to be no man, but a thing of nought?


8.106.3
9077
ἐδόκεές τε θεοὺς λήσειν οἷα ἐμηχανῶ τότε ·
You no doubt thought that the gods would have no knowledge of your former practices,


8.106.3
9078
οἳ σε ποιήσαντα ἀνόσια , νόμῳ δικαίῳ χρεώμενοι , ὑπήγαγον ἐς χεῖρας τὰς ἐμάς , ὥστε σε μὴ μέμψασθαι τὴν ἀπ’ ἐμέο τοι ἐσομένην δίκην " .
but their just law has brought you for your wicked deeds into my hands. Now you will be well content with the fullness of that justice which I will execute upon you.”


8.106.4
9079
ὡς δέ οἱ ταῦτα ὠνείδισε , ἀχθέντων τῶν παίδων ἐς ὄψιν ἠναγκάζετο ὁ Πανιώνιος τῶν ἑωυτοῦ παίδων τεσσέρων ἐόντων τὰ αἰδοῖα ἀποτάμνειν , ἀναγκαζόμενος δὲ ἐποίεε ταῦτα ·
With these words of reproach, he brought Panionius' sons before him and compelled him to castrate all four of them — his own children;


8.106.4
9080
αὐτοῦ τε , ὡς ταῦτα ἐργάσατο , οἱ παῖδες ἀναγκαζόμενοι ἀπέταμνον .
this Panionius was compelled to do. When he had done this, the sons were compelled to castrate their father in turn.


8.106.4
9081
Πανιώνιον μέν νυν οὕτω περιῆλθε ἥ τε τίσις καὶ Ἑρμότιμος .
This, then, was the way in which Panionius was overtaken by vengeance at the hands of Hermotimus.


8.107.1
9082
Ξέρξης δὲ ὡς τοὺς παῖδας ἐπέτρεψε Ἀρτεμισίῃ ἀπάγειν ἐς Ἔφεσον , καλέσας Μαρδόνιον ἐκέλευσέ μιν τῆς στρατιῆς διαλέγειν τοὺς βούλεται , καὶ ποιέειν τοῖσι λόγοισι τὰ ἔργα πειρώμενον ὅμοια .
Having given his sons to Artemisia's charge to be carried to  Ephesus, Xerxes called Mardonius to him and bade him choose whom he would from the army, and make his words good so far as endeavor availed.


8.107.1
9083
ταύτην μὲν τὴν ἡμέρην ἐς τοσοῦτο ἐγίνετο , τῆς δὲ νυκτὸς κελεύσαντος βασιλέος τὰς νέας οἱ στρατηγοὶ ἐκ τοῦ Φαλήρου ἀπῆγον ὀπίσω ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ὡς τάχεος εἶχε ἕκαστος , διαφυλαξούσας τὰς σχεδίας πορευθῆναι βασιλέι .
That is as far as matters went on that day; in the night, however, the admirals, by the king's command, put out to sea from Phalerum and made for the  Hellespont again with all speed to guard the bridges for the king's passage.


8.107.2
9084
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀγχοῦ ἦσαν Ζωστῆρος πλέοντες οἱ βάρβαροι , ἀνατείνουσι γὰρ ἄκραι λεπταὶ τῆς ἠπείρου ταύτης , ἔδοξάν τε νέας εἶναι καὶ ἔφευγον ἐπὶ πολλόν ·
When the barbarians came near to the “Girdle” in their course, they thought that certain little headlands, which here jut out from the mainland, were ships, and they fled for a long way.


8.107.2
9085
χρόνῳ δὲ μαθόντες ὅτι οὐ νέες εἶεν ἀλλ’ ἄκραι , συλλεχθέντες ἐκομίζοντο .
When they learned at last that they were no ships but headlands, they drew together and went on their way.


8.108.1
9086
ὡς δὲ ἡμέρη ἐγίνετο , ὁρῶντες οἱ Ἕλληνες κατὰ χώρην μένοντα τὸν στρατὸν τὸν πεζὸν ἤλπιζον καὶ τὰς νέας εἶναι περὶ Φάληρον , ἐδόκεόν τε ναυμαχήσειν σφέας παραρτέοντό τε ὡς ἀλεξησόμενοι .
When it was day, the Greeks saw the land army abiding where it had been and supposed the ships also to be at Phalerum.


8.108.1
9087
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐπύθοντο τὰς νέας οἰχωκυίας , αὐτίκα μετὰ ταῦτα ἐδόκεε ἐπιδιώκειν .
Thinking also that there would be a sea-fight they prepared to defend themselves.


8.108.1
9088
τὸν μέν νυν ναυτικὸν τὸν Ξέρξεω στρατὸν οὐκ ἐπεῖδον διώξαντες μέχρι Ἄνδρου , ἐς δὲ τὴν Ἄνδρον ἀπικόμενοι ἐβουλεύοντο .
When, however, they learned that the ships were gone, they straightway resolved on pursuit; so they pursued Xerxes' fleet as far as  Andros, but failed to catch sight of it. When they came to  Andros, they held a council there.


8.108.2
9089
Θεμιστοκλέης μέν νυν γνώμην ἀπεδείκνυτο διὰ νήσων τραπομένους καὶ ἐπιδιώξαντας τὰς νέας πλέειν ἰθέως ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον λύσοντας τὰς γεφύρας ·
Themistocles declared his opinion that they should hold their course through the islands, and having pursued the ships, should sail forthwith to the  Hellespont to break the bridges.


8.108.2
9090
Εὐρυβιάδης δὲ τὴν ἐναντίην ταύτῃ γνώμην ἐτίθετο , λέγων ὡς εἰ λύσουσι τὰς σχεδίας , τοῦτ’ ἂν μέγιστον πάντων σφι κακῶν τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἐργάσαιτο .
Eurybiades, on the other hand, offered a contrary opinion, saying that to break the bridges would be the greatest harm that they could do to  Hellas.


8.108.3
9091
εἰ γὰρ ἀναγκασθείη ὁ Πέρσης μένειν ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ , πειρῷτο ἂν ἡσυχίην μὴ ἄγειν , ὡς ἄγοντι μέν οἱ ἡσυχίην οὔτε τι προχωρέειν οἷόν τε ἔσται τῶν πρηγμάτων οὔτε τις κομιδὴ τὰ ὀπίσω φανήσεται , λιμῷ τέ οἱ ἡ στρατιὴ διαφθερέεται , ἐπιχειρέοντι δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ ἔργου ἐχομένῳ πάντα τὰ κατὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην οἷά τε ἔσται προσχωρῆσαι κατὰ πόλις τε καὶ κατὰ ἔθνεα , ἤτοι ἁλισκομένων γε ἢ πρὸ τούτου ὁμολογεόντων ·
“For,” said he, “if the Persian is cut off and compelled to remain in  Europe, he will attempt not to be inactive. This he will do because if he remains inactive, he can neither make his cause prosper nor find any way of return home, but his army will perish of hunger.


8.108.3
9092
τροφήν τε ἕξειν σφέας τὸν ἐπέτειον αἰεὶ τὸν τῶν Ἑλλήνων καρπόν .
If, on the other hand, he is enterprising and active, it may well be that every town and nation in  Europe will join itself to him, by conquest or, before that, by compact. He will then live on whatever yearly fruits of the earth  Hellas produces.


8.108.4
9093
ἀλλὰ δοκέειν γὰρ νικηθέντα τῇ ναυμαχίῃ οὐ μενέειν ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ τὸν Πέρσην ·
But, as I think that the Persian will not remain in  Europe after his defeat in the sea-fight,


8.108.4
9094
ἐατέον ὦν εἶναι φεύγειν , ἐς ὃ ἔλθοι φεύγων ἐς τὴν ἑωυτοῦ ·
let us permit him to flee to his own country.


8.108.4
9095
τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ περὶ τῆς ἐκείνου ποιέεσθαι ἤδη τὸν ἀγῶνα ἐκέλευε .
Thereafter let it be that country and not ours which is at stake in the war.”


8.108.4
9096
ταύτης δὲ εἴχοντο τῆς γνώμης καὶ Πελοποννησίων τῶν ἄλλων οἱ στρατηγοί .
With that opinion the rest of the Peloponnesian admirals also agreed.


8.109.1
9097
ὡς δὲ ἔμαθε ὅτι οὐ πείσει τούς γε πολλοὺς πλέειν ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ὁ Θεμιστοκλέης , μεταβαλὼν πρὸς τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ( οὗτοι γὰρ μάλιστα ἐκπεφευγότων περιημέκτεον , ὁρμέατό τε ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον πλέειν καὶ ἐπὶ σφέων αὐτῶν βαλόμενοι , εἰ οἱ ἄλλοι μὴ βουλοίατο ) ἔλεγέ σφι τάδε .
When Themistocles perceived that he could not persuade the greater part of them to sail to the  Hellespont, he turned to the Athenians (for they were the angriest at the Persians' escape, and they were minded to sail to the  Hellespont even by themselves, if the rest would not) and addressed them as follows:


8.109.2
9098
" καὶ αὐτὸς ἤδη πολλοῖσι παρεγενόμην καὶ πολλῷ πλέω ἀκήκοα τοιάδε γενέσθαι , ἄνδρας ἐς ἀναγκαίην ἀπειληθέντας νενικημένους ἀναμάχεσθαί τε καὶ ἀναλαμβάνειν τὴν προτέρην κακότητα .
“This I have often seen with my eyes and heard yet more often, namely that beaten men, when they be driven to bay, will rally and retrieve their former mishap.


8.109.2
9099
ἡμεῖς δέ , εὕρημα γὰρ εὑρήκαμεν ἡμέας τε αὐτοὺς καὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα , νέφος τοσοῦτο ἀνθρώπων ἀνωσάμενοι , μὴ διώκωμεν ἄνδρας φεύγοντας .
Therefore I say to you, — as it is to a fortunate chance that we owe ourselves and  Hellas, and have driven away so mighty a band of enemies — let us not pursue men who flee,


8.109.3
9100
τάδε γὰρ οὐκ ἡμεῖς κατεργασάμεθα , ἀλλὰ θεοί τε καὶ ἥρωες , οἳ ἐφθόνησαν ἄνδρα ἕνα τῆς τε Ἀσίης καὶ τῆς Εὐρώπης βασιλεῦσαι ἐόντα ἀνόσιόν τε καὶ ἀτάσθαλον ·
for it is not we who have won this victory, but the gods and the heroes, who deemed  Asia and  Europe too great a realm for one man to rule, and that a wicked man and an impious one who dealt alike with temples and bones, burning and overthrowing the images of the gods,


8.109.3
9101
ὃς τά τε ἱρὰ καὶ τὰ ἴδια ἐν ὁμοίῳ ἐποιέετο , ἐμπιπράς τε καὶ καταβάλλων τῶν θεῶν τὰ ἀγάλματα ·
and that a wicked man and an impious one who dealt alike with temples and bones, burning and overthrowing the images of the gods,


8.109.3
9102
ὃς καὶ τὴν θάλασσαν ἀπεμαστίγωσε πέδας τε κατῆκε .
yes, and one who scourged the sea and threw fetters into it.


8.109.4
9103
ἀλλ’ εὖ γὰρ ἔχει ἐς τὸ παρεὸν ἡμῖν , νῦν μὲν ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι καταμείναντας ἡμέων τε αὐτῶν ἐπιμεληθῆναι καὶ τῶν οἰκετέων , καὶ τις οἰκίην τε ἀναπλασάσθω καὶ σπόρου ἀνακῶς ἐχέτω , παντελέως ἀπελάσας τὸν βάρβαρον ·
But as it is well with us for the moment, let us abide now in  Hellas and take thought for ourselves and our households.


8.109.4
9104
ἅμα δὲ τῷ ἔαρι καταπλέωμεν ἐπὶ Ἑλλησπόντου καὶ Ἰωνίης " .
Let us build our houses again and be diligent in sowing, when we have driven the foreigner completely away.


8.109.5
9105
ταῦτα ἔλεγε ἀποθήκην μέλλων ποιήσασθαι ἐς τὸν Πέρσην , ἵνα ἢν ἄρα τί μιν καταλαμβάνῃ πρὸς Ἀθηναίων πάθος ἔχῃ ἀποστροφήν ·
Then when the next spring comes, let us set sail for the  Hellespont and  Ionia.”


8.109.5
9106
τά περ ὦν καὶ ἐγένετο .
This he said with intent to have something to his credit with the Persian, so that he might have a place of refuge if ever (as might chance) he should suffer anything at the hands of the Athenians


8.110.1
9107
Θεμιστοκλέης μὲν ταῦτα λέγων διέβαλλε , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ἐπείθοντο ·
— and just that did in fact happen.


8.110.1
9108
ἐπειδὴ γὰρ καὶ πρότερον δεδογμένος εἶναι σοφὸς ἐφάνη ἐὼν ἀληθέως σοφός τε καὶ εὔβουλος , πάντως ἕτοιμοι ἦσαν λέγοντι πείθεσθαι .
Thus spoke Themistocles with intent to deceive, and the Athenians obeyed him;


8.110.2
9109
ὡς δὲ οὗτοί οἱ ἀνεγνωσμένοι ἦσαν , αὐτίκα μετὰ ταῦτα ὁ Θεμιστοκλέης ἄνδρας ἀπέπεμπε ἔχοντας πλοῖον , τοῖσι ἐπίστευε σιγᾶν ἐς πᾶσαν βάσανον ἀπικνεομένοισι τὰ αὐτὸς ἐνετείλατο βασιλέι φράσαι ·
since he had always been esteemed wise and now had shown himself to be both wise and prudent, they were ready to obey whatever he said.


8.110.2
9110
τῶν καὶ Σίκιννος ὁ οἰκέτης αὖτις ἐγένετο ·
Having won them over, Themistocles straightway sent men in a boat whom he could trust not to reveal under any question the message which he charged them to deliver to the king;


8.110.2
9111
οἳ ἐπείτε ἀπίκοντο πρὸς τὴν Ἀττικήν , οἳ μὲν κατέμενον ἐπὶ τῷ πλοίῳ , Σίκιννος δὲ ἀναβὰς παρὰ Ξέρξην ἔλεγε τάδε .
one of these was his servant Sicinnus. When these men came to  Attica, the rest remained with the boat, and Sicinnus went up to Xerxes;


8.110.3
9112
" ἔπεμψέ με Θεμιστοκλέης ὁ Νεοκλέος , στρατηγὸς μὲν Ἀθηναίων ἀνὴρ δὲ τῶν συμμάχων πάντων ἄριστος καὶ σοφώτατος , φράσοντά τοι ὅτι Θεμιστοκλέης ὁ Ἀθηναῖος , σοὶ βουλόμενος ὑπουργέειν , ἔσχε τοὺς Ἕλληνας τὰς νέας βουλομένους διώκειν καὶ τὰς ἐν Ἑλλησπόντῳ γεφύρας λύειν .
“Themistocles son of Neocles,” he said, “who is the Athenian general and of all the allies the worthiest and wisest, has sent me to tell you this:


8.110.3
9113
καὶ νῦν κατ’ ἡσυχίην πολλὴν κομίζεο " .
Themistocles the Athenian has out of his desire to do you a service stayed the Greeks when they wanted to pursue your ships and break the bridges of the  Hellespont.


8.110.3
9114
οἳ μὲν ταῦτα σημήναντες ἀπέπλεον ὀπίσω .
Now he bids you go your way, none hindering you.” With that message, the men returned in their boat.


8.111.1
9115
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες , ἐπείτε σφι ἀπέδοξε μήτ’ ἐπιδιώκειν ἔτι προσωτέρω τῶν βαρβάρων τὰς νέας μήτε πλέειν ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον λύσοντας τὸν πόρον , τὴν Ἄνδρον περικατέατο ἐξελεῖν ἐθέλοντες .
But the Greeks, now that they were no longer minded to pursue the barbarians' ships farther or sail to the  Hellespont and break the way of passage, besieged  Andros so that they might take it,


8.111.2
9116
πρῶτοι γὰρ Ἄνδριοι νησιωτέων αἰτηθέντες πρὸς Θεμιστοκλέος χρήματα οὐκ ἔδοσαν , ἀλλὰ προϊσχομένου Θεμιστοκλέος λόγον τόνδε , ὡς ἥκοιεν Ἀθηναῖοι περὶ ἑωυτοὺς ἔχοντες δύο θεοὺς μεγάλους , πειθώ τε καὶ ἀναγκαίην , οὕτω τέ σφι κάρτα δοτέα εἶναι χρήματα , ὑπεκρίναντο πρὸς ταῦτα λέγοντες ὡς κατὰ λόγον ἦσαν ἄρα αἱ Ἀθῆναι μεγάλαι τε καὶ εὐδαίμονες , αἳ καὶ θεῶν χρηστῶν ἥκοιεν εὖ , ἐπεὶ Ἀνδρίους γε εἶναι γεωπείνας ἐς τὰ μέγιστα ἀνήκοντας , καὶ θεοὺς δύο ἀχρήστους οὐκ ἐκλείπειν σφέων τὴν νῆσον ἀλλ’ αἰεὶ φιλοχωρέειν , πενίην τε καὶ ἀμηχανίην , καὶ τούτων τῶν θεῶν ἐπηβόλους ἐόντας Ἀνδρίους οὐ δώσειν χρήματα ·
for the men of that place, the first islanders of whom Themistocles demanded money, would not give it. When, however, Themistocles gave them to understand that the Athenians had come with two great gods to aid them, Persuasion and Necessity, and that the Andrians must therefore certainly give money, they said in response, “It is then but reasonable that  Athens is great and prosperous, being blessed with serviceable gods.


8.111.3
9117
οὐδέκοτε γὰρ τῆς ἑωυτῶν ἀδυναμίης τὴν Ἀθηναίων δύναμιν εἶναι κρέσσω .
As for us Andrians, we are but blessed with a plentiful lack of land, and we have two unserviceable gods who never quit our island but want to dwell there forever, namely Poverty and Helplessness. Since we are in the hands of these gods, we will give no money; the power of  Athens can never be stronger than our inability.”


8.112.1
9118
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ὑποκρινάμενοι καὶ οὐ δόντες τὰ χρήματα ἐπολιορκέοντο .
It was for giving this answer and refusing to give what was asked of them that they were besieged.


8.112.1
9119
Θεμιστοκλέης δὲ , οὐ γὰρ ἐπαύετο πλεονεκτέων , ἐσπέμπων ἐς τὰς ἄλλας νήσους ἀπειλητηρίους λόγους αἴτεε χρήματα διὰ τῶν αὐτῶν ἀγγέλων , χρεώμενος τοῖσι καὶ πρὸς βασιλέα ἐχρήσατο , λέγων ὡς εἰ μὴ δώσουσι τὸ αἰτεόμενον , ἐπάξει τὴν στρατιὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων καὶ πολιορκέων ἐξαιρήσει .
There was no end to Themistocles' avarice; using the same agents whom he had used with the king, he sent threatening messages to the other islands, demanding money and saying that if they would not give what he asked he would bring the Greek armada upon them and besiege and take their islands.


8.112.2
9120
λέγων ταῦτα συνέλεγε χρήματα μεγάλα παρὰ Καρυστίων τε καὶ Παρίων , οἳ πυνθανόμενοι τήν τε Ἄνδρον ὡς πολιορκέοιτο διότι ἐμήδισε , καὶ Θεμιστοκλέα ὡς εἴη ἐν αἴνῃ μεγίστῃ τῶν στρατηγῶν , δείσαντες ταῦτα ἔπεμπον χρήματα .
Thereby he collected great sums from the Carystians and Parians, for these were informed that  Andros was besieged for taking the Persian side and that Themistocles was of all the generals the most esteemed.


8.112.2
9121
εἰ δὲ δὴ τινὲς καὶ ἄλλοι ἔδοσαν νησιωτέων , οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν , δοκέω δὲ τινὰς καὶ ἄλλους δοῦναι καὶ οὐ τούτους μούνους .
This frightened them so much that they sent money. I suppose that there were other islanders too who gave and not these alone, but I cannot with certainty say.


8.112.3
9122
καίτοι Καρυστίοισί γε οὐδὲν τούτου εἵνεκα τοῦ κακοῦ ὑπερβολὴ ἐγένετο ·
Nevertheless, the Carystians got no respite from misfortune by doing this.


8.112.3
9123
Πάριοι δὲ Θεμιστοκλέα χρήμασι ἱλασάμενοι διέφυγον τὸ στράτευμα .
The Parians, however, propitiated Themistocles with money and so escaped the force.


8.112.3
9124
Θεμιστοκλέης μέν νυν ἐξ Ἄνδρου ὁρμώμενος χρήματα παρὰ νησιωτέων ἐκτᾶτο λάθρῃ τῶν ἄλλων στρατηγῶν .
So Themistocles went away from  Andros and took money from the islanders, unknown to the other generals.


8.113.1
9125
οἱ δ’ ἀμφὶ Ξέρξην ἐπισχόντες ὀλίγας ἡμέρας μετὰ τὴν ναυμαχίην ἐξήλαυνον ἐς Βοιωτοὺς τὴν αὐτὴν ὁδόν .
Those who were with Xerxes waited for a few days after the sea-fight and then marched away to  Boeotia by the road by which they had come.


8.113.1
9126
ἔδοξε γὰρ Μαρδονίῳ ἅμα μὲν προπέμψαι βασιλέα , ἅμα δὲ ἀνωρίη εἶναι τοῦ ἔτεος πολεμέειν , χειμερίσαι τε ἄμεινον εἶναι ἐν Θεσσαλίῃ , καὶ ἔπειτα ἅμα τῷ ἔαρι πειρᾶσθαι τῆς Πελοποννήσου .
Mardonius wanted to give the king safe conduct and thought the time of year unseasonable for war; it was better, he thought, to winter in  Thessaly, and then attack the  Peloponnese in the spring.


8.113.2
9127
ὡς δὲ ἀπίκατο ἐς τὴν Θεσσαλίην , ἐνθαῦτα Μαρδόνιος ἐξελέγετο πρώτους μὲν τοὺς Πέρσας πάντας τοὺς ἀθανάτους καλεομένους , πλὴν Ὑδάρνεος τοῦ στρατηγοῦ ( οὗτος γὰρ οὐκ ἔφη λείψεσθαι βασιλέος ) , μετὰ δὲ τῶν ἄλλων Περσέων τοὺς θωρηκοφόρους καὶ τὴν ἵππον τὴν χιλίην , καὶ Μήδους τε καὶ Σάκας καὶ Βακτρίους τε καὶ Ἰνδούς , καὶ τὸν πεζὸν καὶ τὴν ἄλλην ἵππον .
When they had arrived in  Thessaly, Mardonius first chose all the Persians called Immortals, save only Hydarnes their general who said that he would not quit the king's person, and next, the Persian cuirassiers and the thousand horse and the Medes and Sacae and Bactrians and Indians, alike their infantrymen and the rest of the horsemen.


8.113.3
9128
ταῦτα μὲν ἔθνεα ὅλα εἵλετο , ἐκ δὲ τῶν ἄλλων συμμάχων ἐξελέγετο κατ’ ὀλίγους , τοῖσι εἴδεά τε ὑπῆρχε διαλέγων καὶ εἰ τεοῖσι τι χρηστὸν συνῄδεε πεποιημένον ·
These nations he chose in their entirety; of the rest of his allies he picked out a few from each people, the best men and those whom he knew to have done some good service.


8.113.3
9129
ἓν δὲ πλεῖστον ἔθνος Πέρσας αἱρέετο , ἄνδρας στρεπτοφόρους τε καὶ ψελιοφόρους , ἐπὶ δὲ Μήδους ·
The Persians whom he chose (men who wore torques and bracelets) were more in number than those of any other nation and next to them the Medes;


8.113.3
9130
οὗτοι δὲ τὸ πλῆθος μὲν οὐκ ἐλάσσονες ἦσαν τῶν Περσέων , ῥώμῃ δὲ ἥσσονες .
these indeed were as many as the Persians, but not such stout fighters.


8.113.3
9131
ὥστε σύμπαντας τριήκοντα μυριάδας γενέσθαι σὺν ἱππεῦσι .
Thereby the whole number, together with the horsemen, grew to three hundred thousand men.


8.114.1
9132
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ , ἐν τῷ Μαρδόνιός τε τὴν στρατιὴν διέκρινε καὶ Ξέρξης ἦν περὶ Θεσσαλίην , χρηστήριον ἐληλύθεε ἐκ Δελφῶν Λακεδαιμονίοισι , Ξέρξην αἰτέειν δίκας τοῦ Λεωνίδεω φόνου καὶ τὸ διδόμενον ἐξ ἐκείνου δέκεσθαι .
Now while Mardonius was choosing his army and Xerxes was in  Thessaly, there came an oracle from  Delphi to the Lacedaemonians, that they should demand justice of Xerxes for the slaying of Leonidas and take whatever he should offer them.


8.114.1
9133
πέμπουσι δὴ κήρυκα τὴν ταχίστην Σπαρτιῆται , ὃς ἐπειδὴ κατέλαβε ἐοῦσαν ἔτι πᾶσαν τὴν στρατιὴν ἐν Θεσσαλίῃ , ἐλθὼν ἐς ὄψιν τὴν Ξέρξεω ἔλεγε τάδε .
The Spartans then sent a herald with all speed. He found the army yet undivided in  Thessaly, came into Xerxes' presence, and spoke as follows:


8.114.2
9134
" ὦ βασιλεῦ Μήδων , Λακεδαιμόνιοί τέ σε καὶ Ἡρακλεῖδαι οἱ ἀπὸ Σπάρτης αἰτέουσι φόνου δίκας , ὅτι σφέων τὸν βασιλέα ἀπέκτεινας ῥυόμενον τὴν Ἑλλάδα " .
“The Lacedaemonians and the Heraclidae of  Sparta demand of you, king of the Medes, that you pay the penalty for the death of their king, whom you killed while he defended  Hellas.”


8.114.2
9135
ὁ δὲ γελάσας τε καὶ κατασχὼν πολλὸν χρόνον , ὥς οἱ ἐτύγχανε παρεστεὼς Μαρδόνιος , δεικνὺς ἐς τοῦτον εἶπε " τοιγὰρ σφι Μαρδόνιος ὅδε δίκας δώσει τοιαύτας οἵας ἐκείνοισι πρέπει " .
At that Xerxes laughed, and after a long while, he pointed to Mardonius, who chanced to be standing by him and said, “Then here is Mardonius, who shall pay those you speak of such penalty as befits them.”


8.115.1
9136
ὃ μὲν δὴ δεξάμενος τὸ ῥηθὲν ἀπαλλάσσετο , Ξέρξης δὲ Μαρδόνιον ἐν Θεσσαλίῃ καταλιπὼν αὐτὸς ἐπορεύετο κατὰ τάχος ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον , καὶ ἀπικνέεται ἐς τὸν πόρον τῆς διαβάσιος ἐν πέντε καὶ τεσσεράκοντα ἡμέρῃσι , ἀπάγων τῆς στρατιῆς οὐδὲν μέρος ὡς εἰπεῖν .
So the herald took that response and departed, but Xerxes left Mardonius in  Thessaly. He himself journeyed with all speed to the  Hellespont and came in forty-five days to the passage for crossing, bringing back with him as good as none (if one may say so) of his host.


8.115.2
9137
ὅκου δὲ πορευόμενοι γινοίατο καὶ κατ’ οὕστινας ἀνθρώπους , τὸν τούτων καρπὸν ἁρπάζοντες ἐσιτέοντο ·
Wherever and to whatever people they came, they seized and devoured its produce.


8.115.2
9138
εἰ δὲ καρπὸν μηδένα εὕροιεν , οἳ δὲ τὴν ποίην τὴν ἐκ τῆς γῆς ἀναφυομένην καὶ τῶν δενδρέων τὸν φλοιὸν περιλέποντες καὶ τὰ φύλλα καταδρέποντες κατήσθιον , ὁμοίως τῶν τε ἡμέρωι καὶ τῶν ἀγρίων , καὶ ἔλειπον οὐδέν ·
If they found none, they would eat the grass of the field and strip the bark and pluck the leaves of the trees, garden and wild alike, leaving nothing


8.115.2
9139
ταῦτα δ’ ἐποίεον ὑπὸ λιμοῦ .
— such was the degree of their starvation.


8.115.3
9140
ἐπιλαβὼν δὲ λοιμός τε τὸν στρατὸν καὶ δυσεντερίη κατ’ ὁδὸν ἔφθειρε .
Moreover, pestilence and dysentery broke out among them on their way, from which they died.


8.115.3
9141
τοὺς δὲ καὶ νοσέοντας αὐτῶν κατέλειπε , ἐπιτάσσων τῇσι πόλισι , ἵνα ἑκάστοτε γίνοιτο ἐλαύνων , μελεδαίνειν τε καὶ τρέφειν , ἐν Θεσσαλίῃ τε τινὰς καὶ ἐν Σίρι τῆς Παιονίης καὶ ἐν Μακεδονίῃ .
Some who were sick Xerxes left behind, charging the cities to which he came in his march to care for them and nourish them, some in  Thessaly and some in  Siris of Paeonia and in  Macedonia.


8.115.4
9142
ἔνθα καὶ τὸ ἱρὸν ἅρμα καταλιπὼν τοῦ Διός , ὅτε ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἤλαυνε , ἀπιὼν οὐκ ἀπέλαβε , ἀλλὰ δόντες οἱ Παίονες τοῖσι Θρήιξι ἀπαιτέοντος Ξέρξεω ἔφασαν νεμομένας ἁρπασθῆναι ὑπὸ τῶν ἄνω Θρηίκων τῶν περὶ τὰς πηγὰς τοῦ Στρυμόνος οἰκημένων .
In  Siris he had left the sacred chariot of Zeus when he was marching to  Hellas, but on his return he did not get it back again. The Paeonians had given it to the Thracians, and when Xerxes demanded it back, they said that the horses had been carried off from pasture by the Thracians of the hills who dwelt about the headwaters of the Strymon.


8.116.1
9143
ἔνθα καὶ ὁ τῶν Βισαλτέων βασιλεὺς γῆς τε τῆς Κρηστωνικῆς Θρῆιξ ἔργον ὑπερφυὲς ἐργάσατο ·
It was then that a monstrous deed was done by the Thracian king of the Bisaltae and the Crestonian country.


8.116.1
9144
ὃς οὔτε αὐτὸς ἔφη τῷ Ξέρξῃ ἑκὼν εἶναι δουλεύσειν , ἀλλ’ οἴχετο ἄνω ἐς τὸ ὄρος τὴν Ῥοδόπην , τοῖσί τε παισὶ ἀπηγόρευε μὴ στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
He had refused to be of his own free will Xerxes' slave, and fled to the mountains called  Rhodope. He forbade his sons to go with the army to  Hellas,


8.116.2
9145
οἳ δὲ ἀλογήσαντες , ἢ ἄλλως σφι θυμὸς ἐγένετο θεήσασθαι τὸν πόλεμον , ἐστρατεύοντο ἅμα τῷ Πέρσῃ ·
but they took no account of that; they had always wanted to see the war, and they followed the Persians' march.


8.116.2
9146
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀνεχώρησαν ἀσινέες πάντες ἓξ ἐόντες , ἐξώρυξε αὐτῶν ὁ πατὴρ τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς διὰ τὴν αἰτίην ταύτην .
For this reason, when all the six of them returned back scatheless, their father tore out their eyes.


8.117.1
9147
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν τοῦτον τὸν μισθὸν ἔλαβον , οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ὡς ἐκ τῆς Θρηίκης πορευόμενοι ἀπίκοντο ἐπὶ τὸν πόρον , ἐπειγόμενοι τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον τῇσι νηυσὶ διέβησαν ἐς Ἄβυδον ·
This was their reward. Now the Persians, journeying through  Thrace to the passage, made haste to cross to  Abydos in their ships, for they found the bridges no longer made fast but broken by a storm.


8.117.1
9148
τὰς γὰρ σχεδίας οὐκ εὗρον ἔτι ἐντεταμένας ἀλλ’ ὑπὸ χειμῶνος διαλελυμένας .
There their march halted, and more food was given them than on their way.


8.117.2
9149
ἐνθαῦτα δὲ κατεχόμενοι σιτία τε πλέω ἢ κατ’ ὁδὸν ἐλάγχανον , καὶ οὐδένα τε κόσμον ἐμπιπλάμενοι καὶ ὕδατα μεταβάλλοντες ἀπέθνησκον τοῦ στρατοῦ τοῦ περιεόντος πολλοί .
Then by reason of their immoderate gorging and the change of the water which they drank, many of the army that had survived died.


8.117.2
9150
οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ ἅμα Ξέρξη ἀπικνέονται ἐς Σάρδις .
The rest came with Xerxes to  Sardis.


8.118.1
9151
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλος ὅδε λόγος λεγόμενος , ὡς ἐπειδὴ Ξέρξης ἀπελαύνων ἐξ Ἀθηνέων ἀπίκετο ἐπ’ Ἠιόνα τὴν ἐπὶ Στρυμόνι , ἐνθεῦτεν οὐκέτι ὁδοιπορίῃσι διεχρᾶτο , ἀλλὰ τὴν μὲν στρατιὴν Ὑδάρνεϊ ἐπιτράπει ἀπάγειν ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον , αὐτὸς δ’ ἐπὶ νεὸς Φοινίσσης ἐπιβὰς ἐκομίζετο ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην .
There is, however, another tale, which is this: when Xerxes came in his march from  Athens to  Eion on the Strymon, he travelled no farther than that by land, but committed his army to Hydarnes to be led to the  Hellespont. He himself embarked and set sail for  Asia in a Phoenician ship.


8.118.2
9152
πλέοντα δέ μιν ἄνεμον Στρυμονίην ὑπολαβεῖν μέγαν καὶ κυματίην .
In the course of this voyage he was caught by a strong wind called the Strymonian, which lifted up the waves.


8.118.2
9153
καὶ δὴ μᾶλλον γάρ τι χειμαίνεσθαι γεμούσης τῆς νεός , ὥστε ἐπὶ τοῦ καταστρώματος ἐπεόντων συχνῶν Περσέων τῶν σὺν Ξέρξῃ κομιζομένων , ἐνθαῦτα ἐς δεῖμα πεσόντα τὸν βασιλέα εἰρέσθαι βώσαντα τὸν κυβερνήτην εἴ τις ἐστί σφι σωτηρίη , καὶ τὸν εἶπαι " δέσποτα , οὐκ ἔστι οὐδεμία , εἰ μὴ τούτων ἀπαλλαγή τις γένηται τῶν πολλῶν ἐπιβατέων " .
This storm bearing the harder upon him by reason of the heavy load of the ship (for the Persians of his company who were on the deck were so many), the king grew afraid and cried to the ship's pilot asking him if there were any way of deliverance.


8.118.3
9154
καὶ Ξέρξην λέγεται ἀκούσαντα ταῦτα εἰπεῖν " ἄνδρες Πέρσαι , νῦν τις διαδεξάτω ὑμέων βασιλέος κηδόμενος ·
To this the man said, “Sire, there is none, if we do not rid ourselves of these many who are on board.”


8.118.3
9155
ἐν ὑμῖν γὰρ οἶκε εἶναι ἐμοὶ ἡ σωτηρίη " .
Hearing that, it is said, Xerxes said to the Persians, “Now it is for you to prove your concern for your king, for it seems that my deliverance rests with you.”


8.118.4
9156
τὸν μὲν ταῦτα λέγειν , τοὺς δὲ προσκυνέοντας ἐκπηδᾶν ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν , καὶ τὴν νέα ἐπικουφισθεῖσαν οὕτω δὴ ἀποσωθῆναι ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην .
At this they bowed and leapt into the sea. The ship, now much lighter, came by these means safe to  Asia.


8.118.4
9157
ὡς δὲ ἐκβῆναι τάχιστα ἐς γῆν τὸν Ξέρξην , ποιῆσαι τοιόνδε ·
No sooner had Xerxes disembarked on land, than he made the pilot a gift of a golden crown.


8.118.4
9158
ὅτι μὲν ἔσωσε βασιλέος τὴν ψυχήν , δωρήσασθαι χρυσέῃ στεφάνῃ τὸν κυβερνήτην , ὅτι δὲ Περσέων πολλοὺς ἀπώλεσε , ἀποταμεῖν τὴν κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ .
For he had saved the king's life but cut off his head for being the death of many Persians.


8.119.1
9159
οὗτος δὲ ἄλλος λέγεται λόγος περὶ τοῦ Ξέρξεω νόστου , οὐδαμῶς ἔμοιγε πιστὸς οὔτε ἄλλως οὔτε τὸ Περσέων τοῦτο πάθος ·
This is the other tale of Xerxes' return; but I for my part believe neither the story of the Persians' fate nor any other part of it.


8.119.1
9160
εἰ γὰρ δὴ ταῦτα οὕτω εἰρέθη ἐκ τοῦ κυβερνήτεω πρὸς Ξέρξην , ἐν μυρίῃσι γνώμῃσι μίαν οὐκ ἔχω ἀντίξοον μὴ οὐκ ἂν ποιῆσαι βασιλέα τοιόνδε , τοὺς μὲν ἐπὶ τοῦ καταστρώματος καταβιβάσαι ἐς κοίλην νέα ἐόντας Πέρσας καὶ Περσέων τοὺς πρώτους , τῶν δ’ ἐρετέων ἐόντων Φοινίκων ὅκως οὐκ ἂν ἴσον πλῆθος τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι ἐξέβαλε ἐς τὴν θάλασσαν .
For if indeed the pilot had spoken to Xerxes in this way, I think that there is not one in ten thousand who would not say that the king would have bidden the men on deck (who were Persians and of the best blood of  Persia) descend into the ship's hold, and would have taken from the Phoenician rowers a number equal to the number of the Persians and cast them into the sea.


8.119.1
9161
ἀλλ’ ὃ μέν , ὡς καὶ πρότερόν μοι εἴρηται , ὁδῷ χρεώμενος ἅμα τῷ ἄλλῳ στρατῷ ἀπενόστησε ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην .
No, the truth is that Xerxes did as I have already said, and returned to  Asia with his army by road.


8.120.1
9162
μέγα δὲ καὶ τόδε μαρτύριον ·
There is further proof of this,


8.120.1
9163
φαίνεται γὰρ Ξέρξης ἐν τῇ ὀπίσω κομιδῇ ἀπικόμενος ἐς Ἄβδηρα καὶ ξεινίην τέ σφι συνθέμενος καὶ δωρησάμενος αὐτοὺς ἀκινάκῃ τε χρυσέῳ καὶ τιήρῃ χρυσοπάστῳ .
for it is known that when Xerxes came to  Abdera in his return, he made a compact of friendship with its people and gave them a golden sword and a gilt tiara.


8.120.1
9164
καὶ ὡς αὐτοὶ λέγουσι Ἀβδηρῖται , λέγοντες ἔμοιγε οὐδαμῶς πιστά , πρῶτον ἐλύσατο τὴν ζώνην φεύγων ἐξ Ἀθηνέων ὀπίσω , ὡς ἐν ἀδείῃ ἐών .
As the people of  Abdera say (but for my part I wholly disbelieve them), it was here that Xerxes in his flight back from  Athens first loosed his girdle, as being here in safety.


8.120.1
9165
τὰ δὲ Ἄβδηρα ἵδρυται πρὸς τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου μᾶλλον ἢ τοῦ Στρυμόνος καὶ τῆς Ἠιόνος , ὅθεν δή μιν φασὶ ἐπιβῆναι ἐπὶ τὴν νέα .
Now  Abdera lies nearer to the  Hellespont than the Strymon and  Eion, where they say that he took ship.


8.121.1
9166
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες ἐπείτε οὐκ οἷοί τε ἐγίνοντο ἐξελεῖν τὴν Ἄνδρον , τραπόμενοι ἐς Κάρυστον καὶ δηιώσαντες αὐτῶν τὴν χώρην ἀπαλλάσσοντο ἐς Σαλαμῖνα .
As for the Greeks, not being able to take  Andros, they went to  Carystus. When they had laid it waste, they returned to  Salamis.


8.121.1
9167
πρῶτα μέν νυν τοῖσι θεοῖσι ἐξεῖλον ἀκροθίνια ἄλλα τε καὶ τριήρεας τρεῖς Φοινίσσας , τὴν μὲν ἐς Ἰσθμὸν ἀναθεῖναι , ἥ περ ἔτι καὶ ἐς ἐμὲ ἦν , τὴν δὲ ἐπὶ Σούνιον , τὴν δὲ τῷ Αἴαντι αὐτοῦ ἐς Σαλαμῖνα .
First of all they set apart for the gods, among other first-fruits, three Phoenician triremes, one to be dedicated at the Isthmus, where it was till my lifetime, the second at  Sunium, and the third for  Ajax at  Salamis where they were.


8.121.2
9168
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο διεδάσαντο τὴν ληίην καὶ τὰ ἀκροθίνια ἀπέπεμψαν ἐς Δελφούς , ἐκ τῶν ἐγένετο ἀνδριὰς ἔχων ἐν τῇ χειρὶ ἀκρωτήριον νεός , ἐὼν μέγαθος δυώδεκα πηχέων ·
After that, they divided the spoils and sent the first-fruits of it to  Delphi; of this was made a man's image twelve cubits high, holding in his hand the figurehead of a ship.


8.121.2
9169
ἕστηκε δὲ οὗτος τῇ περ ὁ Μακεδὼν Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ χρύσεος .
This stood in the same place as the golden statue of Alexander the Macedonian.


8.122.1
9170
πέμψαντες δὲ ἀκροθίνια οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐς Δελφοὺς ἐπειρώτων τὸν θεὸν κοινῇ εἰ λελάβηκε πλήρεα καὶ ἀρεστὰ τὰ ἀκροθίνια .
Having sent the first-fruits to  Delphi, the Greeks, in the name of the country generally, made inquiry of the god whether the first-fruits which he had received were of full measure and whether he was content.


8.122.1
9171
ὁ δὲ παρ’ Ἑλλήνων μὲν τῶν ἄλλων ἔφησε ἔχειν , παρὰ Αἰγινητέων δὲ οὔ , ἀλλὰ ἀπαίτεε αὐτοὺς τὰ ἀριστήια τῆς ἐν Σαλαμῖνι ναυμαχίης .
To this he said that he was content with what he had received from all other Greeks, but not from the Aeginetans. From these he demanded the victor's prize for the sea-fight of  Salamis.


8.122.1
9172
Αἰγινῆται δὲ πυθόμενοι ἀνέθεσαν ἀστέρας χρυσέους , οἳ ἐπὶ ἱστοῦ χαλκέου ἑστᾶσι τρεῖς ἐπὶ τῆς γωνίης , ἀγχοτάτω τοῦ Κροίσου κρητῆρος .
When the Aeginetans learned that, they dedicated three golden stars which are set on a bronze mast, in the angle, nearest to Croesus' bowl.


8.123.1
9173
μετὰ δὲ τὴν διαίρεσιν τῆς ληίης ἔπλεον οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν ἀριστήια δώσοντες τῷ ἀξιωτάτῳ γενομένῳ Ἑλλήνων ἀνὰ τὸν πόλεμον τοῦτον .
After the division of the spoils, the Greeks sailed to the Isthmus, there to award the prize of excellence to him who had shown himself most worthy of it in that war.


8.123.2
9174
ὡς δὲ ἀπικόμενοι οἱ στρατηγοὶ διένεμον τὰς ψήφους ἐπὶ τοῦ Ποσειδέωνος τῷ βωμῷ , τὸν πρῶτον καὶ τὸν δεύτερον κρίνοντες ἐκ πάντων , ἐνθαῦτα πᾶς τις αὐτῶν ἑωυτῷ ἐτίθετο τὴν ψῆφον , αὐτὸς ἕκαστος δοκέων ἄριστος γενέσθαι , δεύτερα δὲ οἱ πολλοὶ συνεξέπιπτον Θεμιστοκλέα κρίνοντες .
But when the admirals came and at the altar of Poseidon gave their votes to judge who was first and who second among them, each of them voted for himself, supposing himself to have done the best service.


8.123.2
9175
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἐμουνοῦντο , Θεμιστοκλέης δὲ δευτερείοισι ὑπερεβάλλετο πολλόν .
The greater part of them, however, united in giving the second place to Themistocles. So they each gained but one vote, while Themistocles far outstripped them in votes for the second place.


8.124.1
9176
οὐ βουλομένων δὲ ταῦτα κρίνειν τῶν Ἑλλήνων φθόνῳ , ἀλλ’ ἀποπλεόντων ἑκάστων ἐς τὴν ἑωυτῶν ἀκρίτων , ὅμως Θεμιστοκλέης ἐβώσθη τε καὶ ἐδοξώθη εἶναι ἀνὴρ πολλὸν Ἑλλήνων σοφώτατος ἀνὰ πᾶσαν τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
The Greeks were too jealous to assign the prize and sailed away each to his own place, leaving the matter undecided; nevertheless, Themistocles was lauded, and throughout all of  Hellas was deemed the wisest man by far of the Greeks.


8.124.2
9177
ὅτι δὲ νικῶν οὐκ ἐτιμήθη πρὸς τῶν ἐν Σαλαμῖνι ναυμαχησάντων , αὐτίκα μετὰ ταῦτα ἐς Λακεδαίμονα ἀπίκετο θέλων τιμηθῆναι ·
However, because he had not received from those that fought at  Salamis the honor due to his preeminence, he immediately afterwards went to  Lacedaemon in order that he might receive honor there.


8.124.2
9178
καὶ μιν Λακεδαιμόνιοι καλῶς μὲν ὑπεδέξαντο , μεγάλως δὲ ἐτίμησαν .
The Lacedaemonians welcomed him and paid him high honor.


8.124.2
9179
ἀριστήια μέν νυν ἔδοσαν G? Εὐρυβιάδῃ ἐλαίης στέφανον , σοφίης δὲ καὶ δεξιότητος Θεμιστοκλέι καὶ τούτῳ στέφανον ἐλαίης ·
They bestowed on Eurybiades a crown of olive as the reward of excellence and another such crown on Themistocles for his wisdom and cleverness.


8.124.2
9180
ἐδωρήσαντό τέ μιν ὄχῳ τῷ ἐν Σπάρτῃ καλλιστεύσαντι .
They also gave him the finest chariot in  Sparta,


8.124.3
9181
αἰνέσαντες δὲ πολλά , προέπεμψαν ἀπιόντα τριηκόσιοι Σπαρτιητέων λογάδες , οὗτοι οἵ περ ἱππέες καλέονται , μέχρι οὔρων τῶν Τεγεητικῶν .
and with many words of praise, they sent him home with the three hundred picked men of  Sparta who are called Knights to escort him as far as the borders of  Tegea.


8.124.3
9182
μοῦνον δὴ τοῦτον πάντων ἀνθρώπων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν Σπαρτιῆται προέπεμψαν .
Themistocles was the only man of whom we know to whom the Spartans gave this escort.


8.125.1
9183
ὡς δὲ ἐκ τῆς Λακεδαίμονος ἀπίκετο ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας , ἐνθαῦτα Τιμόδημος Ἀφιδναῖος τῶν ἐχθρῶν μὲν τῶν Θεμιστοκλέος ἐών , ἄλλως δὲ οὐ τῶν ἐπιφανέων ἀνδρῶν , φθόνῳ καταμαργέων ἐνείκεε τὸν Θεμιστοκλέα , τὴν ἐς Λακεδαίμονα ἄπιξιν προφέρων , ὡς διὰ τὰς Ἀθήνας ἔχοι τὰ γέρεα τὰ παρὰ Λακεδαιμονίων , ἀλλ’ οὐ δι’ ἑωυτόν .
But when Themistocles returned to  Athens from  Lacedaemon, Timodemus of Aphidnae, who was one of Themistocles' enemies but not a man of note, was crazed with envy and spoke bitterly to Themistocles of his visit to  Lacedaemon, saying that the honors he had from the Lacedaemonians were paid him for  Athens' sake and not for his own.


8.125.2
9184
ὁ δέ , ἐπείτε οὐκ ἐπαύετο λέγων ταῦτα ὁ Τιμόδημος , εἶπε " οὕτω ἔχει τοι ·
This he kept saying until Themistocles replied, “This is the truth of the matter:


8.125.2
9185
οὔτ’ ἂν ἐγὼ ἐὼν Βελβινίτης ἐτιμήθην οὕτω πρὸς Σπαρτιητέων , οὔτ’ ἂν σὺ , ὤνθρωπε , ἐὼν Ἀθηναῖος " .
if I had been a man of  Belbina I would not have been honored in this way by the Spartans, nor would you, sir, for all you are a man of  Athens.”


8.125.2
9186
ταῦτα μέν νυν ἐς τοσοῦτο ἐγένετο .
Such was the end of that business.


8.126.1
9187
Ἀρτάβαζος δὲ ὁ Φαρνάκεος ἀνὴρ ἐν Πέρσῃσι λόγιμος καὶ πρόσθε ἐών , ἐκ δὲ τῶν Πλαταιικῶν καὶ μᾶλλον ἔτι γενόμενος , ἔχων ἓξ μυριάδας στρατοῦ τοῦ Μαρδόνιος ἐξελέξατο , προέπεμπε βασιλέα μέχρι τοῦ πόρου .
Artabazus son of Pharnaces, who was already a notable man among the Persians and grew to be yet more so through the Plataean business, escorted the king as far as the passage with sixty thousand men of the army that Mardonius had chosen.


8.126.2
9188
ὡς δὲ ὃ μὲν ἦν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ , ὁ δὲ ὀπίσω πορευόμενος κατὰ τὴν Παλλήνην ἐγίνετο , ἅτε Μαρδονίου τε χειμερίζοντος περὶ Θεσσαλίην τε καὶ Μακεδονίην καὶ οὐδέν κω κατεπείγοντος ἥκειν ἐς τὸ ἄλλο στρατόπεδον , οὐκ ἐδικαίου ἐντυχὼν ἀπεστεῶσι Ποτιδαιήτῃσι μὴ οὐκ ἐξανδραποδίσασθαι σφέας .
Xerxes, then, was now in  Asia, and when Artabazus came near  Pallene in his return (for Mardonius was wintering in  Thessaly and  Macedonia and making no haste to come to the rest of his army), he thought it right that he should enslave the people of  Potidaea, whom he found in revolt.


8.126.3
9189
οἱ γὰρ Ποτιδαιῆται , ὡς βασιλεὺς παρεξεληλάκεε καὶ ὁ ναυτικὸς τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι οἰχώκεε φεύγων ἐκ Σαλαμῖνος , ἐκ τοῦ φανεροῦ ἀπέστασαν ἀπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων ·
When the king had marched away past the town and the Persian fleet had taken flight from  Salamis,


8.126.3
9190
ὣς δὲ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι οἱ τὴν Παλλήνην ἔχοντες .
Potidaea had openly revolted from the barbarians and so too had the rest of the people of  Pallene.


8.127.1
9191
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ Ἀρτάβαζος ἐπολιόρκεε τὴν Ποτίδαιαν .
Thereupon Artabazus laid siege to  Potidaea, and suspecting that  Olynthus too was plotting revolt from the king, he laid siege to it also.


8.127.1
9192
ὑποπτεύσας δὲ καὶ τοὺς Ὀλυνθίους ἀπίστασθαι ἀπὸ βασιλέος , καὶ ταύτην ἐπολιόρκεε ·
This town was held by Bottiaeans who had been driven from the Thermaic gulf by the Macedonians.


8.127.1
9193
εἶχον δὲ αὐτὴν Βοττιαῖοι ἐκ τοῦ Θερμαίου κόλπου ἐξαναστάντες ὑπὸ Μακεδόνων .
Having besieged and taken  Olynthus, he brought these men to a lake and there cut their throats and delivered their city over to the charge of Critobulus of  Torone and the Chalcidian people.


8.127.1
9194
ἐπεὶ δὲ σφέας εἷλε πολιορκέων , κατέσφαξε ἐξαγαγὼν ἐς λίμνην , τὴν δὲ πόλιν παραδιδοῖ Κριτοβούλῳ Τορωναίῳ ἐπιτροπεύειν καὶ τῷ Χαλκιδικῷ γένεϊ , καὶ οὕτω Ὄλυνθον Χαλκιδέες ἔσχον .
It was in this way that the Chalcidians gained possession of  Olynthus.


8.128.1
9195
ἐξελὼν δὲ ταύτην ὁ Ἀρτάβαζος τῇ Ποτιδαίῃ ἐντεταμένως προσεῖχε ·
Having taken  Olynthus, Artabazus dealt immediately with  Potidaea, and his zeal was aided by Timoxenus the general of the Scionaeans, who agreed to betray the place to him.


8.128.1
9196
προσέχοντι δέ οἱ προθύμως συντίθεται προδοσίην Τιμόξεινος ὁ τῶν Σκιωναίων στρατηγός , ὅντινα μὲν τρόπον ἀρχήν , ἔγωγε οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν ( οὐ γὰρ ὦν λέγεται ) , τέλος μέντοι τοιάδε ἐγίνετο ·
I do not know how the agreement was first made, since there is no information available about it.


8.128.1
9197
ὅκως βυβλίον γράψειε ἢ Τιμόξεινος ἐθέλων παρὰ Ἀρτάβαζον πέμψαι ἢ Ἀρτάβαζος παρὰ Τιμόξεινον , τοξεύματος παρὰ τὰς γλυφίδας περιειλίξαντες καὶ πτερώσαντες τὸ βυβλίον ἐτόξευον ἐς συγκείμενον χωρίον .
The result, however, was as I will now show. Whenever Timoxenus wrote a letter to be sent to Artabazus, or Artabazus to Timoxenus, they would wrap it around the shaft of an arrow at the notches, attach feathers to the letter, and shoot it to a place upon which they had agreed.


8.128.2
9198
ἐπάιστος δὲ ἐγένετο ὁ Τιμόξεινος προδιδοὺς τὴν Ποτίδαιαν ·
Timoxenus' plot to betray  Potidaea was, however, discovered, for Artabazus in shooting an arrow to the place agreed upon, missed it and hit the shoulder of a man of  Potidaea.


8.128.2
9199
τοξεύων γὰρ ὁ Ἀρτάβαζος ἐς τὸ συγκείμενον , ἁμαρτὼν τοῦ χωρίου τούτου βάλλει ἀνδρὸς Ποτιδαιήτεω τὸν ὦμον , τὸν δὲ βληθέντα περιέδραμε ὅμιλος , οἷα φιλέει γίνεσθαι ἐν πολέμῳ , οἳ αὐτίκα τὸ τόξευμα λαβόντες ὡς ἔμαθον τὸ βυβλίον , ἔφερον ἐπὶ τοὺς στρατηγούς ·
A throng gathered quickly around the man when he was struck (which is a thing that always happens in war), and they straightway took the arrow, found the letter, and carried it to their generals;


8.128.2
9200
παρῆν δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Παλληναίων συμμαχίν .
the rest of their allies of  Pallene were also there present.


8.128.3
9201
τοῖσι δὲ στρατηγοῖσι ἐπιλεξαμένοισι τὸ βυβλίον καὶ μαθοῦσι τὸν αἴτιον τῆς προδοσίης ἔδοξε μὴ καταπλῆξαι Τιμόξεινον προδοσίῃ τῆς Σκιωναίων πόλιος εἵνεκα , μὴ νομιζοίατο εἶναι Σκιωναῖοι ἐς τὸν μετέπειτα χρόνον αἰεὶ προδόται .
The generals read the letter and perceived who was the traitor, but they resolved for  Scione's sake that they would not condemn Timoxenus with a charge of treason, for fear that the people of  Scione should hereafter be called traitors.


8.129.1
9202
ὃ μὲν δὴ τοιούτῳ τρόπῳ ἐπάιστος ἐγεγόνεε ·
This is how Timoxenus' treachery was brought to light.


8.129.1
9203
Ἀρταβάζῳ δὲ ἐπειδὴ πολιορκέοντι ἐγεγόνεσαν τρεῖς μῆνες , γίνεται ἄμπωτις τῆς θαλάσσης μεγάλη καὶ χρόνον ἐπὶ πολλόν .
But when Artabazus had besieged  Potidaea for three months, there was a great ebb-tide in the sea which lasted for a long while,


8.129.1
9204
ἰδόντες δὲ οἱ βάρβαροι τέναγος γενόμενον παρήισαν ἐς τὴν Παλλήνην .
and when the foreigners saw that the sea was turned to a marsh, they prepared to pass over it into  Pallene.


8.129.2
9205
ὡς δὲ τὰς δύο μὲν μοίρας διοδοιπορήκεσαν , ἔτι δὲ τρεῖς ὑπόλοιποι ἦσαν , τὰς διελθόντας χρῆν εἶναι ἔσω ἐν τῇ Παλλήνῃ , ἐπῆλθε πλημμυρὶς τῆς θαλάσσης μεγάλη , ὅση οὐδαμά κω , ὡς οἱ ἐπιχώριοι λέγουσι , πολλάκις γινομένη .
When they had made their way over two-fifths of it, however, and three yet remained to cross before they could be in  Pallene, there came a great flood-tide, higher, as the people of the place say, than any one of the many that had been before.


8.129.2
9206
οἱ μὲν δὴ νέειν αὐτῶν οὐκ ἐπιστάμενοι διεφθείροντο , τοὺς δὲ ἐπισταμένους οἱ Ποτιδαιῆται ἐπιπλώσαντες πλοίοισι ἀπώλεσαν .
Some of them who did not know how to swim were drowned, and those who knew were slain by the Potidaeans, who came among them in boats.


8.129.3
9207
αἴτιον δὲ λέγουσι Ποτιδαιῆται τῆς τε ῥηχίης καὶ τῆς πλημμυρίδος καὶ τοῦ Περσικοῦ πάθεος γενέσθαι τόδε , ὅτι τοῦ Ποσειδέωνος ἐς τὸν νηὸν καὶ τὸ ἄγαλμα τὸ ἐν τῷ προαστείῳ ἠσέβησαν οὗτοι τῶν Περσέων οἵ περ καὶ διεφθάρησαν ὑπὸ τῆς θαλάσσης ·
The Potidaeans say that the cause of the high sea and flood and the Persian disaster lay in the fact that those same Persians who now perished in the sea had profaned the temple and the image of Poseidon which was in the suburb of the city.


8.129.3
9208
αἴτιον δὲ τοῦτο λέγοντες εὖ λέγειν ἔμοιγε δοκέουσι .
I think that in saying that this was the cause they are correct.


8.129.3
9209
τοὺς δὲ περιγενομένους ἀπῆγε Ἀρτάβαζος ἐς Θεσσαλίην παρὰ Μαρδόνιον .
Those who escaped alive were led away by Artabazus to Mardonius in  Thessaly.


8.129.3
9210
οὗτοι μὲν οἱ προπέμψαντες βασιλέα οὕτω ἔπρηξαν .
This is how the men who had been the king's escort fared.


8.130.1
9211
ὁ δὲ ναυτικὸς ὁ Ξέρξεω περιγενόμενος ὡς προσέμιξε τῇ Ἀσίῃ φεύγων ἐκ Σαλαμῖνος καὶ βασιλέα τε καὶ τὴν στρατιὴν ἐκ Χερσονήσου διεπόρθμευσε ἐς Ἄβυδον , ἐχειμέριζε ἐν Κύμῃ .
All that was left of Xerxes' fleet, having in its flight from  Salamis touched the coast of  Asia and ferried the king and his army over from the  Chersonese to  Abydos, wintered at  Cyme.


8.130.1
9212
ἔαρος δὲ ἐπιλάμψαντος πρώιος συνελέγετο ἐς Σάμον ·
Then early in the first dawn of spring they mustered at  Samos.


8.130.1
9213
αἳ δὲ τῶν νεῶν καὶ ἐχειμέρισαν αὐτοῦ ·
Some of the ships had wintered there.


8.130.1
9214
Περσέων δὲ καὶ Μήδων οἱ πλεῦνες ἐπεβάτευον .
The majority of their fighting men were Persians and Medes.


8.130.2
9215
στρατηγοὶ δέ σφι ἐπῆλθον Μαρδόντης τε ὁ Βαγαίου καὶ Ἀρταΰντης ὁ Ἀρταχαίεω ·
Mardontes son of Bagaeus and Artayntes son of Artachaees came to be their admirals,


8.130.2
9216
συνῆρχε δὲ τούτοισι καὶ ἀδελφιδέος αὐτοῦ Ἀρταΰντεω προσελομένου Ἰθαμίτρης .
and Artayntes chose also his own nephew Ithamitres to have a share in the command.


8.130.2
9217
ἅτε δὲ μεγάλως πληγέντες , οὐ προήισαν ἀνωτέρω τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρης , οὐδ’ ἐπηνάγκαζε οὐδείς , ἀλλ’ ἐν τῇ Σάμῳ κατήμενοι ἐφύλασσον τὴν Ἰωνίην μὴ ἀποστῇ , νέας ἔχοντες σὺν τῇσι Ἰάσι τριηκοσίας .
But by reason of the heavy blow dealt them they went no further out to sea westwards, nor did anyone insist that they should so do. They did, however, lie off  Samos keeping watch against a revolt in  Ionia. The whole number of their ships, Ionian and other, was three hundred.


8.130.3
9218
οὐ μὲν οὐδὲ προσεδέκοντο τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐλεύσεσθαι ἐς τὴν Ἰωνίην ἀλλ’ ἀποχρήσειν σφι τὴν ἑωυτῶν φυλάσσειν , σταθμεύμενοι ὅτι σφέας οὐκ ἐπεδίωξαν φεύγοντας ἐκ Σαλαμῖνος ἀλλ’ ἄσμενοι ἀπαλλάσσοντο .
In truth they did not expect that the Greeks would come to  Ionia, but rather that they would be content to guard their own country. This they thought because the Greeks had not pursued them when they fled from  Salamis, but had been glad to be quit of them.


8.130.3
9219
κατὰ μέν νυν τὴν θάλασσαν ἑσσωμένοι ἦσαν τῷ θυμῷ , πεζῇ δὲ ἐδόκεον πολλῷ κρατήσειν τὸν Μαρδόνιον .
In regard to the sea, the Persians were at heart beaten men, but they supposed that on land Mardonius would easily prevail.


8.130.4
9220
ἐόντες δὲ ἐν Σάμῳ ἅμα μὲν ἐβουλεύοντο εἴ τι δυναίατο κακὸν τοὺς πολεμίους ποιέειν , ἅμα δὲ καὶ ὠτακούστεον ὅκῃ πεσέεται τὰ Μαρδονίου πρήγματα .
So they were at  Samos, and there planned to do what harm they could to their enemies and to listen in the interim for news of how Mardonius' affairs were proceeding.


8.131.1
9221
τοὺς δὲ Ἕλληνας τό τε ἔαρ γινόμενον ἤγειρε καὶ Μαρδόνιος ἐν Θεσσαλίῃ ἐών .
As for the Greeks, the coming of spring and Mardonius' being in  Thessaly moved them to action.


8.131.1
9222
ὁ μὲν δὴ πεζὸς οὔκω συνελέγετο , ὁ δὲ ναυτικὸς ἀπίκετο ἐς Αἴγιναν , νέες ἀριθμὸν δέκα καὶ ἑκατόν .
They had not yet begun the mustering of their army, but their fleet, one hundred and ten ships, came to  Aegina.


8.131.2
9223
στρατηγὸς δὲ καὶ ναύαρχος ἦν Λευτυχίδης ὁ Μενάρεος τοῦ Ἡγησίλεω τοῦ Ἱπποκρατίδεω τοῦ Λευτυχίδεω τοῦ Ἀναξίλεω τοῦ Ἀρχιδήμου τοῦ Ἀναξανδρίδεω τοῦ Θεοπόμπου τοῦ Νικάνδρου τοῦ Χαρίλεω τοῦ Εὐνόμου τοῦ Πολυδέκτεω τοῦ Πρυτάνιος τοῦ Εὐρυφῶντος τοῦ Προκλέος τοῦ Ἀριστοδήμου τοῦ Ἀριστομάχου τοῦ Κλεοδαίου τοῦ Ὕλλου τοῦ Ἡρακλέος , ἐὼν τῆς ἑτέρης οἰκίης τῶν βασιλέων .
Their general and admiral was Leutychides son of Menares, who traced his lineage from son to father through Hegesilaus, Hippocratides, Leutychides, Anaxilaus, Archidemus, Anaxandrides, Theopompus, Nicandrus, Charilaus, Eunomus, Polydectes, Prytanis, Euryphon, Procles, Aristodemus, Aristomachus, Cleodaeus, to Hyllus who was the son of Heracles. He was of the second royal house.


8.131.3
9224
οὗτοι πάντες , πλὴν τῶν ἑπτὰ τῶν μετὰ Λευτυχίδεα πρώτων καταλεχθέντων , οἱ ἄλλοι βασιλέες ἐγένοντο Σπάρτης .
All the aforesaid had been kings of  Sparta, save the seven named first after Leutychides.


8.131.3
9225
Ἀθηναίων δὲ ἐστρατήγεε Ξάνθιππος ὁ Ἀρίφρονος .
The general of the Athenians was Xanthippus son of Ariphron.


8.132.1
9226
ὡς δὲ παρεγένοντο ἐς τὴν Αἴγιναν πᾶσαι αἱ νέες , ἀπίκοντο Ἰώνων ἄγγελοι ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον τῶν Ἑλλήνων , οἳ καὶ ἐς Σπάρτην ὀλίγῳ πρότερον τούτων ἀπικόμενοι ἐδέοντο Λακεδαιμονίων ἐλευθεροῦν τὴν Ἰωνίην ·
When all the ships had arrived at  Aegina, there came to the Greek quarters messengers from the Ionians, the same who a little while before that had gone to  Sparta and entreated the Lacedaemonians to free  Ionia.


8.132.2
9227
τῶν καὶ Ἡρόδοτος ὁ Βασιληίδεω ἦν ·
One of these was Herodotus the son of Basileides.


8.132.2
9228
οἳ στασιῶται σφίσι γενόμενοι ἐπεβούλευον θάνατον Στράττι τῷ Χίου τυράννῳ , ἐόντες ἀρχὴν ἑπτά ·
These, who at first were seven, made a faction and conspired to slay Strattis, the tyrant of  Chios,


8.132.2
9229
ἐπιβουλεύοντες δὲ ὡς φανεροὶ ἐγένοντο , ἐξενείκαντος τὴν ἐπιχείρησιν ἑνὸς τῶν μετεχόντων , οὕτω δὴ οἱ λοιποὶ ἓξ ἐόντες ὑπεξέσχον ἐκ τῆς Χίου καὶ ἐς Σπάρτην τε ἀπίκοντο καὶ δὴ καὶ τότε ἐς τὴν Αἴγιναν , τῶν Ἑλλήνων δεόμενοι καταπλῶσαι ἐς τὴν Ἰωνίην ·
but when their conspiracy became known, one of the accomplices having revealed their enterprise, the six who remained got them secretly out of  Chios, from where they went to  Sparta and now to  Aegina, entreating the Greeks to sail to  Ionia.


8.132.2
9230
οἳ προήγαγον αὐτοὺς μόγις μέχρι Δήλου .
The Greeks took them as far as  Delos, and that not readily, for they, having no knowledge of those parts and thinking that armed men were everywhere, feared all that lay beyond.


8.132.3
9231
τὸ γὰρ προσωτέρω πᾶν δεινὸν ἦν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι οὔτε τῶν χώρων ἐοῦσι ἐμπείροισι , στρατιῆς τε πάντα πλέα ἐδόκεε εἶναι , τὴν δὲ Σάμον ἐπιστέατο δόξῃ καὶ Ἡρακλέας στήλας ἴσον ἀπέχειν .
They supposed too that  Samos was no nearer to them than the Pillars of Heracles.


8.132.3
9232
συνέπιπτε δὲ τοιοῦτο ὥστε τοὺς μὲν βαρβάρους τὸ πρὸς ἑσπέρης ἀνωτέρω Σάμου μὴ τολμᾶν καταπλῶσαι καταρρωδηκότας , τοὺς δὲ Ἕλληνας , χρηιζόντων Χίων , τὸ πρὸς τὴν ἠῶ κατωτέρω Δήλου ·
So it happened that the barbarians were too disheartened to dare to sail farther west than  Samos, while at the same time the Greeks dared to go at the Chians' request no farther east than  Delos.


8.132.3
9233
οὕτω δέος τὸ μέσον ἐφύλασσε σφέων .
It was fear which kept the middle space between them.


8.133.1
9234
οἱ μὲν δὴ Ἕλληνες ἔπλεον ἐς τὴν Δῆλον , Μαρδόνιος δὲ περὶ τὴν Θεσσαλίην ἐχείμαζε .
The Greeks, then, sailed to  Delos, and Mardonius wintered in  Thessaly.


8.133.1
9235
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὁρμώμενος ἔπεμπε κατὰ τὰ χρηστήρια ἄνδρα Εὐρωπέα γένος , τῷ οὔνομα ἦν Μῦς , ἐντειλάμενος πανταχῇ μιν χρησόμενον ἐλθεῖν , τῶν οἷά τε ἦν σφι ἀποπειρήσασθαι .
Having his headquarters there he sent a man of  Europus called Mys to visit the places of divination, charging him to inquire of all the oracles which he could test.


8.133.1
9236
ὅ τι μὲν βουλόμενος ἐκμαθεῖν πρὸς τῶν χρηστηρίων ταῦτα ἐνετέλλετο , οὐκ ἔχω φράσαι ·
What it was that he desired to learn from the oracles when he gave this charge, I cannot say,


8.133.1
9237
οὐ γὰρ ὦν λέγεται ·
for no one tells of it.


8.133.1
9238
δοκέω δ’ ἔγωγε περὶ τῶν παρεόντων πρηγμάτων καὶ οὐκ ἄλλων πέρι πέμψαι .
I suppose that he sent to inquire concerning his present business, and that alone.


8.134.1
9239
οὗτος ὁ Μῦς ἔς τε Λεβάδειαν φαίνεται ἀπικόμενος καὶ μισθῷ πείσας τῶν ἐπιχωρίων ἄνδρα καταβῆναι παρὰ Τροφώνιον , καὶ ἐς Ἄβας τὰς Φωκέων ἀπικόμενος ἐπὶ τὸ χρηστήριον ·
This man Mys is known to have gone to  Lebadea and to have bribed a man of the country to go down into the cave of Trophonius and to have gone to the place of divination at  Abae in  Phocis.


8.134.1
9240
καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐς Θήβας πρῶτα ὡς ἀπίκετο , τοῦτο μὲν τῷ Ἰσμηνίῳ Ἀπόλλωνι ἐχρήσατο ·
He went first to  Thebes where he inquired of Ismenian Apollo


8.134.1
9241
ἔστι δὲ κατά περ ἐν Ὀλυμπίῃ ἱροῖσι αὐτόθι χρηστηριάζεσθαι ·
(sacrifice is there the way of divination, as at  Olympia),


8.134.1
9242
τοῦτο δὲ ξεῖνον τινὰ καὶ οὐ Θηβαῖον χρήμασι πείσας κατεκοίμησε ἐς Ἀμφιάρεω .
and moreover he bribed one who was no Theban but a stranger to lie down to sleep in the shrine of Amphiaraus.


8.134.2
9243
Θηβαίων δὲ οὐδενὶ ἔξεστι μαντεύεσθαι αὐτόθι διὰ τόδε ·
No Theban may seek a prophecy there,


8.134.2
9244
ἐκέλευσε σφέας ὁ Ἀμφιάρεως διὰ χρηστηρίων ποιεύμενος ὁκότερα βούλονται ἑλέσθαι τούτων , ἑωυτῷ ἢ ἅτε μάντι χρᾶσθαι ἢ ἅτε συμμάχῳ , τοῦ ἑτέρου ἀπεχομένους ·
for Amphiaraus bade them by an oracle to choose which of the two they wanted and forgo the other, and take him either for their prophet or for their ally.


8.134.2
9245
οἳ δὲ σύμμαχόν μιν εἵλοντο εἶναι .
They chose that he should be their ally.


8.134.2
9246
διὰ τοῦτο μὲν οὐκ ἔξεστι Θηβαίων οὐδενὶ αὐτόθι ἐγκατακοιμηθῆναι .
Therefore no Theban may lie down to sleep in that place.


8.135.1
9247
τότε δὲ θῶμά μοι μέγιστον γενέσθαι λέγεται ὑπὸ Θηβαίων ·
But at this time there happened, as the Thebans say, a thing at which I marvel greatly.


8.135.1
9248
ἐλθεῖν ἄρα τὸν Εὐρωπέα Μῦν , περιστρωφώμενον πάντα τὰ χρηστήρια , καὶ ἐς τοῦ Πτῴου Ἀπόλλωνος τὸ τέμενος .
It would seem that this man Mys of  Europus came in his wanderings among the places of divination to the precinct of Ptoan Apollo.


8.135.1
9249
τοῦτο δὲ τὸ ἱρὸν καλέεται μὲν Πτῷον , ἔστι δὲ Θηβαίων , κεῖται δὲ ὑπὲρ τῆς Κωπαΐδος λίμνης πρὸς ὄρεϊ ἀγχοτάτω Ἀκραιφίης πόλιος .
This temple is called Ptoum, and belongs to the Thebans. It lies by a hill, above lake  Copais, very near to the town Acraephia.


8.135.2
9250
ἐς τοῦτο τὸ ἱρὸν ἐπείτε παρελθεῖν τὸν καλεόμενον τοῦτον Μῦν , ἕπεσθαι δέ οἱ τῶν ἀστῶν αἱρετοὺς ἄνδρας τρεῖς ἀπὸ τοῦ κοινοῦ ὡς ἀπογραψομένους τὰ θεσπιέειν ἔμελλε , καὶ πρόκατε τὸν πρόμαντιν βαρβάρῳ γλώσσῃ χρᾶν .
When the man called Mys entered into this temple together with three men of the town who were chosen on the state's behalf to write down the oracles that should be given, straightway the diviner prophesied in a foreign tongue.


8.135.3
9251
καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἑπομένους τῶν Θηβαίων ἐν θώματι ἔχεσθαι ἀκούοντας βαρβάρου γλώσσης ἀντὶ Ἑλλάδος , οὐδὲ ἔχειν ὅ τι χρήσωνται τῷ παρεόντι πρήγματι ·
The Thebans who followed him were astonished to hear a strange language instead of Greek and knew not what this present matter might be.


8.135.3
9252
τὸν δὲ Εὐρωπέα Μῦν ἐξαρπάσαντα παρ’ αὐτῶν τὴν ἐφέροντο δέλτον , τὰ λεγόμενα ὑπὸ τοῦ προφήτεω γράφειν ἐς αὐτήν , φάναι δὲ Καρίῃ μιν γλώσσῃ χρᾶν , συγγραψάμενον δὲ οἴχεσθαι ἀπιόντα ἐς Θεσσαλίην .
Mys of  Europus, however, snatched from them the tablet which they carried and wrote on it that which was spoken by the prophet, saying that the words of the oracle were Carian. After writing everything down, he went back to  Thessaly.


8.136.1
9253
Μαρδόνιος δὲ ἐπιλεξάμενος ὅ τι δὴ λέγοντα ἦν τὰ χρηστήρια μετὰ ταῦτα ἔπεμψε ἄγγελον ἐς Ἀθήνας Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν Ἀμύντεω ἄνδρα Μακεδόνα , ἅμα μὲν ὅτι οἱ προσκηδέες οἱ Πέρσαι ἦσαν ·
Mardonius read whatever was said in the oracles, and presently he sent a messenger to  Athens, Alexander, a Macedonian, son of Amyntas.


8.136.1
9254
Ἀλεξάνδρου γὰρ ἀδελφεὴν Γυγαίην , Ἀμύντεω δὲ θυγατέρα , Βουβάρης ἀνὴρ Πέρσης ἔσχε , ἐκ τῆς οἱ ἐγεγόνεε Ἀμύντης ὁ ἐν τῇ Ἀσίῃ , ἔχων τὸ οὔνομα τοῦ μητροπάτορος , τῷ δὴ ἐκ βασιλέος τῆς Φρυγίης ἐδόθη Ἀλάβανδα πόλις μεγάλη νέμεσθαι ·
Him he sent, partly because the Persians were akin to him; Bubares, a Persian, had taken to wife Gygaea Alexander's sister and Amyntas' daughter, who had borne to him that Amyntas of  Asia who was called by the name of his mother's father, and to whom the king gave  Alabanda a great city in  Phrygia for his dwelling.


8.136.1
9255
ἅμα δὲ ὁ Μαρδόνιος πυθόμενος ὅτι πρόξεινός τε εἴη καὶ εὐεργέτης ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ἔπεμπε ·
Partly too he sent him because he learned that Alexander was a protector and benefactor to the Athenians.


8.136.2
9256
τοὺς γὰρ Ἀθηναίους οὕτω ἐδόκεε μάλιστα προσκτήσεσθαι , λεών τε πολλὸν ἄρα ἀκούων εἶναι καὶ ἄλκιμον , τά τε κατὰ τὴν θάλασσαν συντυχόντα σφι παθήματα κατεργασαμένους μάλιστα Ἀθηναίους ἐπίστατο .
It was thus that he supposed he could best gain the Athenians for his allies, of whom he heard that they were a numerous and valiant people, and knew that they had been the chief authors of the calamities which had befallen the Persians at sea.


8.136.3
9257
τούτων δὲ προσγενομένων κατήλπιζε εὐπετέως τῆς θαλάσσης κρατήσειν , τά περ ἂν καὶ ἦν , πεζῇ τε ἐδόκεε πολλῷ εἶναι κρέσσων , οὕτω τε ἐλογίζετο κατύπερθέ οἱ τὰ πρήγματα ἔσεσθαι τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν .
If he gained their friendship he thought he would easily become master of the seas, as truly he would have been.


8.136.3
9258
τάχα δ’ ἂν καὶ τὰ χρηστήρια ταῦτά οἱ προλέγοι , συμβουλεύοντα σύμμαχον τὸν Ἀθηναῖον ποιέεσθαι ·
On land he supposed himself to be by much the stronger, and he accordingly reckoned that thus he would have the upper hand of the Greeks.


8.136.3
9259
τοῖσι δὴ πειθόμενος ἔπεμπε .
This chanced to be the prediction of the oracles which counseled him to make the Athenians his ally. It was in obedience to this that he sent his messenger.


8.137.1
9260
τοῦ δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρου τούτου ἕβδομος γενέτωρ Περδίκκης ἐστὶ ὁ κτησάμενος τῶν Μακεδόνων τὴν τυραννίδα τρόπῳ τοιῷδε .
This Alexander was seventh in descent from Perdiccas, who got for himself the tyranny of  Macedonia in the way that I will show.


8.137.1
9261
ἐξ Ἄργεος ἔφυγον ἐς Ἰλλυριοὺς τῶν Τημένου ἀπογόνων τρεῖς ἀδελφεοί , Γαυάνης τε καὶ Ἀέροπος καὶ Περδίκκης , ἐκ δὲ Ἰλλυριῶν ὑπερβαλόντες ἐς τὴν ἄνω Μακεδονίην ἀπίκοντο ἐς Λεβαίην πόλιν .
Three brothers of the lineage of Temenus came as banished men from  Argos to  Illyria, Gauanes and Aeropus and Perdiccas; and from  Illyria they crossed over into the highlands of  Macedonia till they came to the town Lebaea.


8.137.2
9262
ἐνθαῦτα δὲ ἐθήτευον ἐπὶ μισθῷ παρὰ τῷ βασιλέι , ὃ μὲν ἵππους νέμων , ὁ δὲ βοῦς , ὁ δὲ νεώτατος αὐτῶν Περδίκκης τὰ λεπτὰ τῶν προβάτων .
There they served for wages as thetes in the king's household, one tending horses and another oxen. Perdiccas, who was the youngest, tended the lesser flocks.


8.137.2
9263
ἡ δὲ γυνὴ τοῦ βασιλέος αὐτὴ τὰ σιτία σφι ἔπεσσε ·
Now the king's wife cooked their food for them,


8.137.2
9264
ἦσαν γὰρ τὸ πάλαι καὶ αἱ τυραννίδες τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἀσθενέες χρήμασι , οὐ μοῦνον ὁ δῆμος ·
for in old times the ruling houses among men, and not the common people alone, were lacking in wealth.


8.137.3
9265
ὅκως δὲ ὀπτῴη , ὁ ἄρτος τοῦ παιδὸς τοῦ θητὸς Περδίκκεω διπλήσιος ἐγίνετο αὐτὸς ἑωυτοῦ .
Whenever she baked bread, the loaf of the thete Perdiccas grew double in size.


8.137.3
9266
ἐπεὶ δὲ αἰεὶ τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἐγίνετο , εἶπε πρὸς τὸν ἄνδρα τὸν ἑωυτῆς ·
Seeing that this kept happening, she told her husband,


8.137.3
9267
τὸν δὲ ἀκούσαντα ἐσῆλθε αὐτίκα ὡς εἴη τέρας καὶ φέροι μέγα τι .
and it seemed to him when he heard it that this was a portent signifying some great matter.


8.137.3
9268
καλέσας δὲ τοὺς θῆτας προηγόρευέ σφι ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι ἐκ γῆς τῆς ἑωυτοῦ .
So he sent for his thetes and bade them depart from his territory.


8.137.4
9269
οἳ δὲ τὸν μισθὸν ἔφασαν δίκαιοι εἶναι ἀπολαβόντες οὕτω ἐξιέναι .
They said it was only just that they should have their wages before they departed.


8.137.4
9270
ἐνθαῦτα ὁ βασιλεὺς τοῦ μισθοῦ πέρι ἀκούσας , ἦν γὰρ κατὰ τὴν καπνοδόκην ἐς τὸν οἶκον ἐσέχων ὁ ἥλιος , εἶπε θεοβλαβὴς γενόμενος " μισθὸν δὲ ὑμῖν ἐγὼ ὑμέων ἄξιον τόνδε ἀποδίδωμι , " δέξας τὸν ἥλιον .
When they spoke of wages, the king was moved to foolishness and said, “That is the wage you merit, and it is that I give you,” pointing to the sunlight that shone down the smoke vent into the house.


8.137.5
9271
ὁ μὲν δὴ Γαυάνης τε καὶ ὁ Ἀέροπος οἱ πρεσβύτεροι ἕστασαν ἐκπεπληγμένοι , ὡς ἤκουσαν ταῦτα ·
Gauanes and Aeropus, who were the elder, stood astonished when they heard that, but the boy said, “We accept what you give, O king,”


8.137.5
9272
ὁ δὲ παῖς , ἐτύγχανε γὰρ ἔχων μάχαιραν , εἴπας τάδε " δεκόμεθα ὦ βασιλεῦ τὰ διδοῖς , " περιγράφει τῇ μαχαίρῃ ἐς τὸ ἔδαφος τοῦ οἴκου τὸν ἥλιον , περιγράψας δέ , ἐς τὸν κόλπον τρὶς ἀρυσάμενος τοῦ ἡλίου , ἀπαλλάσσετο αὐτός τε καὶ οἱ μετ’ ἐκείνου .
and with that he took a knife which he had with him and drew a line with it on the floor of the house round the sunlight. When he had done this, he three times gathered up the sunlight into the fold of his garment and went his way with his companions.


8.138.1
9273
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἀπήισαν , τῷ δὲ βασιλέι σημαίνει τις τῶν παρέδρων οἷόν τι χρῆμα ποιήσειε ὁ παῖς καὶ ὡς σὺν νόῳ κείνων ὁ νεώτατος λάβοι τὰ διδόμενα .
So they departed, but one of those who sat nearby declared to the king what this was that the boy had done and how it was of set purpose that the youngest of them had accepted the gift offered.


8.138.1
9274
ὁ δὲ ταῦτα ἀκούσας καὶ ὀξυνθεὶς πέμπει ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς ἱππέας ἀπολέοντας .
When the king heard this, he was angered, and sent riders after them to slay them.


8.138.1
9275
ποταμὸς δὲ ἐστὶ ἐν τῇ χώρῃ ταύτῃ , τῷ θύουσι οἱ τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἀπ’ Ἄργεος ἀπόγονοι σωτῆρι ·
There is, however, in that land a river, to which the descendants from  Argos of these men offer sacrifice as their deliverer.


8.138.2
9276
οὗτος , ἐπείτε διέβησαν οἱ Τημενίδαι , μέγας οὕτω ἐρρύη ὥστε τοὺς ἱππέας μὴ οἵους τε γενέσθαι διαβῆναι .
This river, when the sons of Temenus had crossed it, rose in such flood that the riders could not cross.


8.138.2
9277
οἳ δὲ ἀπικόμενοι ἐς ἄλλην γῆν τῆς Μακεδονίης οἴκησαν πέλας τῶν κήπων τῶν λεγομένων εἶναι Μίδεω τοῦ Γορδίεω , ἐν τοῖσι φύεται αὐτόματα ῥόδα , ἓν ἕκαστον ἔχον ἑξήκοντα φύλλα , ὀδμῇ τε ὑπερφέροντα τῶν ἄλλων .
So the brothers came to another part of  Macedonia and settled near the place called the garden of Midas son of Gordias, where roses grow of themselves, each bearing sixty blossoms and of surpassing fragrance.


8.138.3
9278
ἐν τούτοισι καὶ ὁ Σιληνὸς τοῖσι κήποισι ἥλω , ὡς λέγεται ὑπὸ Μακεδόνων .
In this garden, according to the Macedonian story, Silenus was taken captive.


8.138.3
9279
ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν κήπων ὄρος κεῖται Βέρμιον οὔνομα , ἄβατον ὑπὸ χειμῶνος .
Above it rises the mountain called Bermius, which none can ascend for the wintry cold.


8.138.3
9280
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ὁρμώμενοι , ὡς ταύτην ἔσχον , κατεστρέφοντο καὶ τὴν ἄλλην Μακεδονίην .
From there they issued forth when they had won that country and presently subdued also the rest of  Macedonia.


8.139.1
9281
ἀπὸ τούτου δὴ τοῦ Περδίκκεω Ἀλέξανδρος ὧδε ἐγένετο ·
From that Perdiccas Alexander was descended, being the son of Amyntas, who was the son of Alcetes;


8.139.1
9282
Ἀμύντεω παῖς ἦν Ἀλέξανδρος , Ἀμύντης δὲ Ἀλκέτεω , Ἀλκέτεω δὲ πατὴρ ἦν Ἀέροπος , τοῦ δὲ Φίλιππος , Φιλίππου δὲ Ἀργαῖος , τοῦ δὲ Περδίκκης ὁ κτησάμενος τὴν ἀρχήν .
Alcetes' father was Aeropus, and his was Philippus; Philippus' father was Argaeus, and his again was Perdiccas, who won that lordship.


8.140A.1
9283
ἐγεγόνεε μὲν δὴ ὧδε ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Ἀμύντεω ·
Such was the lineage of Alexander son of Amyntas.


8.140A.1
9284
ὡς δὲ ἀπίκετο ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας ἀποπεμφθεὶς ὑπὸ Μαρδονίου , ἔλεγε τάδε .
When he came to  Athens from Mardonius who had sent him, he spoke as follows:


8.140A.1
9285
" ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , Μαρδόνιος τάδε λέγει .
“This, Athenians, is what Mardonius says to you: —


8.140A.1
9286
ἐμοὶ ἀγγελίη ἥκει παρὰ βασιλέος λέγουσα οὕτω .
there is a message come to me from the king, saying,


8.140A.1
9287
" Ἀθηναίοισι τὰς ἁμαρτάδας τὰς ἐς ἐμὲ ἐξ ἐκείνων γενομένας πάσας μετίημι .
‘I forgive the Athenians all the offenses which they have committed against me;


8.140A.2
9288
νῦν τε ὧδε Μαρδόνιε ποίεε ·
and now, Mardonius, I bid you do this: —


8.140A.2
9289
τοῦτο μὲν τὴν γῆν σφι ἀπόδος , τοῦτο δὲ ἄλλην πρὸς ταύτῃ ἑλέσθων αὐτοί , ἥντινα ἂν ἐθέλωσι , ἐόντες αὐτόνομοι ·
Give them back their territory and let them choose more for themselves besides, where ever they will, and dwell under their own laws.


8.140A.2
9290
ἱρά τε πάντα σφι , ἢν δὴ βούλωνταί γε ἐμοὶ ὁμολογέειν , ἀνόρθωσον , ὅσα ἐγὼ ἐνέπρησα " .
Rebuild all their temples which I burnt, if they will make a pact with me.’


8.140A.2
9291
τούτων δὲ ἀπιγμένων ἀναγκαίως ἔχει μοι ποιέειν ταῦτα , ἢν μὴ τὸ ὑμέτερον αἴτιον γένηται .
This is the message, and I must obey it (says Mardonius), unless you take it upon yourselves to hinder me.


8.140A.3
9292
λέγω δὲ ὑμῖν τάδε .
This too I say to you: —


8.140A.3
9293
νῦν τί μαίνεσθε πόλεμον βασιλέι ἀειρόμενοι ;
Why are you so insane as to wage war against the king?


8.140A.3
9294
οὔτε γὰρ ἂν ὑπερβάλοισθε οὔτε οἷοί τε ἐστὲ ἀντέχειν τὸν πάντα χρόνον .
You cannot overcome him, nor can you resist him forever.


8.140A.3
9295
εἴδετε μὲν γὰρ τῆς Ξέρξεω στρατηλασίης τὸ πλῆθος καὶ τὰ ἔργα , πυνθάνεσθε δὲ καὶ τὴν νῦν παρ’ ἐμοὶ ἐοῦσαν δύναμιν ·
As for the multitude of Xerxes' army, what it did, you have seen, and you have heard of the power that I now have with me.


8.140A.3
9296
ὥστε καὶ ἢν ἡμέας ὑπερβάλησθε καὶ νικήσητε , τοῦ περ ὑμῖν οὐδεμία ἐλπὶς εἴ περ εὖ φρονέετε , ἄλλη παρέσται πολλαπλησίη .
Even if you overcome and conquer us (whereof, if you be in your right minds, you can have no hope), yet there will come another host many times as great as this.


8.140A.4
9297
μὴ ὦν βούλεσθε παρισούμενοι βασιλέι στέρεσθαι μὲν τῆς χώρης , θέειν δὲ αἰεὶ περὶ ὑμέων αὐτῶν , ἀλλὰ καταλύσασθε ·
Be not then minded to match yourselves against the king, and thereby lose your land and always be yourselves in jeopardy, but make peace.


8.140A.4
9298
παρέχει δὲ ὑμῖν κάλλιστα καταλύσασθαι , βασιλέος ταύτῃ ὁρμημένου .
This you can most honorably do since the king is that way inclined.


8.140A.4
9299
ἔστε ἐλεύθεροι , ἡμῖν ὁμαιχμίην συνθέμενοι ἄνευ τε δόλου καὶ ἀπάτης " .
Keep your freedom, and agree to be our brothers in arms in all faith and honesty.’


8.140B.1
9300
" Μαρδόνιος μὲν ταῦτα ὦ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐνετείλατό μοι εἰπεῖν πρὸς ὑμέας ·
This Athenians, is the message which Mardonius charges me to give you.


8.140B.1
9301
ἐγὼ δὲ περὶ μὲν εὐνοίης τῆς πρὸς ὑμέας ἐούσης ἐξ ἐμεῦ οὐδὲν λέξω , οὐ γὰρ ἂν νῦν πρῶτον ἐκμάθοιτε , προσχρηίζω δὲ ὑμέων πείθεσθαι Μαρδονίῳ .
For my own part I will say nothing of the goodwill that I have towards you, for it would not be the first that you have learned of that. But I entreat you to follow Mardonius' counsel.


8.140B.2
9302
ἐνορῶ γὰρ ὑμῖν οὐκ οἵοισί τε ἐσομένοισι τὸν πάντα χρόνον πολεμέειν Ξέρξῃ ·
Well I see that you will not have power to wage war against Xerxes forever.


8.140B.2
9303
εἰ γὰρ ἐνώρων τοῦτο ἐν ὑμῖν , οὐκ ἄν κοτε ἐς ὑμέας ἦλθον ἔχων λόγους τούσδε ·
If I saw such power in you, I would never have come to you with such language as this,


8.140B.2
9304
καὶ γὰρ δύναμις ὑπὲρ ἄνθρωπον ἡ βασιλέος ἐστὶ καὶ χεὶρ ὑπερμήκης .
for the king's might is greater than human, and his arm is long.


8.140B.3
9305
ἢν ὦν μὴ αὐτίκα ὁμολογήσητε , μεγάλα προτεινόντων ἐπ’ οἷσι ὁμολογέειν ἐθέλουσι , δειμαίνω ὑπὲρ ὑμέων ἐν τρίβῳ τε μάλιστα οἰκημένων τῶν συμμάχων πάντων αἰεί τε φθειρομένων μούνων , ἐξαίρετον μεταίχμιόν τε τὴν γῆν ἐκτημένων .
If, therefore, you will not straightway agree with them, when the conditions which they offer you are so great, I fear what may befall you. For of all the allies you dwell most in the very path of the war, and you alone will never escape destruction, your country being marked out for a battlefield.


8.140B.4
9306
ἀλλὰ πείθεσθε ·
No, rather follow his counsel,


8.140B.4
9307
πολλοῦ γὰρ ὑμῖν ἄξια ταῦτα , εἰ βασιλεύς γε ὁ μέγας μούνοισι ὑμῖν Ἑλλήνων τὰς ἁμαρτάδας ἀπιεὶς ἐθέλει φίλος γενέσθαι " .
for it is not to be lightly regarded by you who are the only men in  Hellas whose offenses the great king is ready to forgive and whose friend he would be.”


8.141.1
9308
Ἀλέξανδρος μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεξε .
These were the words of Alexander.


8.141.1
9309
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ πυθόμενοι ἥκειν Ἀλέξανδρον ἐς Ἀθήνας ἐς ὁμολογίην ἄξοντα τῷ βαρβάρῳ Ἀθηναίους , ἀναμνησθέντες τῶν λογίων ὥς σφεας χρεόν ἐστι ἅμα τοῖσι ἄλλοισι Δωριεῦσι ἐκπίπτειν ἐκ Πελοποννήσου ὑπὸ Μήδων τε καὶ Ἀθηναίων , κάρτα τε ἔδεισαν μὴ ὁμολογήσωσι τῷ Πέρσῃ Ἀθηναῖοι , αὐτίκα τέ σφι ἔδοξε πέμπειν ἀγγέλους .
The Lacedaemonians, however, had heard that Alexander had come to  Athens to bring the Athenians to an agreement with the barbarian. Remembering the oracles, how that they themselves with the rest of the Dorians must be driven out of the  Peloponnese by the Medes and the Athenians, they were greatly afraid that the Athenians should agree with the Persian, and they straightway resolved that they would send envoys.


8.141.2
9310
καὶ δὴ συνέπιπτε ὥστε ὁμοῦ σφεων γίνεσθαι τὴν κατάστασιν ·
Moreover, it so fell out for both that they made their entry at one and the same time,


8.141.2
9311
ἐπανέμειναν γὰρ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι διατρίβοντες , εὖ ἐπιστάμενοι ὅτι ἔμελλον Λακεδαιμόνιοι πεύσεσθαι ἥκοντα παρὰ τοῦ βαρβάρου ἄγγελον ἐπ’ ὁμολογίῃ , πυθόμενοί τε πέμψειν κατὰ τάχος ἀγγέλους .
for the Athenians delayed and waited for them, being certain that the Lacedaemonians were going to hear that the messenger had come from the Persians for an agreement. They had heard that the Lacedaemonians would send their envoys with all speed.


8.141.2
9312
ἐπίτηδες ὦν ἐποίευν , ἐνδεικνύμενοι τοῖσι Λακεδαιμονίοισι τὴν ἑωυτῶν γνώμην .
Therefore it was of set purpose that they did this in order that they might make their will known to the Lacedaemonians.


8.142.1
9313
ὡς δὲ ἐπαύσατο λέγων Ἀλέξανδρος , διαδεξάμενοι ἔλεγον οἱ ἀπὸ Σπάρτης ἄγγελοι " ἡμέας δὲ ἔπεμψαν Λακεδαιμόνιοι δεησομένους ὑμέων μήτε νεώτερον ποιέειν μηδὲν κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα μήτε λόγους ἐνδέκεσθαι παρὰ τοῦ βαρβάρου .
So when Alexander had made an end of speaking, the envoys from  Sparta said, “We on our part have been sent by the Lacedaemonians to entreat you to do nothing harmful to  Hellas and accept no offer from the barbarian.


8.142.2
9314
οὔτε γὰρ δίκαιον οὐδαμῶς οὔτε κόσμον φέρον οὔτε γε ἄλλοισι Ἑλλήνων οὐδαμοῖσι , ὑμῖν δὲ δὴ καὶ διὰ πάντων ἥκιστα πολλῶν εἵνεκα .
That would be unjust and dishonorable for any Greek, but for you most of all, on many counts;


8.142.2
9315
ἠγείρατε γὰρ τόνδε τὸν πόλεμον ὑμεῖς οὐδὲν ἡμέων βουλομένων , καὶ περὶ τῆς ὑμετέρης ἀρχῆθεν ὁ ἀγὼν ἐγένετο , νῦν δὲ φέρει καὶ ἐς πᾶσαν τὴν Ἑλλάδα ·
it was you who stirred up this war, by no desire of ours, and your territory was first the stake of that battle in which all  Hellas is now engaged.


8.142.3
9316
ἄλλως τε τούτων ἁπάντων αἰτίους γενέσθαι δουλοσύνης τοῖσι Ἕλλησι Ἀθηναίους οὐδαμῶς ἀνασχετόν , οἵτινες αἰεὶ καὶ τὸ πάλαι φαίνεσθε πολλοὺς ἐλευθερώσαντες ἀνθρώπων .
Apart from that, it is unbearable that not all this alone but slavery too should be brought upon the Greeks by you Athenians, who have always been known as givers of freedom to many.


8.142.3
9317
πιεζευμένοισι μέντοι ὑμῖν συναχθόμεθα , καὶ ὅτι καρπῶν ἐστερήθητε διξῶν ἤδη καὶ ὅτι οἰκοφθόρησθε χρόνον ἤδη πολλόν .
Nevertheless, we grieve with you in your afflictions, seeing that you have lost two harvests and your substance has been for a long time wasted.


8.142.4
9318
ἀντὶ τούτων δὲ ὑμῖν Λακεδαιμόνιοί τε καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι ἐπαγγέλλονται γυναῖκάς τε καὶ τὰ ἐς πόλεμον ἄχρηστα οἰκετέων ἐχόμενα πάντα ἐπιθρέψειν , ἔστ’ ἂν ὁ πόλεμος ὅδε συνεστήκῃ .
In requital for this the Lacedaemonians and their allies declare that they will nourish your women and all of your household members who are unserviceable for war, so long as this war will last.


8.142.4
9319
μηδὲ ὑμέας Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Μακεδὼν ἀναγνώσῃ , λεήνας τὸν Μαρδονίου λόγον .
Let not Alexander the Macedonian win you with his smooth-tongued praise of Mardonius' counsel. It is his business to follow that counsel,


8.142.5
9320
τούτῳ μὲν γὰρ ταῦτα ποιητέα ἐστί ·
for as he is a tyrant so must he be the tyrant's fellow-worker;


8.142.5
9321
τύραννος γὰρ ἐὼν τυράννῳ συγκατεργάζεται ·
it is not your business, if you are men rightly minded,


8.142.5
9322
ὑμῖν δὲ οὐ ποιητέα , εἴ περ εὖ τυγχάνετε φρονέοντες , ἐπισταμένοισι ὡς βαρβάροισι ἐστὶ οὔτε πιστὸν οὔτε ἀληθὲς οὐδέν " .
for you know that in foreigners there is no faith nor truth.”


8.142.5
9323
ταῦτα ἔλεξαν οἱ ἄγγελοι .
These are the words of the envoys.


8.143.1
9324
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ πρὸς μὲν Ἀλέξανδρον ὑπεκρίναντο τάδε .
But to Alexander the Athenians replied as follows:


8.143.1
9325
" καὶ αὐτοὶ τοῦτό γε ἐπιστάμεθα ὅτι πολλαπλησίη ἐστὶ τῷ Μήδῳ δύναμις ἤ περ ἡμῖν , ὥστε οὐδὲν δέει τοῦτό γε ὀνειδίζειν .
“We know of ourselves that the power of the Mede is many times greater than ours.


8.143.1
9326
ἀλλ’ ὅμως ἐλευθερίης γλιχόμενοι ἀμυνεύμεθα οὕτω ὅκως ἂν καὶ δυνώμεθα .
There is no need to taunt us with that. Nevertheless in our zeal for freedom we will defend ourselves to the best of our ability.


8.143.1
9327
ὁμολογῆσαι δὲ τῷ βαρβάρῳ μήτε σὺ ἡμέας πειρῶ ἀναπείθειν οὔτε ἡμεῖς πεισόμεθα .
But as regards agreements with the barbarian, do not attempt to persuade us to enter into them, nor will we consent.


8.143.2
9328
νῦν τε ἀπάγγελλε Μαρδονίῳ ὡς Ἀθηναῖοι λέγουσι , ἔστ’ ἂν ὁ ἥλιος τὴν αὐτὴν ὁδὸν ἴῃ τῇ περ καὶ νῦν ἔρχεται , μήκοτε ὁμολογήσειν ἡμέας Ξέρξῃ ·
Now carry this answer back to Mardonius from the Athenians, that as long as the sun holds the course by which he now goes, we will make no agreement with Xerxes.


8.143.2
9329
ἀλλὰ θεοῖσί τε συμμάχοισι πίσυνοί μιν ἐπέξιμεν ἀμυνόμενοι καὶ τοῖσι ἥρωσι , τῶν ἐκεῖνος οὐδεμίαν ὄπιν ἔχων ἐνέπρησε τούς τε οἴκους καὶ τὰ ἀγάλματα .
We will fight against him without ceasing, trusting in the aid of the gods and the heroes whom he has disregarded and burnt their houses and their adornments.


8.143.3
9330
σύ τε τοῦ λοιποῦ λόγους ἔχων τοιούσδε μὴ ἐπιφαίνεο Ἀθηναίοισι , μηδὲ δοκέων χρηστὰ ὑπουργέειν ἀθέμιστα ἔρδειν παραίνεε ·
Come no more to Athenians with such a plea, nor under the semblance of rendering us a service, counsel us to act wickedly.


8.143.3
9331
οὐ γάρ σε βουλόμεθα οὐδὲν ἄχαρι πρὸς Ἀθηναίων παθεῖν ἐόντα πρόξεινόν τε καὶ φίλον " .
For we do not want those who are our friends and protectors to suffer any harm at Athenian hands.”


8.144.1
9332
πρὸς μὲν Ἀλέξανδρον ταῦτα ὑπεκρίναντο , πρὸς δὲ τοὺς ἀπὸ Σπάρτης ἀγγέλους τάδε .
Such was their answer to Alexander, but to the Spartan envoys they said,


8.144.1
9333
" τὸ μὲν δεῖσαι Λακεδαιμονίους μὴ ὁμολογήσωμεν τῷ βαρβάρῳ , κάρτα ἀνθρωπήιον ἦν ·
“It was most human that the Lacedaemonians should fear our making an agreement with the barbarian.


8.144.1
9334
ἀτὰρ αἰσχρῶς γε οἴκατε ἐξεπιστάμενοι τὸ Ἀθηναίων φρόνημα ἀρρωδῆσαι , ὅτι οὔτε χρυσός ἐστι γῆς οὐδαμόθι τοσοῦτος οὔτε χώρη κάλλεϊ καὶ ἀρετῇ μέγα ὑπερφέρουσα , τὰ ἡμεῖς δεξάμενοι ἐθέλοιμεν ἂν μηδίσαντες καταδουλῶσαι τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
We think that it is an ignoble thing to be afraid, especially since we know the Athenian temper to be such that there is nowhere on earth such store of gold or such territory of surpassing fairness and excellence that the gift of it should win us to take the Persian part and enslave  Hellas.


8.144.2
9335
πολλά τε γὰρ καὶ μεγάλα ἐστι τὰ διακωλύοντα ταῦτα μὴ ποιέειν μηδ’ ἢν ἐθέλωμεν , πρῶτα μὲν καὶ μέγιστα τῶν θεῶν τὰ ἀγάλματα καὶ τὰ οἰκήματα ἐμπεπρησμένα τε καὶ συγκεχωσμένα , τοῖσι ἡμέας ἀναγκαίως ἔχει τιμωρέειν ἐς τὰ μέγιστα μᾶλλον ἤ περ ὁμολογέειν τῷ ταῦτα ἐργασαμένῳ , αὖτις δὲ τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν ἐὸν ὅμαιμόν τε καὶ ὁμόγλωσσον καὶ θεῶν ἱδρύματά τε κοινὰ καὶ θυσίαι ἤθεά τε ὁμότροπα , τῶν προδότας γενέσθαι Ἀθηναίους οὐκ ἂν εὖ ἔχοι .
For there are many great reasons why we should not do this, even if we so desired; first and foremost, the burning and destruction of the adornments and temples of our gods, whom we are constrained to avenge to the utmost rather than make pacts with the perpetrator of these things, and next the kinship of all Greeks in blood and speech, and the shrines of gods and the sacrifices that we have in common, and the likeness of our way of life, to all of which it would not befit the Athenians to be false.


8.144.3
9336
ἐπίστασθέ τε οὕτω , εἰ μὴ πρότερον ἐτυγχάνετε ἐπιστάμενοι , ἔστ’ ἂν καὶ εἷς περιῇ Ἀθηναίων , μηδαμὰ ὁμολογήσοντας ἡμέας Ξέρξῃ .
Know this now, if you knew it not before, that as long as one Athenian is left alive we will make no agreement with Xerxes.


8.144.3
9337
ὑμέων μέντοι ἀγάμεθα τὴν προνοίην τὴν πρὸς ἡμέας ἐοῦσαν , ὅτι προείδετε ἡμέων οἰκοφθορημένων οὕτω ὥστε ἐπιθρέψαι ἐθέλειν ἡμέων τοὺς οἰκέτας .
Nevertheless we thank you for your forethought concerning us, in that you have so provided for our wasted state that you offer to nourish our households.


8.144.4
9338
καὶ ὑμῖν μὲν ἡ χάρις ἐκπεπλήρωται , ἡμεῖς μέντοι λιπαρήσομεν οὕτω ὅκως ἂν ἔχωμεν , οὐδὲν λυπέοντες ὑμέας .
For your part, you have given us full measure of kindness, yet for ourselves, we will make shift to endure as best we may, and not be burdensome to you.


8.144.4
9339
νῦν δέ , ὡς οὕτω ἐχόντων , στρατιὴν ὡς τάχιστα ἐκπέμπετε .
But now, seeing that this is so, send your army with all speed,


8.144.5
9340
ὡς γὰρ ἡμεῖς εἰκάζομεν , οὐκ ἑκὰς χρόνου παρέσται ὁ βάρβαρος ἐσβαλὼν ἐς τὴν ἡμετέρην , ἀλλ’ ἐπειδὰν τάχιστα πύθηται τὴν ἀγγελίην ὅτι οὐδὲν ποιήσομεν τῶν ἐκεῖνος ἡμέων προσεδέετο .
for as we guess, the barbarian will be upon us and invade our country in no long time as soon as the message comes to him that we will do nothing that he requires of us;


8.144.5
9341
πρὶν ὦν παρεῖναι ἐκεῖνον ἐς τὴν Ἀττικήν , ἡμέας καιρός ἐστι προβοηθῆσαι ἐς τὴν Βοιωτίην " .
therefore, before he comes into  Attica, now is the time for us to march first into  Boeotia.”


8.144.5
9342
οἳ μὲν ταῦτα ὑποκριναμένων Ἀθηναίων ἀπαλλάσσοντο ἐς Σπάρτην .
At this reply of the Athenians the envoys returned back to  Sparta.



9.1.1
9343
Μαρδόνιος δέ , ὥς οἱ ἀπονοστήσας Ἀλέξανδρος τὰ παρὰ Ἀθηναίων ἐσήμηνε , ὁρμηθεὶς ἐκ Θεσσαλίης ἦγε τὴν στρατιὴν σπουδῇ ἐπὶ τὰς Ἀθήνας .
When Alexander returned and told him what he had heard from the Athenians, Mardonius set forth from  Thessaly and led his army with all zeal against  Athens;


9.1.1
9344
ὅκου δὲ ἑκάστοτε γίνοιτο , τούτους παρελάμβανε .
he also took with him all the people to whose countries he came along the way.


9.1.1
9345
τοῖσι δὲ Θεσσαλίης ἡγεομένοισι οὔτε τὰ πρὸ τοῦ πεπρηγμένα μετέμελε οὐδὲν πολλῷ τε μᾶλλον ἐπῆγον τὸν Πέρσην , καὶ συμπροέπεμψέ τε Θώρηξ ὁ Ληρισαῖος Ξέρξην φεύγοντα καὶ τότε ἐκ τοῦ φανεροῦ παρῆκε Μαρδόνιον ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
The rulers of  Thessaly did not repent of what they had already done and were readier than before to further his march. Thorax of Larissa, who had given Xerxes safe-conduct in his flight, now, without any attempt of concealment, opened a passage for Mardonius into  Hellas.


9.2.1
9346
ἐπεὶ δὲ πορευόμενος γίνεται ὁ στρατὸς ἐν Βοιωτοῖσι , οἱ Θηβαῖοι κατελάμβανον τὸν Μαρδόνιον καὶ συνεβούλευον αὐτῷ λέγοντες ὡς οὐκ εἴη χῶρος ἐπιτηδεότερος ἐνστρατοπεδεύεσθαι ἐκείνου , οὐδὲ ἔων ἰέναι ἑκαστέρω , ἀλλ’ αὐτοῦ ἱζόμενον ποιέειν ὅκως ἀμαχητὶ τὴν πᾶσαν Ἑλλάδα καταστρέψεται .
But when, in the course of its march, the army had come into  Boeotia, the Thebans attempted to stay Mardonius, advising him that he could find no country better fitted than theirs for encampment; he should not (they begged) go further, but rather halt there and subdue all  Hellas without fighting.


9.2.2
9347
κατὰ μὲν γὰρ τὸ ἰσχυρὸν Ἕλληνας ὁμοφρονέοντας , οἵ περ καὶ πάρος τ- αὐτὰ ἐγίνωσκον , χαλεπὰ εἶναι περιγίνεσθαι καὶ ἅπασι ἀνθρώποισι ·
As long as the Greeks who were previously in accord remained so, it would be difficult even for the whole world to overcome them by force of arms;


9.2.2
9348
" εἰ δὲ ποιήσεις τὰ ἡμεῖς παραινέομεν , " ἔφασαν λέγοντες , " ἕξεις ἀπόνως πάντα τὰ ἐκείνων ἰσχυρὰ βουλεύματα ·
“but if you do as we advise,” said the Thebans, “you will without trouble be master of all their battle plans.


9.2.3
9349
πέμπε χρήματα ἐς τοὺς δυναστεύοντας ἄνδρας ἐν τῇσι πόλισι , πέμπων δὲ τὴν Ἑλλάδα διαστήσεις ·
Send money to the men who have power in their cities, and thereby you will divide  Hellas against itself;


9.2.3
9350
ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ τοὺς μὴ τὰ σὰ φρονέοντας ῥηιδίως μετὰ τῶν στασιωτέων καταστρέψεαι " .
after that, with your partisans to aid you, you will easily subdue those who are your adversaries.”


9.3.1
9351
οἳ μὲν ταῦτα συνεβούλευον , ὁ δὲ οὐκ ἐπείθετο , ἀλλά οἱ δεινὸς ἐνέστακτο ἵμερος τὰς Ἀθήνας δεύτερα ἑλεῖν , ἅμα μὲν ὑπ’ ἀγνωμοσύνης , ἅμα δὲ πυρσοῖσι διὰ νήσων ἐδόκεε βασιλέι δηλώσειν ἐόντι ἐν Σάρδισι ὅτι ἔχοι Ἀθήνας ·
Such was their counsel, but he would not follow it. What he desired was to take  Athens once more; this was partly out of mere perversity, and partly because he intended to signify to the king at  Sardis by a line of beacons across the islands that he held  Athens.


9.3.2
9352
ὃς οὐδὲ τότε ἀπικόμενος ἐς τὴν Ἀττικὴν εὗρε τοὺς Ἀθηναίους , ἀλλ’ ἔν τε Σαλαμῖνι τοὺς πλείστους ἐπυνθάνετο εἶναι ἔν τε τῇσι νηυσί , αἱρέει τε ἔρημον τὸ ἄστυ .
When he came to  Attica, however, he found the city as unpopulated as before, for, as he learned, the majority of them were on shipboard at  Salamis. So he took the city, but without any of its men.


9.3.2
9353
ἡ δὲ βασιλέος αἵρεσις ἐς τὴν ὑστέρην τὴν Μαρδονίου ἐπιστρατηίην δεκάμηνος ἐγένετο .
There were ten months between the kings taking of the place and the later invasion of Mardonius.


9.4.1
9354
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐν Ἀθήνῃσι ἐγένετο ὁ Μαρδόνιος , πέμπει ἐς Σαλαμῖνα Μουρυχίδην ἄνδρα Ἑλλησπόντιον φέροντα τοὺς αὐτοὺς λόγους τοὺς καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Μακεδὼν τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι διεπόρθμευσε .
When Mardonius came to  Athens, he sent to  Salamis a certain Murychides, a man from  Hellespont, bearing the same offer as Alexander the Macedonian had ferried across to the Athenians.


9.4.2
9355
ταῦτα δὲ τὸ δεύτερον ἀπέστελλε προέχων μὲν τῶν Ἀθηναίων οὐ φιλίας γνώμας , ἐλπίζων δὲ σφέας ὑπήσειν τῆς ἀγνωμοσύνης , ὡς δοριαλώτου ἐούσης τῆς Ἀττικῆς χώρης καὶ ἐούσης ὑπ’ ἑωυτῷ .
He sent this for the second time because although he already knew the Athenians' unfriendly purpose, he expected that they would abandon their stubbornness now that  Attica was the captive of his spear and lay at his mercy.


9.5.1
9356
τούτων μὲν εἵνεκα ἀπέπεμψε Μουρυχίδην ἐς Σαλαμῖνα , ὁ δὲ ἀπικόμενος ἐπὶ τὴν βουλὴν ἔλεγε τὰ παρὰ Μαρδονίου .
For this reason he sent Murychides to  Salamis who came before the council and conveyed to them Mardonius' message.


9.5.1
9357
τῶν δὲ βουλευτέων Λυκίδης εἶπε γνώμην ὡς ἐδόκεε ἄμεινον εἶναι δεξαμένους τὸν λόγον , τόν σφι Μουρυχίδης προφέρει , ἐξενεῖκαι ἐς τὸν δῆμον .
Then Lycidas, one of the councillors, said that it seemed best to him to receive the offer brought to them by Murychides and lay it before the people. This was the opinion which he declared, either because he had been bribed by Mardonius, or because the plan pleased him.


9.5.2
9358
ὃ μὲν δὴ ταύτην τὴν γνώμην ἀπεφαίνετο , εἴτε δὴ δεδεγμένος χρήματα παρὰ Μαρδονίου , εἴτε καὶ ταῦτά οἱ ἑάνδανε ·
The Athenians in the council were, however, very angry; so too were those outside when they heard of it.


9.5.2
9359
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ αὐτίκα δεινὸν ποιησάμενοι οἵ τε ἐκ τῆς βουλῆς καὶ οἱ ἔξωθεν ὡς ἐπύθοντο , περιστάντες Λυκίδην κατέλευσαν βάλλοντες , τὸν δὲ Ἑλλησπόντιον Μουρυχίδην ἀπέπεμψαν ἀσινέα .
They made a ring round Lycidas and stoned him to death. Murychides the Hellespontian, however, they permitted to depart unharmed.


9.5.3
9360
γενομένου δὲ θορύβου ἐν τῇ Σαλαμῖνι περὶ τὸν Λυκίδην , πυνθάνονται τὸ γινόμενον αἱ γυναῖκες τῶν Ἀθηναίων , διακελευσαμένη δὲ γυνὴ γυναικὶ καὶ παραλαβοῦσα ἐπὶ τὴν Λυκίδεω οἰκίην ἤισαν αὐτοκελέες , καὶ κατὰ μὲν ἔλευσαν αὐτοῦ τὴν γυναῖκα κατὰ δὲ τὰ τέκνα .
There was much noise at  Salamis over the business of Lycidas; and when the Athenian women learned what was afoot, one calling to another and bidding her follow, they went on their own impetus to the house of Lycidas and stoned to death his wife and his children.


9.6.1
9361
ἐς δὲ τὴν Σαλαμῖνα διέβησαν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ὧδε .
Now this was how the Athenians had crossed over to  Salamis.


9.6.1
9362
ἕως μὲν προσεδέκοντο ἐκ τῆς Πελοποννήσου στρατὸν ἥξειν τιμωρήσοντά σφι , οἳ δὲ ἔμενον ἐν τῇ Ἀττικῇ ·
As long as they expected that the Peloponnesian army would come to their aid, they remained in  Attica.


9.6.1
9363
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἳ μὲν μακρότερα καὶ σχολαίτερα ἐποίεον , ὁ δὲ ἐπιὼν καὶ δὴ ἐν τῇ Βοιωτίῃ ἐλέγετο εἶναι , οὕτω δὴ ὑπεξεκομίσαντό τε πάντα καὶ αὐτοὶ διέβησαν ἐς Σαλαμῖνα , ἐς Λακεδαίμονά τε ἔπεμπον ἀγγέλους ἅμα μὲν μεμψομένους τοῖσι Λακεδαιμονίοισι ὅτι περιεῖδον ἐμβαλόντα τὸν βάρβαρον ἐς τὴν Ἀττικὴν ἀλλ’ οὐ μετὰ σφέων ἠντίασαν ἐς τὴν Βοιωτίην , ἅμα δὲ ὑπομνήσοντας ὅσα σφι ὑπέσχετο ὁ Πέρσης μεταβαλοῦσι δώσειν , προεῖπαί τε ὅτι εἰ μὴ ἀμυνεῦσι Ἀθηναίοισι , ὡς καὶ αὐτοί τινα ἀλεωρὴν εὑρήσονται .
But when the Peloponnesians took longer and longer to act and the invader was said to be in  Boeotia already, they then conveyed all their goods out of harm's way and themselves crossed over to  Salamis. They also sent envoys to  Lacedaemon, who were to upbraid the Lacedaemonians for permitting the barbarian to invade  Attica and not helping the Athenians to meet him in  Boeotia; and who were to remind the Lacedaemonians of the promises which the Persian had made to  Athens if she would change sides, and warn them that the Athenians would devise some means of salvation for themselves if the Lacedaemonians sent them no help.


9.7.1
9364
οἱ γὰρ δὴ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὅρταζόν τε τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον καί σφι ἦν Ὑακίνθια , περὶ πλείστου δ’ ἦγον τὰ τοῦ θεοῦ πορσύνειν ·
The Lacedaemonians were at this time celebrating the festival of Hyacinthus, and their chief concern was to give the god his due;


9.7.1
9365
ἅμα δὲ τὸ τεῖχός σφι , τὸ ἐν τῷ Ἰσθμῷ ἐτείχεον , καὶ ἤδη ἐπάλξις ἐλάμβανε .
moreover, the wall which they were building on the Isthmus was by now getting its battlements.


9.7.1
9366
ὡς δὲ ἀπίκοντο ἐς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα οἱ ἄγγελοι οἱ ἀπ’ Ἀθηνέων , ἅμα ἀγόμενοι ἔκ τε Μεγάρων ἀγγέλους καὶ ἐκ Πλαταιέων , ἔλεγον τάδε ἐπελθόντες ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐφόρους .
When the Athenian envoys arrived in  Lacedaemon, bringing with them envoys from  Megara and  Plataea, they came before the ephors and said:


9.7A.1
9367
" ἔπεμψαν ἡμέας Ἀθηναῖοι λέγοντες ὅτι ἡμῖν βασιλεὺς ὁ Μήδων τοῦτο μὲν τὴν χώρην ἀποδιδοῖ , τοῦτο δὲ συμμάχους ἐθέλει ἐπ’ ἴσῃ τε καὶ ὁμοίῃ ποιήσασθαι ἄνευ τε δόλου καὶ ἀπάτης , ἐθέλει δὲ καὶ ἄλλην χώρην πρὸς τῇ ἡμετέρῃ διδόναι , τὴν ἂν αὐτοὶ ἑλώμεθα .
“The Athenians have sent us with this message: the king of the Medes is ready to give us back our country, and to make us his confederates, equal in right and standing, in all honor and honesty, and to give us whatever land we ourselves may choose besides our own.


9.7A.2
9368
ἡμεῖς δὲ Δία τε Ἑλλήνιον αἰδεσθέντες καὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα δεινὸν ποιεύμενοι προδοῦναι οὐ καταινέσαμεν ἀλλ’ ἀπειπάμεθα , καίπερ ἀδικεόμενοι ὑπ’ Ἑλλήνων καὶ καταπροδιδόμενοι , ἐπιστάμενοί τε ὅτι κερδαλεώτερον ἐστὶ ὁμολογέειν τῷ Πέρσῃ μᾶλλον ἤ περ πολεμέειν ·
But we, since we do not want to sin against Zeus the god of  Hellas and think it shameful to betray  Hellas, have not consented.


9.7A.2
9369
οὐ μὲν οὐδὲ ὁμολογήσομεν ἑκόντες εἶναι .
This we have done despite the fact that the Greeks are dealing with us wrongfully and betraying us to our hurt;


9.7A.2
9370
καὶ τὸ μὲν ἀπ’ ἡμέων οὕτω ἀκίβδηλον νέμεται ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἕλληνας " ·
furthermore, we know that it is more to our advantage to make terms with the Persians than to wage war with him, yet we will not make terms with him of our own free will. For our part, we act honestly by the Greeks;


9.7B.1
9371
" ὑμεῖς δὲ ἐς πᾶσαν ἀρρωδίην τότε ἀπικόμενοι μὴ ὁμολογήσωμεν τῷ Πέρσῃ , ἐπείτε ἐξεμάθετε τὸ ἡμέτερον φρόνημα σαφέως , ὅτι οὐδαμὰ προδώσομεν τὴν Ἑλλάδα , καὶ διότι τεῖχος ὑμῖν διὰ τοῦ Ἰσθμοῦ ἐλαυνόμενον ἐν τέλεϊ ἐστί , καὶ δὴ λόγον οὐδένα τῶν Ἀθηναίων ποιέεσθε , συνθέμενοί τε ἡμῖν τὸν Πέρσην ἀντιώσεσθαι ἐς τὴν Βοιωτίην προδεδώκατε , περιείδετέ τε προεσβαλόντα ἐς τὴν Ἀττικὴν τὸν βάρβαρον .
but what of you, who once were in great dread lest we should make terms with the Persian? Now that you have a clear idea of our sentiments and are sure that we will never betray  Hellas, and now that the wall which you are building across the Isthmus is nearly finished, you take no account of the Athenians, but have deserted us despite all your promises that you would withstand the Persian in  Boeotia, and have permitted the barbarian to march into  Attica.


9.7B.2
9372
ἐς μέν νυν τὸ παρεὸν Ἀθηναῖοι ὑμῖν μηνίουσι ·
For the present, then, the Athenians are angry with you


9.7B.2
9373
οὐ γὰρ ἐποιήσατε ἐπιτηδέως .
since you have acted in a manner unworthy of you.


9.7B.2
9374
νῦν δὲ ὅτι τάχος στρατιὴν ἅμα ἡμῖν ἐκέλευσαν ὑμέας ἐκπέμπειν , ὡς ἂν τὸν βάρβαρον δεκώμεθα ἐν τῇ Ἀττικῇ ·
Now they ask you to send with us an army with all speed, so that we may await the foreigner's onset in  Attica;


9.7B.2
9375
ἐπειδὴ γὰρ ἡμάρτομεν τῆς Βοιωτίης , τῆς γε ἡμετέρης ἐπιτηδεότατον ἐστὶ μαχέσασθαι τὸ Θριάσιον πεδίον " .
since we have lost  Boeotia, in our own territory the most suitable place for a battle is the Thriasian plain.”


9.8.1
9376
ὡς δὲ ἄρα ἤκουσαν οἱ ἔφοροι ταῦτα , ἀνεβάλλοντο ἐς τὴν ὑστεραίην ὑποκρίνασθαι , τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίῃ ἐς τὴν ἑτέρην ·
When the ephors heard that, they delayed answering till the next day, and again till the day after.


9.8.1
9377
τοῦτο καὶ ἐπὶ δέκα ἡμέρας ἐποίεον , ἐξ ἡμέρης ἐς ἡμέρην ἀναβαλλόμενοι .
This they did for ten days, putting it off from day to day.


9.8.1
9378
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ τὸν Ἰσθμὸν ἐτείχεον σπουδὴν ἔχοντες πολλὴν πάντες Πελοποννήσιοι , καί σφι ἦν πρὸς τέλεϊ .
In the meantime all the Peloponnesians were doing all they could to fortify the Isthmus, and they had nearly completed the task.


9.8.2
9379
οὐδ’ ἔχω εἰπεῖν τὸ αἴτιον διότι ἀπικομένου μὲν Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ Μακεδόνος ἐς Ἀθήνας σπουδὴν μεγάλην ἐποιήσαντο μὴ μηδίσαι Ἀθηναίους , τότε δὲ ὤρην ἐποιήσαντο οὐδεμίαν , ἄλλο γε ἢ ὅτι ὁ Ἰσθμός σφι ἐτετείχιστο καὶ ἐδόκεον Ἀθηναίων ἔτι δεῖσθαι οὐδέν ·
I cannot say for certain why it was that when Alexander the Macedonian came to  Athens the Lacedaemonians insisted that the Athenians should not join the side of the Persian, yet now took no account of that;


9.8.2
9380
ὅτε δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ἀπίκετο ἐς τὴν Ἀττικήν , οὔκω ἀπετετείχιστο , ἐργάζοντο δὲ μεγάλως καταρρωδηκότες τοὺς Πέρσας .
it may be that with the Isthmus fortified, they thought they had no more need of the Athenians, whereas when Alexander came to  Attica, their wall was not yet built and they were working at this in great fear of the Persians.


9.9.1
9381
τέλος δὲ τῆς τε ὑποκρίσιος καὶ ἐξόδου τῶν Σπαρτιητέων ἐγένετο τρόπος τοιόσδε .
The nature of their response was as follows: on the day before the final hearing of the Athenian delegation, Chileus, a man of  Tegea, who had more authority with the Lacedaemonians than any other of their guests,


9.9.1
9382
τῇ προτεραίῃ τῆς ὑστάτης καταστάσιος μελλούσης ἔσεσθαι Χίλεος ἀνὴρ Τεγεήτης , δυνάμενος ἐν Λακεδαίμονι μέγιστον ξείνων , τῶν ἐφόρων ἐπύθετο πάντα λόγον τὸν δὴ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἔλεγον ·
learned from the ephors all that the Athenians had said.


9.9.1
9383
ἀκούσας δὲ ὁ Χίλεος ἔλεγε ἄρα σφι τάδε .
Upon hearing this he, as the tale goes, said to the ephors,


9.9.2
9384
" οὕτω ἔχει , ἄνδρες ἔφοροι ·
This is the situation, Ephors:


9.9.2
9385
Ἀθηναίων ἡμῖν ἐόντων μὴ ἀρθμίων τῷ δὲ βαρβάρῳ συμμάχων , καίπερ τείχεος διὰ τοῦ Ἰσθμοῦ ἐληλαμένου καρτεροῦ , μεγάλαι κλισιάδες ἀναπεπτέαται ἐς τὴν Πελοπόννησον τῷ Πέρσῃ .
If the Athenians are our enemies and the barbarians allies, then although you push a strong wall across the Isthmus, a means of access into the  Peloponnese lies wide open for the Persian.


9.9.2
9386
ἀλλ’ ἐσακούσατε , πρίν τι ἄλλο Ἀθηναίοισι δόξαι σφάλμα φέρον τῇ Ἑλλάδι " .
No, give heed to what they say before the Athenians take some new resolve which will bring calamity to  Hellas.”


9.10.1
9387
ὃ μέν σφι ταῦτα συνεβούλευε ·
This was the counsel he gave the ephors, who straightway took it to heart.


9.10.1
9388
οἳ δὲ φρενὶ λαβόντες τὸν λόγον αὐτίκα , φράσαντες οὐδὲν τοῖσι ἀγγέλοισι τοῖσι ἀπιγμένοισι ἀπὸ τῶν πολίων , νυκτὸς ἔτι ἐκπέμπουσι πεντακισχιλίους Σπαρτιητέων καὶ ἑπτὰ περὶ ἕκαστον τάξαντες τῶν εἱλώτων , Παυσανίῃ τῷ Κλεομβρότου ἐπιτάξαντες ἐξάγειν .
Without saying a word to the envoys who had come from the cities, they ordered five thousand Spartans to march before dawn.


9.10.2
9389
ἐγίνετο μὲν ἡ ἡγεμονίη Πλειστάρχου τοῦ Λεωνίδεω ·
Seven helots were appointed to attend each of them, and they gave the command to Pausanias son of Cleombrotus.


9.10.2
9390
ἀλλ’ ὃ μὲν ἦν ἔτι παῖς , ὁ δὲ τούτου ἐπίτροπός τε καὶ ἀνεψιός .
The leader's place rightfully belonged to Pleistarchus son of Leonidas, but he was still a boy, and Pausanias his guardian and cousin.


9.10.2
9391
Κλεόμβροτος γὰρ ὁ Παυσανίεω μὲν πατὴρ Ἀναξανδρίδεω δὲ παῖς οὐκέτι περιῆν , ἀλλ’ ἀπαγαγὼν ἐκ τοῦ Ἰσθμοῦ τὴν στρατιὴν τὴν τὸ τεῖχος δείμασαν μετὰ ταῦτα οὐ πολλὸν χρόνον τινὰ βιοὺς ἀπέθανε .
Cleombrotus, Pausanias' father and Anaxandrides' son, was no longer living.


9.10.3
9392
ἀπῆγε δὲ τὴν στρατιὴν ὁ Κλεόμβροτος ἐκ τοῦ Ἰσθμοῦ διὰ τόδε ·
After he led the army which had built the wall away from the Isthmus, he lived but a little while before his death.


9.10.3
9393
θυομένῳ οἱ ἐπὶ τῷ Πέρσῃ ὁ ἥλιος ἀμαυρώθη ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ .
The reason for Cleombrotus leading his army away from the Isthmus was that while he was offering sacrifice for victory over the Persian, the sun was darkened in the heavens.


9.10.3
9394
προσαιρέεται δὲ ἑωυτῷ Παυσανίης Εὐρυάνακτα τὸν Δωριέος , ἄνδρα οἰκίης ἐόντα τῆς αὐτῆς .
Pausanias chose as his colleague a man of the same family, Euryanax son of Dorieus.


9.11.1
9395
οἳ μὲν δὴ σὺν Παυσανίῃ ἐξεληλύθεσαν ἔξω Σπάρτης ·
So Pausanias' army had marched away from  Sparta;


9.11.1
9396
οἱ δὲ ἄγγελοι , ὡς ἡμέρη ἐγεγόνεε , οὐδὲν εἰδότες περὶ τῆς ἐξόδου ἐπῆλθον ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐφόρους , ἐν νόῳ δὴ ἔχοντες ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐπὶ τὴν ἑωυτοῦ ἕκαστος ·
but as soon as it was day, the envoys came before the ephors, having no knowledge of the expedition, and being minded themselves too to depart each one to his own place.


9.11.1
9397
ἐπελθόντες δὲ ἔλεγον τάδε .
When they arrived they said:


9.11.1
9398
" ὑμεῖς μὲν , ὦ Λακεδαιμόνιοι αὐτοῦ τῇδε μένοντες Ὑακίνθιά τε ἄγετε καὶ παίζετε , καταπροδόντες τοὺς συμμάχους ·
 “You Lacedaemonians,”  “remain where you are, observing your Hyacinthia and celebrating, leaving your allies deserted.


9.11.1
9399
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ὡς ἀδικεόμενοι ὑπὸ ὑμέων χήτεΐ τε συμμάχων καταλύσονται τῷ Πέρσῃ οὕτω ὅκως ἄν δύνωνται ·
For the wrong that you do them and for lack of allies, the Athenians, will make their peace with the Persian as best they can.


9.11.2
9400
καταλυσάμενοι δέ , δῆλα γὰρ ὅτι σύμμαχοι βασιλέος γινόμεθα , συστρατευσόμεθα ἐπ’ ἣν ἂν ἐκεῖνοι ἐξηγέωνται .
and thereafter, in so far as we will be king's allies, we will march with him against whatever land his men lead us.


9.11.2
9401
ὑμεῖς δὲ τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν μαθήσεσθε ὁκοῖον ἄν τι ὑμῖν ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἐκβαίνῃ " .
Then will you learn what the issue of this matter will be for you.”


9.11.2
9402
ταῦτα λεγόντων τῶν ἀγγέλων , οἱ ἔφοροι εἶπαν ἐπ’ ὅρκου καὶ δὴ δοκέειν εἶναι ἐν Ὀρεσθείῳ στείχοντας ἐπὶ τοὺς ξείνους .
In response to this the ephors swore to them that they believed their army to be even now at Orestheum, marching against the “strangers.”


9.11.2
9403
ξείνους γὰρ ἐκάλεον τοὺς βαρβάρους .
For they called the barbarians “strangers.


9.11.3
9404
οἳ δὲ ὡς οὐκ εἰδότες ἐπειρώτων τὸ λεγόμενον , ἐπειρόμενοι δὲ ἐξέμαθον πᾶν τὸ ἐόν , ὥστε ἐν θώματι γενόμενοι ἐπορεύοντο τὴν ταχίστην διώκοντες ·
Having no knowledge of this, the envoys questioned them further as to the meaning of this and thereby learned the whole truth;


9.11.3
9405
σὺν δέ σφι τῶν περιοίκων Λακεδαιμονίων λογάδες πεντακισχίλιοι ὁπλῖται τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἐποίεον .
they marvelled at this and hastened with all speed after the army. With them went five thousand men-at-arms of the Lacedaemonian countrymen.


9.12.1
9406
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν ἠπείγοντο ·
So they made haste to reach the Isthmus.


9.12.1
9407
Ἀργεῖοι δὲ ἐπείτε τάχιστα ἐπύθοντο τοὺς μετὰ Παυσανίεω ἐξεληλυθότας ἐκ Σπάρτης , πέμπουσι κήρυκα τῶν ἡμεροδρόμων ἀνευρόντες τὸν ἄριστον ἐς τὴν Ἀττικήν , πρότερον αὐτοὶ Μαρδονίῳ ὑποδεξάμενοι σχήσειν τὸν Σπαρτιήτην μὴ ἐξιέναι ·
The Argives, however, had already promised Mardonius that they would prevent the Spartans from going out to war.


9.12.2
9408
ὃς ἐπείτε ἀπίκετο ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας ἔλεγε τάδε .
As soon as they were informed that Pausanias and his army had departed from Sparta, they sent as their herald to Attica the swiftest runner of long distances whom they could find.


9.12.2
9409
" Μαρδόνιε , ἔπεμψάν με Ἀργεῖοι φράσοντά τοι ὅτι ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος ἐξελήλυθε ἡ νεότης , καὶ ὡς οὐ δυνατοὶ αὐτὴν ἔχειν εἰσὶ Ἀργεῖοι μὴ οὐκ ἐξιέναι .
When he came to Athens, he spoke to Mardonius in the following manner: “I have been sent by the Argives to tell you that the young men have gone out from Lacedaemon to war, and that the Argives cannot prevent them from so doing;


9.12.2
9410
πρὸς ταῦτα τύγχανε εὖ βουλευόμενος " .
therefore, make plans accordingly.”


9.13.1
9411
ὃ μὲν δὴ εἴπας ταῦτα ἀπαλλάσσετο ὀπίσω , Μαρδόνιος δὲ οὐδαμῶς ἔτι πρόθυμος ἦν μένειν ἐν τῇ Ἀττικῇ , ὡς ἤκουσε ταῦτα .
So spoke the herald, and went back again. When Mardonius heard that, he no longer desired to remain in Attica.


9.13.1
9412
πρὶν μέν νυν ἢ πυθέσθαι ἀνεκώχευε , θέλων εἰδέναι τὸ παρ’ Ἀθηναίων , ὁκοῖόν τι ποιήσουσι , καὶ οὔτε ἐπήμαινε οὔτε ἐσίνετο γῆν τὴν Ἀττικήν , ἐλπίζων διὰ παντὸς τοῦ χρόνου ὁμολογήσειν σφέας ·
Before he had word of it, he had held his land, desiring to know the Athenians' plan and what they would do; he neither harmed nor harried the land of Attica, for he still supposed that they would make terms with him.


9.13.2
9413
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐκ ἔπειθε , πυθόμενος πάντα λόγον , πρὶν ἢ τοὺς μετὰ Παυσανίεω ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν ἐσβαλεῖν , ὑπεξεχώρεε ἐμπρήσας τε τὰς Ἀθήνας , καὶ εἴ κού τι ὀρθὸν ἦν τῶν τειχέων ἢ τῶν οἰκημάτων ἢ τῶν ἱρῶν , πάντα καταβαλὼν καὶ συγχώσας .
But when he could not prevail upon them and learned the truth of the matter, he withdrew before Pausanias' army prior to its entering the Isthmus. First, however, he burnt  Athens, and utterly overthrew and demolished whatever wall or house or temple was left standing.


9.13.3
9414
ἐξήλαυνε δὲ τῶνδε εἵνεκεν , ὅτι οὔτε ἱππασίμη ἡ χώρη ἦν ἡ Ἀττική , εἴ τε νικῷτο συμβαλών , ἀπάλλαξις οὐκ ἦν ὅτι μὴ κατὰ στεινόν , ὥστε ὀλίγους σφέας ἀνθρώπους ἴσχειν .
The reason for his marching away was that Attica was not a land fit for horses, and if he should be defeated in a battle, there was no way of retreat save one so narrow that a few men could prevent his passage.


9.13.3
9415
ἐβουλεύετο ὦν ἐπαναχωρήσας ἐς τὰς Θήβας συμβαλεῖν πρὸς πόλι τε φιλίῃ καὶ χώρῃ ἱππασίμῳ .
He therefore planned to retreat to Thebes and do battle where he had a friendly city at his back and ground suitable for horsemen.


9.14.1
9416
Μαρδόνιος μὲν δὴ ὑπεξεχώρεε , ἤδη δὲ ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ ἐόντι αὐτῷ ἦλθε ἀγγελίη πρόδρομον ἄλλην στρατιὴν ἥκειν ἐς Μέγαρα , Λακεδαιμονίων χιλίους ·
So Mardonius drew his men off, and when he had now set forth on his road there came a message that in addition to the others, an advance guard of a thousand Lacedaemonians had arrived at Megara.


9.14.1
9417
πυθόμενος δὲ ταῦτα ἐβουλεύετο θέλων εἴ κως τούτους πρῶτον ἕλοι .
When he heard this, he deliberated how he might first make an end of these.


9.14.1
9418
ὑποστρέψας δὲ τὴν στρατιὴν ἦγε ἐπὶ τὰ Μέγαρα ·
He accordingly turned about and led his army against Megara,


9.14.1
9419
ἡ δὲ ἵππος προελθοῦσα κατιππάσατο χώρην τὴν Μεγαρίδα .
his cavalry going first and overrunning the lands of that city.


9.14.1
9420
ἐς ταύτην δὴ ἑκαστάτω τῆς Εὐρώπης τὸ πρὸς ἡλίου δύνοντος ἡ Περσικὴ αὕτη στρατιὴ ἀπίκετο .
That was the westernmost place in Europe which this Persian army reached.


9.15.1
9421
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Μαρδονίῳ ἦλθε ἀγγελίη ὡς ἁλέες εἴησαν οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐν τῷ Ἰσθμῷ .
Presently there came a message to Mardonius that the Greeks were gathered together on the Isthmus.


9.15.1
9422
οὕτω δὴ ὀπίσω ἐπορεύετο διὰ Δεκελέης ·
Thereupon he marched back again through Decelea;


9.15.1
9423
οἱ γὰρ βοιωτάρχαι μετεπέμψαντο τοὺς προσχώρους τῶν Ἀσωπίων , οὗτοι δὲ αὐτῷ τὴν ὁδὸν ἡγέοντο ἐς Σφενδαλέας , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ἐς Τάναγραν ·
the rulers of Boeotia sent for those of the Asopus country who lived nearby, and these guided him to Sphendalae and from there to Tanagra.


9.15.2
9424
ἐν Τανάγρῃ δὲ νύκτα ἐναυλισάμενος , καὶ τραπόμενος τῇ ὑστεραίῃ ἐς Σκῶλον ἐν γῇ τῇ Θηβαίων ἦν .
Having camped in Tanagra for the night, and on the next day he turned from there to Scolus, where he was in Theban territory.


9.15.2
9425
ἐνθαῦτα δὲ τῶν Θηβαίων καίπερ μηδιζόντων ἔκειρε τοὺς χώρους , οὔτι κατὰ ἔχθος αὐτῶν ἀλλ’ ὑπ’ ἀναγκαίης μεγάλης ἐχόμενος ἔρυμά τε τῷ στρατῷ ποιήσασθαι , καὶ ἢν συμβαλόντι οἱ μὴ ἐκβαίνῃ ὁκοῖόν τι ἐθέλοι , κρησφύγετον τοῦτο ἐποιέετο .
There he laid waste the lands of the Thebans, though they sided with the Persian part. This he did, not for any ill-will that he bore them, but because sheer necessity drove him to make a stronghold for his army and to have this for a refuge if the fortune of battle were other than he wished.


9.15.3
9426
παρῆκε δὲ αὐτοῦ τὸ στρατόπεδον ἀρξάμενον ἀπὸ Ἐρυθρέων παρὰ Ὑσιάς , κατέτεινε δὲ ἐς τὴν Πλαταιίδα γῆν , παρὰ τὸν Ἀσωπὸν ποταμὸν τεταγμένον .
His army, stationed along the Asopus river, covered the ground from Erythrae past Hysiae and up to the lands of Plataea.


9.15.3
9427
οὐ μέντοι τό γε τεῖχος τοσοῦτο ἐποιέετο , ἁλλ’ ὡς ἐπὶ δέκα σταδίους μάλιστά κῃ μέτωπον ἕκαστον .
I do not mean to say that the walled camp which he made was of this size; each side of it was of a length of about ten furlongs.


9.16.1
9428
ἐχόντων δὲ τὸν πόνον τοῦτον τῶν βαρβάρων , Ἀτταγῖνος ὁ Φρύνωνος ἀνὴρ Θηβαῖος παρασκευασάμενος μεγάλως ἐκάλεε ἐπὶ ξείνια αὐτόν τε Μαρδόνιον καὶ πεντήκοντα Περσέων τοὺς λογιμωτάτους , κληθέντες δὲ οὗτοι εἵποντο ·
While the barbarians were engaged in this task, Attaginus son of Phrynon, a Theban, made great preparations and invited Mardonius with fifty who were the most notable of the Persians to be his guests at a banquet.


9.16.1
9429
ἦν δὲ τὸ δεῖπνον ποιεύμενον ἐν Θήβῃσι .
They came as they were bidden; the dinner was held at Thebes.


9.16.1
9430
τάδε δὲ ἤδη τὰ ἐπίλοιπα ἤκουον Θερσάνδρου ἀνδρὸς μὲν Ὀρχομενίου , λογίμου δὲ ἐς τὰ πρῶτα ἐν Ὀρχομενῷ .
What follows was told me by Thersander of Orchomenus, one of the most notable men of that place.


9.16.1
9431
ἔφη δὲ ὁ Θέρσανδρος κληθῆναι καὶ αὐτὸς ὑπὸ Ἀτταγίνου ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον τοῦτο , κληθῆναι δὲ καὶ Θηβαίων ἄνδρας πεντήκοντα , καί σφεων οὐ χωρὶς ἑκατέρους κλῖναι , ἀλλὰ Πέρσην τε καὶ Θηβαῖον ἐν κλίνῃ ἑκάστῃ .
Thersander too (he said) was invited to this dinner, and fifty Thebans in addition. Attaginus made them sit, not each man by himself but on each couch a Persian and a Theban together.


9.16.2
9432
ὡς δὲ ἀπὸ δείπνου ἦσαν , διαπινόντων τὸν Πέρσην τὸν ὁμόκλινον Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν ἱέντα εἰρέσθαι αὐτὸν ὁποδαπός ἐστι , αὐτὸς δὲ ὑποκρίνασθαι ὡς εἴη Ὀρχομένιος .
Now as they were drinking together after dinner, the Persian who sat with him asked Thersander in the Greek tongue from what country he was.


9.16.2
9433
τὸν δὲ εἰπεῖν " ἐπεὶ νῦν ὁμοτράπεζός τέ μοι καὶ ὁμόσπονδος ἐγένεο , μνημόσυνά τοι γνώμης τῆς ἐμῆς καταλιπέσθαι θέλω , ἵνα καὶ προειδὼς αὐτὸς περὶ σεωυτοῦ βουλεύεσθαι ἔχῃς τὰ συμφέροντα .
Thersander answered that he was from Orchomenus. Then said the Persian: “Since you have eaten at the board with me and drunk with me afterwards, I would like to leave a memorial of my belief, so that you yourself may have such knowledge as to take fitting counsel for your safety.


9.16.3
9434
ὁρᾷς τούτους τοὺς δαινυμένους Πέρσας καὶ τὸν στρατὸν τὸν ἐλίπομεν ἐπὶ τῷ ποταμῷ στρατοπεδευόμενον ·
Do you see these Persians at the banquet and that host which we left encamped by the river side?


9.16.3
9435
τούτων πάντων ὄψεαι ὀλίγου τινὸς χρόνου διελθόντος ὀλίγους τινὰς τοὺς περιγενομένους " .
In a little while you shall see but a small remnant left alive of all these.”


9.16.3
9436
ταῦτα ἅμα τε τὸν Πέρσην λέγειν καὶ μετιέναι πολλὰ τῶν δακρύων .
As he said this, the Persian wept bitterly.


9.16.4
9437
αὐτὸς δὲ θωμάσας τὸν λόγον εἰπεῖν πρὸς αὐτὸν " οὐκῶν Μαρδονίῳ τε ταῦτα χρεόν ἐστι λέγειν καὶ τοῖσι μετ’ ἐκεῖνον ἐν αἴνῃ ἐοῦσι Περσέων " ;
Marvelling at these words, Thersander answered: “Must you not then tell this to Mardonius and those honorable Persians who are with him?”


9.16.4
9438
τὸν δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα εἰπεῖν " ξεῖνε , ὅ τι δεῖ γενέσθαι ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἀμήχανον ἀποτρέψαι ἀνθρώπῳ ·
“Sir,” said the Persian, “that which a god wills to send no man can turn aside,


9.16.4
9439
οὐδὲ γὰρ πιστὰ λέγουσι ἐθέλει πείθεσθαι οὐδείς .
for even truth sometimes finds no one to believe it.


9.16.5
9440
ταῦτα δὲ Περσέων συχνοὶ ἐπιστάμενοι ἑπόμεθα ἀναγκαίῃ ἐνδεδεμένοι , ἐχθίστη δὲ ὀδύνη ἐστὶ τῶν ἐν ἀνθρώποισι αὕτη , πολλὰ φρονέοντα μηδενὸς κρατέειν " .
What I have said is known to many of us Persians, but we follow, in the bonds of necessity. It is the most hateful thing for a person to have much knowledge and no power.”


9.16.5
9441
ταῦτα μὲν Ὀρχομενίου Θερσάνδρου ἤκουον , καὶ τάδε πρὸς τούτοισι , ὡς αὐτὸς αὐτίκα λέγοι ταῦτα πρὸς ἀνθρώπους πρότερον ἢ γενέσθαι ἐν Πλαταιῇσι τὴν μάχην .
This tale I heard from Thersander of Orchomenus who told me in addition that he had straightway told this to others before the battle of Plataea.


9.17.1
9442
Μαρδονίου δὲ ἐν τῇ Βοιωτίῃ στρατοπεδευομένου οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι παρείχοντο ἅπαντες στρατιὴν καὶ συνεσέβαλον ἐς Ἀθήνας , ὅσοι περ ἐμήδιζον Ἑλλήνων τῶν ταύτῃ οἰκημένων , μοῦνοι δὲ Φωκέες οὐ συνεσέβαλον ( ἐμήδιζον γὰρ δὴ σφόδρα καὶ οὗτοι ) οὐκ ἑκόντες ἀλλ’ ὑπ’ ἀναγκαίης .
So Mardonius was making his encampment in  Boeotia. All the Greeks of that region who sided with the Persians furnished fighting men, and they joined with him in his attack upon  Athens, with the exception of the Phocians; as for taking the Persian side, that they did right away, though from necessity rather than willingly.


9.17.2
9443
ἡμέρῃσι δὲ οὐ πολλῇσι μετὰ τὴν ἄπιξιν τὴν ἐς Θήβας ὕστερον ἦλθον αὐτῶν ὁπλῖται χίλιοι , ἦγε δὲ αὐτοὺς Ἁρμοκύδης ἀνὴρ τῶν ἀστῶν δοκιμώτατος .
A few days after the Persians' coming to Thebes, a thousand Phocian men-at-arms under the leadership of Harmocydes, the most notable of their countrymen, arrived.


9.17.2
9444
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπίκατο καὶ οὗτοι ἐς Θήβας , πέμψας ὁ Μαρδόνιος ἱππέας ἐκέλευσε σφέας ἐπ’ ἑωυτῶν ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ ἵζεσθαι .
When these men too were in Thebes, Mardonius sent horsemen and bade the Phocians take their station on the plain by themselves.


9.17.3
9445
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐποίησαν ταῦτα , αὐτίκα παρῆν ἵππος ἡ ἅπασα .
When they had done so, the whole of the Persian cavalry appeared,


9.17.3
9446
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα διεξῆλθε μὲν διὰ τοῦ στρατοπέδου τοῦ Ἑλληνικοῦ τοῦ μετὰ Μήδων ἐόντος φήμη ὡς κατακοντιεῖ σφεας , διεξῆλθε δὲ δι’ αὐτῶν Φωκέων τ- αὐτὸ τοῦτο .
and presently word was spread through all of the Greek army which was with Mardonius, and likewise among the Phocians themselves, that Mardonius would shoot them to death with javelins.


9.17.4
9447
ἔνθα δή σφι ὁ στρατηγὸς Ἁρμοκύδης παραίνεε λέγων τοιάδε .
Then their general Harmocydes exhorted them:


9.17.4
9448
" ὦ Φωκέες , πρόδηλα γὰρ ὅτι ἡμέας οὗτοι οἱ ἄνθρωποι μέλλουσι προόπτῳ θανάτῳ δώσειν , διαβεβλημένους ὑπὸ Θεσσαλῶν , ὡς ἐγὼ εἰκάζω ·
“Men of Phocis,” he said, “seeing that death at these fellows' hands is staring us in the face (we being, as I surmise, maligned by the Thessalians),


9.17.4
9449
νῦν ἄνδρα πάντα τινὰ ὑμέων χρεόν ἐστι γενέσθαι ἀγαθόν ·
it is now time for every one of you to be noble;


9.17.4
9450
κρέσσον γὰρ ποιεῦντάς τι καὶ ἀμυνομένους τελευτῆσαι τὸν αἰῶνα ἤ περ παρέχοντας διαφθαρῆναι αἰσχίστῳ μόρῳ .
for it is better to end our lives in action and fighting than tamely to suffer a shameful death.


9.17.4
9451
ἀλλὰ μαθέτω τις αὐτῶν ὅτι ἐόντες βάρβαροι ἐπ’ Ἕλλησι ἀνδράσι φόνον ἔρραψαν " .
No, rather we will teach them that they whose slaying they have devised are men of Hellas.”


9.18.1
9452
ὃ μὲν ταῦτα παραίνεε ·
Thus he exhorted them.


9.18.1
9453
οἱ δὲ ἱππέες ἐπεί σφεας ἐκυκλώσαντο , ἐπήλαυνον ὡς ἀπολέοντες , καὶ δὴ διετείνοντο τὰ βέλεα ὡς ἀπήσοντες , καὶ κού τις καὶ ἀπῆκε .
But when the horsemen had encircled the Phocians, they rode at them as if to slay them, and drew their bows to shoot; it is likely too that some did in fact shoot.


9.18.1
9454
καὶ οἳ ἀντίοι ἔστησαν πάντῃ συστρέψαντες ἑωυτοὺς καὶ πυκνώσαντες ὡς μάλιστα .
The Phocians opposed them in every possible way, drawing in together and closing their ranks to the best of their power.


9.18.1
9455
ἐνθαῦτα οἱ ἱππόται ὑπέστρεφον καὶ ἀπήλαυνον ὀπίσω .
At this the horsemen wheeled about and rode back and away.


9.18.2
9456
οὐκ ἔχω δ’ ἀτρεκέως εἰπεῖν οὔτε εἰ ἦλθον μὲν ἀπολέοντες τοὺς Φωκέας δεηθέντων Θεσσαλῶν , ἐπεὶ δὲ ὥρων πρὸς ἀλέξησιν τραπομένους , δείσαντες μὴ καὶ σφίσι γένηται τρώματα , οὕτω δὴ ἀπήλαυνον ὀπίσω ·
Now I cannot with exactness say whether they came at the Thessalians' desire to slay the Phocians, but when they saw the men preparing to defend themselves, they feared lest they themselves should suffer some hurt, and so rode away


9.18.2
9457
ὣς γάρ σφι ἐνετείλατο Μαρδόνιος ·
(for such was Mardonius' command),


9.18.2
9458
οὔτ’ εἰ αὐτῶν πειρηθῆναι ἠθέλησε εἴ τι ἀλκῆς μετέχουσι .
or if Mardonius wanted to test the Phocians' mettle.


9.18.3
9459
ὡς δὲ ὀπίσω ἀπήλασαν οἱ ἱππόται , πέμψας Μαρδόνιος κήρυκα ἔλεγε τάδε .
When the horsemen had ridden away, Mardonius sent a herald, with this message:


9.18.3
9460
" θαρσέετε ὦ Φωκέες ·
“Men of Phocis, be of good courage,


9.18.3
9461
ἄνδρες γὰρ ἐφάνητε ἐόντες ἀγαθοί , οὐκ ὡς ἐγὼ ἐπυνθανόμην .
for you have shown yourselves to be valiant men, and not as it was reported to me.


9.18.3
9462
καὶ νῦν προθύμως φέρετε τὸν πόλεμον τοῦτον ·
Now push this war zealously forward,


9.18.3
9463
εὐεργεσίῃσι γὰρ οὐ νικήσετε οὔτ’ ὦν ἐμὲ οὔτε βασιλέα " .
for you will outdo neither myself nor the king in the rendering of service.”


9.18.3
9464
τὰ περὶ Φωκέων μὲν ἐς τοσοῦτο ἐγένετο .
This is how the matter of the Phocians turned out.


9.19.1
9465
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ ὡς ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν ἦλθον , ἐν τούτῳ ἐστρατοπεδεύοντο .
As for the Lacedaemonians, when they had come to the Isthmus, they encamped there.


9.19.1
9466
πυνθανόμενοι δὲ ταῦτα οἱ λοιποὶ Πελοποννήσιοι τοῖσι τὰ ἀμείνω ἑάνδανε , οἳ δὲ καὶ ὁρῶντες ἐξιόντας Σπαρτιήτας , οὐκ ἐδικαίευν λείπεσθαι τῆς ἐξόδου Λακεδαιμονίων .
When the rest of the Peloponnesians who chose the better cause heard that, seeing the Spartans setting forth to war, they thought that they should not lag behind the Lacedaemonians in so doing.


9.19.2
9467
ἐκ δὴ ὦν τοῦ Ἰσθμοῦ καλλιερησάντων τῶν ἱρῶν ἐπορεύοντο πάντες καὶ ἀπικνέονται ἐς Ἐλευσῖνα ·
Accordingly, they all marched from the Isthmus (the omens of sacrifice being favorable) and came to Eleusis.


9.19.2
9468
ποιήσαντες δὲ καὶ ἐνθαῦτα ἱρά , ὥς σφι ἐκαλλιέρεε , τὸ πρόσω ἐπορεύοντο , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ἅμα αὐτοῖσι , διαβάντες μὲν ἐκ Σαλαμῖνος , συμμιγέντες δὲ ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι .
When they had offered sacrifice there also and the omens were favorable, they continued their march, having now the Athenians with them, who had crossed over from Salamis and joined with them at Eleusis.


9.19.3
9469
ὡς δὲ ἄρα ἀπίκοντο τῆς Βοιωτίης ἐς Ἐρυθράς , ἔμαθόν τε δὴ τοὺς βαρβάρους ἐπὶ τῷ Ἀσωπῷ στρατοπεδευομένους , φρασθέντες δὲ τοῦτο ἀντετάσσοντο ἐπὶ τῆς ὑπωρέης τοῦ Κιθαιρῶνος .
When they came (as it is said) to Erythrae in  Boeotia, they learned that the barbarians were encamped by the Asopus. Taking note of that, they arrayed themselves opposite the enemy on the lower hills of Cithaeron.


9.20.1
9470
Μαρδόνιος δέ , ὡς οὐ κατέβαινον οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐς τὸ πεδίον , πέμπει ἐς αὐτοὺς πᾶσαν τὴν ἵππον , τῆς ἱππάρχεε Μασίστιος εὐδοκιμέων παρὰ Πέρσῃσι , τὸν Ἕλληνες Μακίστιον καλέουσι , ἵππον ἔχων Νησαῖον χρυσοχάλινον καὶ ἄλλως κεκοσμημένον καλῶς .
When the Greeks did not come down into the plain, Mardonius sent against them his entire cavalry, whose commander was Masistius (whom the Greeks call Macistius), a man much honored among the Persians; he rode a Nesaean horse which had a golden bit and was elaborately adorned all over.


9.20.1
9471
ἐνθαῦτα ὡς προσήλασαν οἱ ἱππόται πρὸς τοὺς Ἕλληνας , προσέβαλλον κατὰ τέλεα , προσβάλλοντες δὲ κακὰ μεγάλα ἐργάζοντο καὶ γυναῖκας σφέας ἀπεκάλεον .
Thereupon the horsemen rode up to the Greeks and charged them by squadrons; as they attacked, they did them much hurt, and called them women all the while.


9.21.1
9472
κατὰ συντυχίην δὲ Μεγαρέες ἔτυχον ταχθέντες τῇ τε ἐπιμαχώτατον ἦν τοῦ χωρίου παντός , καὶ πρόσοδος μάλιστα ταύτῃ ἐγίνετο τῇ ἵππῳ .
Now it chanced that the Megarians were posted in that part of the field which was most open to attack, and here the horsemen found the readiest approach.


9.21.1
9473
προσβαλλούσης ὦν τῆς ἵππου οἱ Μεγαρέες πιεζόμενοι ἔπεμπον ἐπὶ τοὺς στρατηγοὺς τῶν Ἑλλήνων κήρυκα , ἀπικόμενος δὲ ὁ κῆρυξ πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἔλεγε τάδε .
Therefore, being hard-pressed by the charges, the Megarians sent a herald to the generals of the Greeks, who came to them and spoke as follows:


9.21.2
9474
" Μεγαρέες λέγουσι ·
“From the men of Megara to their allies:


9.21.2
9475
ἡμεῖς , ἄνδρες σύμμαχοι , οὐ δυνατοί εἰμεν τὴν Περσέων ἵππον δέκεσθαι μοῦνοι , ἔχοντες στάσιν ταύτην ἐς τὴν ἔστημεν ἀρχήν ·
we cannot alone withstand the Persian cavalry (although we have till now held our ground with patience and valor, despite the fact that we were hard-pressed) in the position to which we were first appointed.


9.21.2
9476
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐς τόδε λιπαρίῃ τε καὶ ἀρετῇ ἀντέχομεν καίπερ πιεζόμενοι .
Know that now we will abandon our post, unless you send others to take our place there.”


9.21.2
9477
νῦν τε εἰ μή τινας ἄλλους πέμψετε διαδόχους τῆς τάξιος , ἴστε ἡμέας ἐκλείψοντας τὴν τάξιν " .
This the herald reported,


9.21.3
9478
ὃ μὲν δή σφι ταῦτα ἀπήγγελλε , Παυσανίης δὲ ἀποπειρᾶτο τῶν Ἑλλήνων εἴ τινες ἐθέλοιεν ἄλλοι ἐθελονταὶ ἰέναι τε ἐς τὸν χῶρον τοῦτον καὶ τάσσεσθαι διάδοχοι Μεγαρεῦσι .
and Pausanias inquired among the Greeks if any would offer to go to that place and relieve the Megarians by holding the post.


9.21.3
9479
οὐ βουλομένων δὲ τῶν ἄλλων Ἀθηναῖοι ὑπεδέξαντο καὶ Ἀθηναίων οἱ τριηκόσιοι λογάδες , τῶν ἐλοχήγεε Ὀλυμπιόδωρος ὁ Λάμπωνος .
All the others did not want to, but the Athenians took it upon themselves, that is three hundred picked men of Athens, whose captain was Olympiodorus son of Lampon.


9.22.1
9480
οὗτοι ἦσαν οἵ τε ὑποδεξάμενοι καὶ οἱ πρὸ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν παρεόντων Ἑλλήνων ἐς Ἐρυθρὰς ταχθέντες , τοὺς τοξότας προσελόμενοι .
Those who volunteered themselves were posted at Erythrae in front of the whole Greek army, and they took with them the archers also.


9.22.1
9481
μαχομένων δὲ σφέων ἐπὶ χρόνον τέλος τοιόνδε ἐγένετο τῆς μάχης .
They fought for a long time and the end of the battle was as I will now tell.


9.22.1
9482
προσβαλλούσης τῆς ἵππου κατὰ τέλεα , ὁ Μασιστίου προέχων τῶν ἄλλων ἵππος βάλλεται τοξεύματι τὰ πλευρά , ἀλγήσας δὲ ἵσταταί τε ὀρθὸς καὶ ἀποσείεται τὸν Μασίστιον ·
The cavalry charged by squadrons, and Masistius' horse, being at the head of the rest, was struck in the side by an arrow. Rearing up in pain, it threw Masistius,


9.22.2
9483
πεσόντι δὲ αὐτῷ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι αὐτίκα ἐπεκέατο .
who when he fell, was straightaway set upon by the Athenians.


9.22.2
9484
τόν τε δὴ ἵππον αὐτοῦ λαμβάνουσι καὶ αὐτὸν ἀμυνόμενον κτείνουσι , κατ’ ἀρχὰς οὐ δυνάμενοι .
His horse they took then and there, and he himself was killed fighting.


9.22.2
9485
ἐνεσκεύαστο γὰρ οὕτω ·
They could not, however, kill him at first, for he was outfitted in the following manner:


9.22.2
9486
ἐντὸς θώρηκα εἶχε χρύσεον λεπιδωτόν , κατύπερθε δὲ τοῦ θώρηκος κιθῶνα φοινίκεον ἐνεδεδύκεε .
he wore a purple tunic over a cuirass of golden scales which was within it;


9.22.2
9487
τύπτοντες δὲ ἐς τὸν θώρηκα ἐποίευν οὐδέν , πρίν γε δὴ μαθών τις τὸ ποιεύμενον παίει μιν ἐς τὸν ὀφθαλμόν .
thus they accomplished nothing by striking at the cuirass, until someone saw what was happening and stabbed him in the eye.


9.22.2
9488
οὕτω δὴ ἔπεσέ τε καὶ ἀπέθανε .
Then he collapsed and died.


9.22.3
9489
ταῦτα δέ κως γινόμενα ἐλελήθεε τοὺς ἄλλους ἱππέας ·
But as chance would have it, the rest of the horsemen knew nothing of this,


9.22.3
9490
οὔτε γὰρ πεσόντα μιν εἶδον ἀπὸ τοῦ ἵππου οὔτε ἀποθνήσκοντα , ἀναχωρήσιός τε γινομένης καὶ ὑποστροφῆς οὐκ ἔμαθον τὸ γινόμενον .
for they had not seen him fall from his horse, or die.


9.22.3
9491
ἐπείτε δὲ ἔστησαν , αὐτίκα ἐπόθεσαν , ὥς σφεας οὐδεὶς ἦν ὁ τάσσων μαθόντες δὲ τὸ γεγονός , διακελευσάμενοι ἤλαυνον τοὺς ἵππους πάντες , ὡς ἂν τὸν νεκρὸν ἀνελοίατο .
They wheeled about and rode back without perceiving what was done. As soon as they halted, however, they saw what they were missing since there was no one to give them orders. Then when they perceived what had occurred, they gave each other the word, and all rode together to recover the dead body.


9.23.1
9492
ἰδόντες δὲ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι οὐκέτι κατὰ τέλεα προσελαύνοντας τοὺς ἱππέας ἀλλὰ πάντας , τὴν ἄλλην στρατιὴν ἐπεβώσαντο .
When the Athenians saw the horsemen riding at them, not by squadrons as before, but all together, they cried to the rest of the army for help.


9.23.1
9493
ἐν ᾧ δὲ ὁ πεζὸς ἅπας ἐβοήθεε , ἐν τούτῳ μάχη ὀξέα περὶ τοῦ νεκροῦ γίνεται .
While all their infantry was rallying to aid, there was a bitter fight over the dead body.


9.23.2
9494
ἕως μέν νυν μοῦνοι ἦσαν οἱ τριηκόσιοι , ἑσσοῦντό τε πολλὸν καὶ τὸν νεκρὸν ἀπέλειπον ·
As long as the three hundred stood alone, they had the worst of the battle by far, and were ready to leave the dead man.


9.23.2
9495
ὡς δέ σφι τὸ πλῆθος ἐπεβοήθησε , οὕτω δὴ οὐκέτι οἱ ἱππόται ὑπέμενον οὐδέ σφι ἐξεγένετο τὸν νεκρὸν ἀνελέσθαι , ἀλλὰ πρὸς ἐκείνῳ ἄλλους προσαπώλεσαν τῶν ἱππέων .
When the main body came to their aid, then it was the horsemen who could no longer hold their ground, nor help to recover the dead man, but rather lost others of their comrades in addition to Masistius.


9.23.2
9496
ἀποστήσαντες ὦν ὅσον τε δύο στάδια ἐβουλεύοντο ὅ τι χρεὸν εἴη ποιέειν ·
They accordingly withdrew and halted about two furlongs away, where they deliberated what they should do.


9.23.2
9497
ἐδόκεε δέ σφι ἀναρχίης ἐούσης ἀπελαύνειν παρὰ Μαρδόνιον .
Since there was no one to give them orders, they resolved to report to Mardonius.


9.24.1
9498
ἀπικομένης δὲ τῆς ἵππου ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον πένθος ἐποιήσαντο Μασιστίου πᾶσά τε ἡ στρατιὴ καὶ Μαρδόνιος μέγιστον , σφέας τε αὐτοὺς κείροντες καὶ τοὺς ἵππους καὶ τὰ ὑποζύγια οἰμωγῇ τε χρεώμενοι ἀπλέτῳ ·
When the cavalry returned to camp, Mardonius and the whole army mourned deeply for Masistius, cutting their own hair and the hair of their horses and beasts of burden, and lamenting loudly;


9.24.1
9499
ἅπασαν γὰρ τὴν Βοιωτίην κατεῖχε ἠχὼ ὡς ἀνδρὸς ἀπολομένου μετά γε Μαρδόνιον λογιμωτάτου παρά τε Πέρσῃσι καὶ βασιλέι .
the sound of this was heard over all Boeotia, for a man was dead who, next to Mardonius, was most esteemed by all Persia and the king.


9.25.1
9500
οἱ μέν νυν βάρβαροι τρόπῳ τῷ σφετέρῳ ἀποθανόντα ἐτίμων Μασίστιον ·
So the barbarians honored Masistius' death in their customary way,


9.25.1
9501
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες ὡς τὴν ἵππον ἐδέξαντο προσβάλλουσαν καὶ δεξάμενοι ὤσαντο , ἐθάρσησάν τε πολλῷ μᾶλλον καὶ πρῶτα μὲν ἐς ἅμαξαν ἐσθέντες τὸν νεκρὸν παρὰ τὰς τάξις ἐκόμιζον ·
but the Greeks were greatly encouraged that they withstood and drove off the charging horsemen. First they laid the dead man on a cart and carried him about their ranks,


9.25.1
9502
ὁ δὲ νεκρὸς ἦν θέης ἄξιος μεγάθεος εἵνεκα καὶ κάλλεος , τῶν δὴ εἵνεκα καὶ ταῦτα ἐποίευν ·
and the body was well worth seeing, because of its stature and grandeur;


9.25.1
9503
ἐκλείποντες τὰς τάξις ἐφοίτων θεησόμενοι Μασίστιον .
therefore, they would even leave their ranks and come to view Masistius.


9.25.2
9504
μετὰ δὲ ἔδοξέ σφι ἐπικαταβῆναι ἐς Πλαταιάς ·
Presently they resolved that they would march down to Plataea,


9.25.2
9505
ὁ γὰρ χῶρος ἐφαίνετο πολλῷ ἐὼν ἐπιτηδεότερός σφι ἐνστρατοπεδεύεσθαι ὁ Πλαταιικὸς τοῦ Ἐρυθραίου τά τε ἄλλα καὶ εὐυδρότερος .
for they saw that the ground there was generally more suited for encampment than that at Erythrae, and chiefly because it was better watered.


9.25.2
9506
ἐς τοῦτον δὴ τὸν χῶρον καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν κρήνην τὴν Γαργαφίην τὴν ἐν τῷ χώρῳ τούτῳ ἐοῦσαν ἔδοξέ σφι χρεὸν εἶναι ἀπικέσθαι καὶ διαταχθέντας στρατοπεδεύεσθαι .
It was to this place and to the Gargaphian spring which was there, that they resolved to go and pitch camp in their several battalions;


9.25.3
9507
ἀναλαβόντες δὲ τὰ ὅπλα ἤισαν διὰ τῆς ὑπωρέης τοῦ Κιθαιρῶνος παρὰ Ὑσιὰς ἐς τὴν Πλαταιίδα γῆν , ἀπικόμενοι δὲ ἐτάσσοντο κατὰ ἔθνεα πλησίον τῆς τε κρήνης τῆς Γαργαφίης καὶ τοῦ τεμένεος τοῦ Ἀνδροκράτεος τοῦ ἥρωος , διὰ ὄχθων τε οὐκ ὑψηλῶν καὶ ἀπέδου χώρου .
They took up their arms and marched along the lower slopes of Cithaeron past Hysiae to the lands of  Plataea, and when they arrived, they arrayed themselves nation by nation near the Gargaphian spring and the precinct of the hero Androcrates, among low hills and in a level country.


9.26.1
9508
ἐνθαῦτα ἐν τῇ διατάξι ἐγένετο λόγων πολλῶν ὠθισμὸς Τεγεητέων τε καὶ Ἀθηναίων ·
During the drawing up of battle formation there arose much dispute between the Tegeans and the Athenians,


9.26.1
9509
ἐδικαίευν γὰρ αὐτοὶ ἑκάτεροι ἔχειν τὸ ἕτερον κέρας , καὶ καινὰ καὶ παλαιὰ παραφέροντες ἔργα .
for each of them claimed that they should hold the second wing of the army, justifying themselves by tales of deeds new and old.


9.26.1
9510
τοῦτο μὲν οἱ Τεγεῆται ἔλεγον τάδε .
This was what the Tegeans said:


9.26.2
9511
" ἡμεῖς αἰεί κοτε ἀξιεύμεθα ταύτης τῆς τάξιος ἐκ τῶν συμμάχων ἁπάντων , ὅσαι ἤδη ἔξοδοι κοιναὶ ἐγένοντο Πελοποννησίοισι καὶ τὸ παλαιὸν καὶ τὸ νέον , ἐξ ἐκείνου τοῦ χρόνου ἐπείτε Ἡρακλεῖδαι ἐπειρῶντο μετὰ τὸν Εὐρυσθέος θάνατον κατιόντες ἐς Πελοπόννησον ·
First the Tegeans spoke: “We, among all the allies, have always had the right to hold this position in all campaigns, of the united Peloponnesian armies, both ancient and recent, ever since that time when the Heraclidae after Eurystheus' death attempted to return to the  Peloponnese.


9.26.3
9512
τότε εὑρόμεθα τοῦτο διὰ πρῆγμα τοιόνδε .
We gained because of the achievement which we will relate.


9.26.3
9513
ἐπεὶ μετὰ Ἀχαιῶν καὶ Ἰώνων τῶν τότε ἐόντων ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ ἐκβοηθήσαντες ἐς τὸν Ἰσθμὸν ἱζόμεθα ἀντίοι τοῖσι κατιοῦσι , τότε ὦν λόγος Ὕλλον ἀγορεύσασθαι ὡς χρεὸν εἴη τὸν μὲν στρατὸν τῷ στρατῷ μὴ ἀνακινδυνεύειν συμβάλλοντα , ἐκ δὲ τοῦ Πελοποννησίου στρατοπέδου τὸν ἂν σφέων αὐτῶν κρίνωσι εἶναι ἄριστον , τοῦτόν οἱ μουνομαχῆσαι ἐπὶ διακειμένοισι .
When we marched out at the Isthmus for war, along with the Achaeans and Ionians who then dwelt in the Peloponnese, and encamped opposite the returning exiles, then (it is said) Hyllus announced that army should not be risked against army in battle, but that that champion in the host of the Peloponnesians whom they chose as their best should fight with him in single combat on agreed conditions.


9.26.4
9514
ἔδοξέ τε τοῖσι Πελοποννησίοισι ταῦτα εἶναι ποιητέα καὶ ἔταμον ὅρκιον ἐπὶ λόγῳ τοιῷδε , ἢν μὲν Ὕλλος νικήσῃ τὸν Πελοποννησίων ἡγεμόνα , κατιέναι Ἡρακλείδας ἐπὶ τὰ πατρώια , ἢν δὲ νικηθῇ , τὰ ἔμπαλιν Ἡρακλείδας ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι καὶ ἀπάγειν τὴν στρατιὴν ἑκατόν τε ἐτέων μὴ ζητῆσαι κάτοδον ἐς Πελοπόννησον .
The Peloponnesians, resolving that this should be so, swore a compact that if Hyllus should overcome the Peloponnesian champion, the Heraclidae should return to the land of their fathers, but if he were himself beaten, then the Heraclidae should depart and lead their army away, not attempting to return to the  Peloponnese until a hundred years had passed.


9.26.5
9515
προσκρίθη τε δὴ ἐκ πάντων τῶν συμμάχων ἐθελοντὴς Ἔχεμος ὁ Ἠερόπου τοῦ Φηγέος στρατηγός τε ἐὼν καὶ βασιλεὺς ἡμέτερος , καὶ ἐμουνομάχησέ τε καὶ ἀπέκτεινε Ὕλλον .
Then our general and king Echemus, son of Phegeus' son Eeropus, volunteered and was chosen out of all the allied host; he fought that duel and killed Hyllus.


9.26.5
9516
ἐκ τούτου τοῦ ἔργου εὑρόμεθα ἐν Πελοποννησίοισί γε τοῖσι τότε καὶ ἄλλα γέρεα μεγάλα , τὰ διατελέομεν ἔχοντες , καὶ τοῦ κέρεος τοῦ ἑτέρου αἰεὶ ἡγεμονεύειν κοινῆς ἐξόδου γινομένης .
It was for that feat of arms that the Peloponnesians granted us this in addition to other great privileges which we have never ceased to possess, namely that in all united campaigns we should always lead the army's second wing.


9.26.6
9517
ὑμῖν μέν νυν ὦ Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὐκ ἀντιεύμεθα , ἀλλὰ διδόντες αἵρεσιν ὁκοτέρου βούλεσθε κέρεος ἄρχειν παρίεμεν ·
Now with you, men of Lacedaemon, we have no rivalry, but forbear and bid you choose the command of whichever wing you want.


9.26.6
9518
τοῦ δὲ ἑτέρου φαμὲν ἡμέας ἱκνέεσθαι ἡγεμονεύειν κατά περ ἐν τῷ πρόσθε χρόνῳ .
We do, however, say that our place is at the head of the other, as it has always been.


9.26.6
9519
χωρίς τε τούτου τοῦ ἀπηγημένου ἔργου ἀξιονικότεροί εἰμεν Ἀθηναίων ταύτην τὴν τάξιν ἔχειν .
Quite apart from that feat which we have related, we are worthier than the Athenians to hold that post,


9.26.7
9520
πολλοὶ μὲν γὰρ καὶ εὖ ἔχοντες πρὸς ὑμέας ἡμῖν , ἄνδρες Σπαρτιῆται , ἀγῶνες ἀγωνίδαται , πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ πρὸς ἄλλους .
for we have fought many battles which turned out favorably for you, men of Lacedaemon, and others besides.


9.26.7
9521
οὕτω ὦν δίκαιον ἡμέας ἔχειν τὸ ἕτερον κέρας ἤ περ Ἀθηναίους ·
It is accordingly we and not the Athenians who should hold the second wing,


9.26.7
9522
οὐ γάρ σφι ἐστὶ ἔργα οἷά περ ἡμῖν κατεργασμένα , οὔτ’ ὦν καινὰ οὔτε παλαιά " .
for neither at some earlier period nor recently, have they achieved such feats of arms as we.”


9.27.1
9523
οἳ μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεγον , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ πρὸς ταῦτα ὑπεκρίναντο τάδε .
To these words the Athenians replied:


9.27.1
9524
" ἐπιστάμεθα μὲν σύνοδον τήνδε μάχης εἵνεκα συλλεγῆναι πρὸς τὸν βάρβαρον , ἀλλ’ οὐ λόγων ·
“It is our belief that we are gathered for battle with the barbarian, and not for speeches;


9.27.1
9525
ἐπεὶ δὲ ὁ Τεγεήτης προέθηκε παλαιὰ καὶ καινὰ λέγειν τὰ ἑκατέροισι ἐν τῷ παντὶ χρόνῳ κατέργασται χρηστά , ἀναγκαίως ἡμῖν ἔχει δηλῶσαι πρὸς ὑμέας ὅθεν ἡμῖν πατρώιον ἐστὶ ἐοῦσι χρηστοῖσι αἰεὶ πρώτοισι εἶναι μᾶλλον ἢ Ἀρκάσι .
but since the man of Tegea has made it his business to speak of all the valorous deeds, old and new, which either of our nations has at any time achieved, we must prove to you how we, rather than Arcadians, have by virtue of our valor a hereditary right to the place of honor.


9.27.2
9526
Ἡρακλείδας , τῶν οὗτοι φασὶ ἀποκτεῖναι τὸν ἡγεμόνα ἐν Ἰσθμῷ , τοῦτο μὲν τούτους , πρότερον ἐξελαυνομένους ὑπὸ πάντων Ἑλλήνων ἐς τοὺς ἀπικοίατο φεύγοντες δουλοσύνην πρὸς Μυκηναίων , μοῦνοι ὑποδεξάμενοι τὴν Εὐρυσθέος ὕβριν κατείλομεν , σὺν ἐκείνοισι μάχῃ νικήσαντες τοὺς τότε ἔχοντας Πελοπόννησον .
Now when those same Heraclidae had been rejected by every Greek people to whom they resorted to escape the tyranny of the Mycenaeans, we alone received them. With them we vanquished those who then inhabited the  Peloponnese, and we broke the pride of Eurystheus.


9.27.3
9527
τοῦτο δὲ Ἀργείους τοὺς μετὰ Πολυνείκεος ἐπὶ Θήβας ἐλάσαντας , τελευτήσαντας τὸν αἰῶνα καὶ ἀτάφους κειμένους , στρατευσάμενοι ἐπὶ τοὺς Καδμείους ἀνελέσθαι τε τοὺς νεκροὺς φαμὲν καὶ θάψαι τῆς ἡμετέρης ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι .
Furthermore, when the Argives who had marched with Polynices against  Thebes had there made an end of their lives and lay unburied, know that we sent our army against the Cadmeans and recovered the dead and buried them in  Eleusis.


9.27.4
9528
ἔστι δὲ ἡμῖν ἔργον εὖ ἔχον καὶ ἐς Ἀμαζονίδας τὰς ἀπὸ Θερμώδοντος ποταμοῦ ἐσβαλούσας κοτὲ ἐς γῆν τὴν Ἀττικήν , καὶ ἐν τοῖσι Τρωικοῖσι πόνοισι οὐδαμῶν ἐλειπόμεθα .
We also have on record our great victory against the Amazons, who once came from the river Thermodon and broke into Attica, and in the hard days of Troy we were second to none.


9.27.4
9529
ἀλλ’ οὐ γάρ τι προέχει τούτων ἐπιμεμνῆσθαι ·
But since it is useless to recall these matters —


9.27.4
9530
καὶ γὰρ ἂν χρηστοὶ τότε ἐόντες ὡυτοὶ νῦν ἂν εἶεν φλαυρότεροι , καὶ τότε ἐόντες φλαῦροι νῦν ἂν εἶεν ἀμείνονες .
for those who were previously valiant may now be of lesser mettle, and those who lacked mettle then may be better men now —


9.27.5
9531
παλαιῶν μέν νυν ἔργων ἅλις ἔστω ·
enough of the past.


9.27.5
9532
ἡμῖν δὲ εἰ μηδὲν ἄλλο ἐστὶ ἀποδεδεγμένον , ὥσπερ ἐστὶ πολλά τε καὶ εὖ ἔχοντα εἰ τεοῖσι καὶ ἄλλοισι Ἑλλήνων , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἐν Μαραθῶνι ἔργου ἄξιοι εἰμὲν τοῦτο τὸ γέρας ἔχειν καὶ ἄλλα πρὸς τούτῳ , οἵτινες μοῦνοι Ἑλλήνων δὴ μουνομαχήσαντες τῷ Πέρσῃ καὶ ἔργῳ τοσούτῳ ἐπιχειρήσαντες περιεγενόμεθα καὶ ἐνικήσαμεν ἔθνεα ἕξ τε καὶ τεσσεράκοντα .
Supposing that we were known for no achievement (although the fact is that we have done more than any other of the Greeks), we nevertheless deserve to have this honor and more beside because of the role we played at Marathon, seeing that alone of all Greeks we met the Persian singlehandedly and did not fail in that enterprise, but overcame forty-six nations.


9.27.6
9533
ἆρ’ οὐ δίκαιοι εἰμὲν ἔχειν ταύτην τὴν τάξιν ἀπὸ τούτου μούνου τοῦ ἔργου ;
Is it not then our right to hold this post, for that one feat alone?


9.27.6
9534
ἀλλ’ οὐ γὰρ ἐν τῷ τοιῷδε τάξιος εἵνεκα στασιάζειν πρέπει , ἄρτιοι εἰμὲν πείθεσθαι ὑμῖν ὦ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ἵνα δοκέει ἐπιτηδεότατον ἡμέας εἶναι ἑστάναι καὶ κατ’ οὕστινας ·
Yet seeing that this is no time for wrangling about our place in the battle, we are ready to obey you, men of Lacedaemon and take whatever place and face whatever enemy you think fitting.


9.27.6
9535
πάντῃ γὰρ τεταγμένοι πειρησόμεθα εἶναι χρηστοί .
Wherever you set us, we will strive to be valiant men.


9.27.6
9536
ἐξηγέεσθε δὲ ὡς πεισομένων " .
Command us then, knowing that we will obey.”


9.28.1
9537
οἱ μὲν ταῦτα ἀμείβοντο , Λακεδαιμονίων δὲ ἀνέβωσε ἅπαν τὸ στρατόπεδον Ἀθηναίους ἀξιονικοτέρους εἶναι ἔχειν τὸ κέρας ἤ περ Ἀρκάδας .
This was the Athenians' response, and the whole army shouted aloud that the Athenians were worthier to hold the wing than the Arcadians.


9.28.1
9538
οὕτω δὴ ἔσχον οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ ὑπερεβάλοντο τοὺς Τεγεήτας .
It was in this way that the Athenians were preferred to the men of Tegea, and gained that place.


9.28.2
9539
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐτάσσοντο ὧδε οἱ ἐπιφοιτῶντές τε καὶ οἱ ἀρχὴν ἐλθόντες Ἑλλήνων .
Presently the whole Greek army was arrayed as I will show, both the later and the earliest comers.


9.28.2
9540
τὸ μὲν δεξιὸν κέρας εἶχον Λακεδαιμονίων μύριοι ·
On the right wing were ten thousand Lacedaemonians;


9.28.2
9541
τούτων δὲ τοὺς πεντακισχιλίους ἐόντας Σπαρτιήτας ἐφύλασσον ψιλοὶ τῶν εἱλώτων πεντακισχίλιοι καὶ τρισμύριοι , περὶ ἄνδρα ἕκαστον ἑπτὰ τεταγμένοι .
five thousand of these, who were Spartans, had a guard of thirty-five thousand light-armed helots, seven appointed for each man.


9.28.3
9542
προσεχέας δὲ σφίσι εἵλοντο ἑστάναι οἱ Σπαρτιῆται τοὺς Τεγεήτας καὶ τιμῆς εἵνεκα καὶ ἀρετῆς ·
The Spartans chose the Tegeans for their neighbors in the battle, both to do them honor, and for their valor;


9.28.3
9543
τούτων δ’ ἦσαν ὁπλῖται χίλιοι καὶ πεντακόσιοι .
there were of these fifteen hundred men-at-arms.


9.28.3
9544
μετὰ δὲ τούτους ἵσταντο Κορινθίων πεντακισχίλιοι , παρὰ δὲ σφίσι εὕροντο παρὰ Παυσανίεω ἑστάναι Ποτιδαιητέων τῶν ἐκ Παλλήνης τοὺς παρεόντας τριηκοσίους .
Next to these in the line were five thousand Corinthians, at whose desire Pausanias permitted the three hundred Potidaeans from Pallene then present to stand by them.


9.28.4
9545
τούτων δὲ ἐχόμενοι ἵσταντο Ἀρκάδες Ὀρχομένιοι ἑξακόσιοι , τούτων δὲ Σικυώνιοι τρισχίλιοι .
Next to these were six hundred Arcadians from Orchomenus, and after them three thousand men of Sicyon.


9.28.4
9546
τούτων δὲ εἴχοντο Ἐπιδαυρίων ὀκτακόσιοι .
By these one thousand Troezenians were posted,


9.28.4
9547
παρὰ δὲ τούτους Τροιζηνίων ἐτάσσοντο χίλιοι , Τροιζηνίων δὲ ἐχόμενοι Λεπρεητέων διηκόσιοι , τούτων δὲ Μυκηναίων καὶ Τιρυνθίων τετρακόσιοι , τούτων δὲ ἐχόμενοι Φλειάσιοι χίλιοι .
and after them two hundred men of Lepreum, then four hundred from Mycenae and Tiryns, and next to them one thousand from Phlius.


9.28.4
9548
παρὰ δὲ τούτους ἔστησαν Ἑρμιονέες τριηκόσιοι .
By these stood three hundred men of Hermione.


9.28.5
9549
Ἑρμιονέων δὲ ἐχόμενοι ἵσταντο Ἐρετριέων τε καὶ Στυρέων ἑξακόσιοι , τούτων δὲ Χαλκιδέες τετρακόσιοι , τούτων δὲ Ἀμπρακιητέων πεντακόσιοι .
Next to the men of Hermione were six hundred Eretrians and Styreans;


9.28.5
9550
μετὰ δὲ τούτους Λευκαδίων καὶ Ἀνακτορίων ὀκτακόσιοι ἔστησαν , τούτων δὲ ἐχόμενοι Παλέες οἱ ἐκ Κεφαλληνίης διηκόσιοι .
next to them, four hundred Chalcidians; next again, five hundred Ampraciots. After these stood eight hundred Leucadians and Anactorians, and next to them two hundred from Pale in Cephallenia;


9.28.6
9551
μετὰ δὲ τούτους Αἰγινητέων πεντακόσιοι ἐτάχθησαν .
after them in the array, five hundred Aeginetans;


9.28.6
9552
παρὰ δὲ τούτους ἐτάσσοντο Μεγαρέων τρισχίλιοι .
by them stood three thousand men of Megara,


9.28.6
9553
εἴχοντο δὲ τούτων Πλαταιέες ἑξακόσιοι .
and next to these six hundred Plataeans.


9.28.6
9554
τελευταῖοι δὲ καὶ πρῶτοι Ἀθηναῖοι ἐτάσσοντο , κέρας ἔχοντες τὸ εὐώνυμον , ὀκτακισχίλιοι ·
At the end, and first in the line, were the Athenians who held the left wing. They were eight thousand in number,


9.28.6
9555
ἐστρατήγεε δ’ αὐτῶν Ἀριστείδης ὁ Λυσιμάχου .
and their general was Aristides son of Lysimachus.


9.29.1
9556
οὗτοι , πλὴν τῶν ἑπτὰ περὶ ἕκαστον τεταγμένων Σπαρτιήτῃσι , ἦσαν ὁπλῖται , σύμπαντες ἐόντες ἀριθμὸν τρεῖς τε μυριάδες καὶ ὀκτὼ χιλιάδες καὶ ἑκατοντάδες ἑπτά .
All these, except the seven appointed to attend each Spartan, were men-at-arms, and the whole sum of them was thirty-eight thousand and seven hundred.


9.29.1
9557
ὁπλῖται μὲν οἱ πάντες συλλεγέντες ἐπὶ τὸν βάρβαρον ἦσαν τοσοῦτοι , ψιλῶν δὲ πλῆθος ἦν τόδε , τῆς μὲν Σπαρτιητικῆς τάξιος πεντακισχίλιοι καὶ τρισμύριοι ἄνδρες , ὡς ἐόντων ἑπτὰ περὶ ἕκαστον ἄνδρα , καὶ τούτων πᾶς τις παρήρτητο ὡς ἐς πόλεμον ·
This was the number of men-at-arms that mustered for war against the barbarian; as regards the number of the light-armed men, there were in the Spartan array seven for each man-at-arms, that is, thirty-five thousand, and every one of these was equipped for war.


9.29.2
9558
οἱ δὲ τῶν λοιπῶν Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ Ἑλλήνων ψιλοί , ὡς εἷς περὶ ἕκαστον ἐὼν ἄνδρα , πεντακόσιοι καὶ τετρακισχίλιοι καὶ τρισμύριοι ἦσαν .
The light-armed from the rest of  Lacedaemon and  Hellas were as one to every man-at-arms, and their number was thirty-four thousand and five hundred.


9.30.1
9559
ψιλῶν μὲν δὴ τῶν ἁπάντων τῶν μαχίμων ἦν τὸ πλῆθος ἕξ τε μυριάδες καὶ ἐννέα χιλιάδες καὶ ἑκατοντάδες πέντε , τοῦ δὲ σύμπαντος τοῦ Ἑλληνικοῦ τοῦ συνελθόντος ἐς Πλαταιὰς σύν τε ὁπλίτῃσι καὶ ψιλοῖσι τοῖσι μαχίμοισι ἕνδεκα μυριάδες ἦσαν , μιῆς χιλιάδος , πρὸς δὲ ὀκτακοσίων ἀνδρῶν καταδέουσαι .
So the total of all the light-armed men who were fighters was sixty-nine thousand and five hundred, and of the whole Greek army mustered at Plataea, men-at-arms and light-armed fighting men together, eleven times ten thousand less eighteen hundred.


9.30.1
9560
σὺν δὲ Θεσπιέων τοῖσι παρεοῦσι ἐξεπληροῦντο αἱ ἕνδεκα μυριάδες ·
The Thespians who were present were one hundred and ten thousand in number,


9.30.1
9561
παρῆσαν γὰρ καὶ Θεσπιέων ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ οἱ περιεόντες , ἀριθμὸν ἐς ὀκτακοσίους καὶ χιλίους ·
for the survivors of the Thespians were also present with the army, eighteen hundred in number.


9.30.1
9562
ὅπλα δὲ οὐδ’ οὗτοι εἶχον .
But these did not have weapons.


9.30.1
9563
οὗτοι μέν νυν ταχθέντες ἐπὶ τῷ Ἀσωπῷ ἐστρατοπεδεύοντο .
These then were arrayed and encamped by the Asopus.


9.31.1
9564
οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ Μαρδόνιον βάρβαροι ὡς ἀπεκήδευσαν Μασίστιον , παρῆσαν , πυθόμενοι τοὺς Ἕλληνας εἶναι ἐν Πλαταιῇσι , καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀσωπὸν τὸν ταύτῃ ῥέοντα .
When Mardonius' barbarians had finished their mourning for Masistius and heard that the Greeks were at Plataea, they also came to the part of the Asopus river nearest to them.


9.31.1
9565
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ ἀντετάσσοντο ὧδε ὑπὸ Μαρδονίου .
When they were there, they were arrayed for battle by Mardonius as I shall show.


9.31.1
9566
κατὰ μὲν Λακεδαιμονίους ἔστησε Πέρσας .
He posted the Persians facing the Lacedaemonians.


9.31.2
9567
καὶ δὴ πολλὸν γὰρ περιῆσαν πλήθεϊ οἱ Πέρσαι , ἐπί τε τάξις πλεῦνας ἐκεκοσμέατο καὶ ἐπεῖχον τοὺς Τεγεήτας .
Seeing that the Persians by far outnumbered the Lacedaemonians, they were arrayed in deeper ranks and their line ran opposite the Tegeans also.


9.31.2
9568
ἔταξε δὲ οὕτω ·
He arrayed them in the following way.


9.31.2
9569
ὅ τι μὲν ἦν αὐτῶν δυνατώτατον πᾶν ἀπολέξας ἔστησε ἀντίον Λακεδαιμονίων , τὸ δὲ ἀσθενέστερον παρέταξε κατὰ τοὺς Τεγεήτας .
He chose out the strongest part of the Persians to set it over against the Lacedaemonians,


9.31.2
9570
ταῦτα δ’ ἐποίεε φραζόντων τε καὶ διδασκόντων Θηβαίων .
and posted the weaker by them facing the Tegeans; this he did being so informed and taught by the Thebans.


9.31.3
9571
Περσέων δὲ ἐχομένους ἔταξε Μήδους ·
Next to the Persians he posted the Medes;


9.31.3
9572
οὗτοι δὲ ἐπέσχον Κορινθίους τε καὶ Ποτιδαιήτας καὶ Ὀρχομενίους τε καὶ Σικυωνίους .
these were opposite the men of Corinth, Potidaea, Orchomenus, and Sicyon.


9.31.3
9573
Μήδων δὲ ἐχομένους ἔταξε Βακτρίους ·
Next to the Medes, the Bactrians;


9.31.3
9574
οὗτοι δὲ ἐπέσχον Ἐπιδαυρίους τε καὶ Τροιζηνίους καὶ Λεπρεήτας τε καὶ Τιρυνθίους καὶ Μυκηναίους τε καὶ Φλειασίους .
these were opposite the men of Epidaurus, Troezen, Lepreum, Tiryns, Mycenae, and Phlius.


9.31.4
9575
μετὰ δὲ Βακτρίους ἔστησε Ἰνδούς ·
After the Bactrians he set the Indians,


9.31.4
9576
οὗτοι δὲ ἐπέσχον Ἑρμιονέας τε καὶ Ἐρετριέας καὶ Στυρέας τε καὶ Χαλκιδέας .
opposite the men of Hermione and Eretria and Styra and Chalcis.


9.31.4
9577
Ἰνδῶν δὲ ἐχομένους Σάκας ἔταξε , οἳ ἐπέσχον Ἀμπρακιήτας τε καὶ Ἀνακτορίους καὶ Λευκαδίους καὶ Παλέας καὶ Αἰγινήτας .
Next to the Indians he posted the Sacae, opposite the Ampraciots, Anactorians, Leucadians, Paleans, and Aeginetans;


9.31.5
9578
Σακέων δὲ ἐχομένους ἔταξε ἀντία Ἀθηναίων τε καὶ Πλαταιέων καὶ Μεγαρέων Βοιωτούς τε καὶ Λοκροὺς καὶ Μηλιέας τε καὶ Θεσσαλοὺς καὶ Φωκέων τοὺς χιλίους ·
next to the Sacae, and opposite the Athenians, Plataeans, Megarians, the Boeotians, Locrians, Malians, Thessalians, and the thousand that came from Phocis;


9.31.5
9579
οὐ γὰρ ὦν ἅπαντες οἱ Φωκέες ἐμήδισαν , ἀλλὰ τινὲς αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ Ἑλλήνων ηὖξον περὶ τὸν Παρνησσὸν κατειλημένοι , καὶ ἐνθεῦτεν ὁρμώμενοι ἔφερόν τε καὶ ἦγον τήν τε Μαρδονίου στρατιὴν καὶ τοὺς μετ’ αὐτοῦ ἐόντας Ἑλλήνων .
for not all the Phocians took the Persian side, but some of them gave their aid to the Greek cause; these had been besieged on Parnassus, and issued out from there to harry Mardonius' army and the Greeks who were with him.


9.31.5
9580
ἔταξε δὲ καὶ Μακεδόνας τε καὶ τοὺς περὶ Θεσσαλίην οἰκημένους κατὰ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους .
Beside these, he arrayed the Macedonians also and those who lived in the area of Thessaly opposite the Athenians.


9.32.1
9581
ταῦτα μὲν τῶν ἐθνέων τὰ μέγιστα ὠνόμασται τῶν ὑπὸ Μαρδονίου ταχθέντων , τά περ ἐπιφανέστατά τε ἦν καὶ λόγου πλείστου ·
These which I have named were the greatest of the nations set in array by Mardonius,


9.32.1
9582
ἐνῆσαν δὲ καὶ ἄλλων ἐθνέων ἄνδρες ἀναμεμιγμένοι , Φρυγῶν τε καὶ Θρηίκων καὶ Μυσῶν τε καὶ Παιόνων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων , ἐν δὲ καὶ Αἰθιόπων τε καὶ Αἰγυπτίων οἵ τε Ἑρμοτύβιες καὶ οἱ Καλασίριες καλεόμενοι μαχαιροφόροι , οἵ περ εἰσὶ Αἰγυπτίων μοῦνοι μάχιμοι .
but there was also in the army a mixture of Phrygians, Thracians, Mysians, Paeonians, and the rest, besides Ethiopians and the Egyptian swordsmen called Hermotybies and Calasiries, who are the only fighting men in Egypt.


9.32.2
9583
τούτους δὲ ἔτι ἐν Φαλήρῳ ἐὼν ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν ἀπεβιβάσατο ἐόντας ἐπιβάτας ·
These had been fighters on shipboard, till Mardonius while yet at Phalerum disembarked them from their ships;


9.32.2
9584
οὐ γὰρ ἐτάχθησαν ἐς τὸν πεζὸν τὸν ἅμα Ξέρξῃ ἀπικόμενον ἐς Ἀθήνας Αἰγύπτιοι .
for the Egyptians were not appointed to serve in the land army which Xerxes led to Athens.


9.32.2
9585
τῶν μὲν δὴ βαρβάρων ἦσαν τριήκοντα μυριάδες , ὡς καὶ πρότερον δεδήλωται ·
Of the barbarians, then, there were three hundred thousand, as I have already shown.


9.32.2
9586
τῶν δὲ Ἑλλήνων τῶν Μαρδονίου συμμάχων οἶδε μὲν οὐδεὶς ἀριθμόν ·
As for the Greek allies of Mardonius, no one knows the number of them


9.32.2
9587
οὐ γὰρ ὦν ἠριθμήθησαν ·
(for they were not counted),


9.32.2
9588
ὡς δὲ ἐπεικάσαι , ἐς πέντε μυριάδας συλλεγῆναι εἰκάζω .
I suppose them to have been mustered to the number of fifty thousand.


9.32.2
9589
οὗτοι οἱ παραταχθέντες πεζοὶ ἦσαν , ἡ δὲ ἵππος χωρὶς ἐτέτακτο .
These were the footmen that were set in array; the cavalry were separately ordered.


9.33.1
9590
ὡς δὲ ἄρα πάντες οἱ ἐτετάχατο κατὰ ἔθνεα καὶ κατὰ τέλεα , ἐνθαῦτα τῇ δευτέρῃ ἐθύοντο καὶ ἀμφότεροι .
On the second day after they had all been arrayed according to their nations and their battalions, both armies offered sacrifice.


9.33.1
9591
Ἕλλησι μὲν Τισαμενὸς Ἀντιόχου ἦν ὁ θυόμενος ·
It was Tisamenus who sacrificed for the Greeks,


9.33.1
9592
οὗτος γὰρ δὴ εἵπετο τῷ στρατεύματι τούτῳ μάντις ·
for he was with their army as a diviner;


9.33.1
9593
τὸν ἐόντα Ἠλεῖον καὶ γένεος τοῦ Ἰαμιδέων Κλυτιάδην Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐποιήσαντο λεωσφέτερον .
he was an Elean by birth, a Clytiad of the Iamid clan, and the Lacedaemonians gave him the freedom of their city.


9.33.2
9594
Τισαμενῷ γὰρ μαντευομένῳ ἐν Δελφοῖσι περὶ γόνου ἀνεῖλε ἡ Πυθίη ἀγῶνας τοὺς μεγίστους ἀναιρήσεσθαι πέντε .
This they did, for when Tisamenus was inquiring of the oracle at Delphi concerning offspring, the priestess prophesied to him that he should win five great victories.


9.33.2
9595
ὃ μὲν δὴ ἁμαρτὼν τοῦ χρηστηρίου προσεῖχε γυμνασίοισι ὡς ἀναιρησόμενος γυμνικοὺς ἀγῶνας , ἀσκέων δὲ πεντάεθλον παρὰ ἓν πάλαισμα ἔδραμε νικᾶν Ὀλυμπιάδα , Ἱερωνύμῳ τῷ Ἀνδρίῳ ἐλθὼν ἐς ἔριν .
Not understanding that oracle, he engaged in bodily exercise, thinking that he would then be able to win in similar sports. When he had trained himself for the Five Contests, he came within one wrestling bout of winning the Olympic prize, in a match with Hieronymus of Andros.


9.33.3
9596
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ μαθόντες οὐκ ἐς γυμνικοὺς ἀλλ’ ἐς ἀρηίους ἀγῶνας φέρον τὸ Τισαμενοῦ μαντήιον , μισθῷ ἐπειρῶντο πείσαντες Τισαμενὸν ποιέεσθαι ἅμα Ἡρακλειδέων τοῖσι βασιλεῦσι ἡγεμόνα τῶν πολέμων .
The Lacedaemonians, however, perceived that the oracle given to Tisamenus spoke of the lists not of sport but of war, and they attempted to bribe Tisamenus to be a leader in their wars jointly with their kings of Heracles' line.


9.33.4
9597
ὁ δὲ ὁρέων περὶ πολλοῦ ποιευμένους Σπαρτιήτας φίλον αὐτὸν προσθέσθαι , μαθὼν τοῦτο ἀνετίμα , σημαίνων σφι ὡς ἤν μιν πολιήτην σφέτερον ποιήσωνται τῶν πάντων μεταδιδόντες , ποιήσει ταῦτα , ἐπ’ ἄλλῳ μισθῷ δ’ οὔ .
When he saw that the Spartans set great store by his friendship, he set his price higher, and made it known to them that he would do what they wanted only in exchange for the gift of full citizenship and all of the citizen's rights.


9.33.5
9598
Σπαρτιῆται δὲ πρῶτα μὲν ἀκούσαντες δεινὰ ἐποιεῦντο καὶ μετίεσαν τῆς χρησμοσύνης τὸ παράπαν , τέλος δὲ δείματος μεγάλου ἐπικρεμαμένου τοῦ Περσικοῦ τούτου στρατεύματος καταίνεον μετιόντες .
Hearing that, the Spartans at first were angry and completely abandoned their request; but when the dreadful menace of this Persian host hung over them, they consented and granted his demand.


9.33.5
9599
ὁ δὲ γνοὺς τετραμμένους σφέας οὐδ’ οὕτω ἔτι ἔφη ἀρκέεσθαι τούτοισι μούνοισι , ἀλλὰ δεῖν ἔτι τὸν ἀδελφεὸν ἑωυτοῦ Ἡγίην γίνεσθαι Σπαρτιήτην ἐπὶ τοῖσι αὐτοῖσι λόγοισι τοῖσι καὶ αὐτὸς γίνεται .
When he saw their purpose changed, he said that he would not be content with that alone; his brother Hegias too must be made a Spartan on the same terms as himself.


9.34.1
9600
ταῦτα δὲ λέγων οὗτος ἐμιμέετο Μελάμποδα , ὡς εἰκάσαι βασιληίην τε καὶ πολιτηίην αἰτεομένους .
By so saying he imitated Melampus, in so far as one may compare demands for kingship with those for citizenship.


9.34.1
9601
καὶ γὰρ δὴ καὶ Μελάμπους τῶν ἐν Ἄργεϊ γυναικῶν μανεισέων , ὥς μιν οἱ Ἀργεῖοι ἐμισθοῦντο ἐκ Πύλου παῦσαι τὰς σφετέρας γυναῖκας τῆς νούσου , μισθὸν προετείνατο τῆς βασιληίης τὸ ἥμισυ .
For when the women of Argos had gone mad, and the Argives wanted him to come from Pylos and heal them of that madness, Melampus demanded half of their kingship for his wages.


9.34.2
9602
οὐκ ἀνασχομένων δὲ τῶν Ἀργείων ἀλλ’ ἀπιόντων , ὡς ἐμαίνοντο πλεῦνες τῶν γυναικῶν , οὕτω δὴ ὑποστάντες τὰ ὁ Μελάμπους προετείνατο ἤισαν δώσοντές οἱ ταῦτα .
This the Argives would not put up with and departed.


9.34.2
9603
ὁ δὲ ἐνθαῦτα δὴ ἐπορέγεται ὁρέων αὐτοὺς τετραμμένους , φάς , ἢν μὴ καὶ τῷ ἀδελφεῷ Βίαντι μεταδῶσι τὸ τριτημόριον τῆς βασιληίης , οὐ ποιήσειν τὰ βούλονται .
When, however, the madness spread among their women, they promised what Melampus demanded and were ready to give it to him.


9.34.2
9604
οἱ δὲ Ἀργεῖοι ἀπειληθέντες ἐς στεινὸν καταινέουσι καὶ ταῦτα .
Thereupon, seeing their purpose changed, he demanded yet more and said that he would not do their will except if they gave a third of their kingship to his brother Bias; now driven into dire straits, the Argives consented to that also.


9.35.1
9605
ὣς δὲ καὶ Σπαρτιῆται , ἐδέοντο γὰρ δεινῶς τοῦ Τισαμενοῦ , πάντως συνεχώρεόν οἱ .
The Spartans too were so eagerly desirous of winning Tisamenus that they granted everything that he demanded.


9.35.1
9606
συγχωρησάντων δὲ καὶ ταῦτα τῶν Σπαρτιητέων , οὕτω δὴ πέντε σφι μαντευόμενος ἀγῶνας τοὺς μεγίστους Τισαμενὸς ὁ Ἠλεῖος , γενόμενος Σπαρτιήτης , συγκαταιρέει .
When they had granted him this also, Tisamenus of Elis, now a Spartan, engaged in divination for them and aided them to win five very great victories.


9.35.1
9607
μοῦνοι δὲ δὴ πάντων ἀνθρώπων ἐγένοντο οὗτοι Σπαρτιήτῃσι πολιῆται .
No one on earth save Tisamenus and his brother ever became citizens of Sparta.


9.35.2
9608
οἱ δὲ πέντε ἀγῶνες οἵδε ἐγένοντο , εἷς μὲν καὶ πρῶτος οὗτος ὁ ἐν Πλαταιῇσι , ἐπὶ δὲ ὁ ἐν Τεγέῃ πρὸς Τεγεήτας τε καὶ Ἀργείους γενόμενος , μετὰ δὲ ὁ ἐν Διπαιεῦσι πρὸς Ἀρκάδας πάντας πλὴν Μαντινέων , ἐπὶ δὲ ὁ Μεσσηνίων ὁ πρὸς Ἰθώμῃ , ὕστατος δὲ ὁ ἐν Τανάγρῃ πρὸς Ἀθηναίους τε καὶ Ἀργείους γενόμενος ·
Now the five victories were these: one, the first, this victory at Plataea;


9.35.2
9609
οὗτος δὲ ὕστατος κατεργάσθη τῶν πέντε ἀγώνων .
next, that which was won at Tegea over the Tegeans and Argives; after that, over all the Arcadians save the Mantineans at Dipaea; next, over the Messenians at Ithome; lastly, the victory at Tanagra over the Athenians and Argives, which was the last won of the five victories.


9.36.1
9610
οὗτος δὴ τότε τοῖσι Ἕλλησι ὁ Τισαμενός , ἀγόντων τῶν Σπαρτιητέων , ἐμαντεύετο ἐν τῇ Πλαταιίδι .
This Tisamenus had now been brought by the Spartans and was the diviner of the Greeks at Plataea.


9.36.1
9611
τοῖσι μέν νυν Ἕλλησι καλὰ ἐγίνετο τὰ ἱρὰ ἀμυνομένοισι , διαβᾶσι δὲ τὸν Ἀσωπὸν καὶ μάχης ἄρχουσι οὔ .
The sacrifices boded good to the Greeks if they would just defend themselves, but evil if they should cross the Asopus and be the first to attack.


9.37.1
9612
Μαρδονίῳ δὲ προθυμεομένῳ μάχης ἄρχειν οὐκ ἐπιτήδεα ἐγίνετο τὰ ἱρά , ἀμυνομένῳ δὲ καὶ τούτῳ καλά .
Mardonius' sacrifices also foretold an unfavorable outcome if he should be zealous to attack first, and good if he should but defend himself.


9.37.1
9613
καὶ γὰρ οὗτος Ἑλληνικοῖσι ἱροῖσι ἐχρᾶτο , μάντιν ἔχων Ἡγησίστρατον ἄνδρα Ἠλεῖόν τε καὶ τῶν Τελλιαδέων ἐόντα λογιμώτατον , τὸν δὴ πρότερον τούτων Σπαρτιῆται λαβόντες ἔδησαν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ ὡς πεπονθότες πολλά τε καὶ ἀνάρσια ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ .
He too used the Greek manner of sacrifice, and Hegesistratus of Elis was his diviner, the most notable of the sons of Tellias. This man had been put in prison and condemned to die by the Spartans for the great harm which he had done them.


9.37.2
9614
ὁ δὲ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ κακῷ ἐχόμενος , ὥστε τρέχων περὶ τῆς ψυχῆς πρό τε τοῦ θανάτου πεισόμενος πολλά τε καὶ λυγρά , ἔργον ἐργάσατο μέζον λόγου .
Being in such bad shape inasmuch as he was in peril of his life and was likely to be very grievously maltreated before his death, he did something which was almost beyond belief;


9.37.2
9615
ὡς γὰρ δὴ ἐδέδετο ἐν ξύλῳ σιδηροδέτῳ , ἐσενειχθέντος κως σιδηρίου ἐκράτησε , αὐτίκα δὲ ἐμηχανᾶτο ἀνδρηιότατον ἔργον πάντων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν ·
made fast in iron-bound stocks, he got an iron weapon which was brought in some way into his prison, and straightway conceived a plan of such courage as we have never known;


9.37.2
9616
σταθμησάμενος γὰρ ὅκως ἐξελεύσεταί οἱ τὸ λοιπὸν τοῦ ποδός , ἀπέταμε τὸν ταρσὸν ἑωυτοῦ .
reckoning how best the rest of it might get free, he cut off his own foot at the instep.


9.37.3
9617
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας , ὡς φυλασσόμενος ὑπὸ φυλάκων , διορύξας τὸν τοῖχον ἀπέδρη ἐς Τεγέην , τὰς μὲν νύκτας πορευόμενος , τὰς δὲ ἡμέρας καταδύνων ἐς ὕλην καὶ αὐλιζόμενος , οὕτω ὡς Λακεδαιμονίων πανδημεὶ διζημένων τρίτῃ εὐφρόνῃ γενέσθαι ἐν Τεγέη , τοὺς δὲ ἐν θώματι μεγάλῳ ἐνέχεσθαι τῆς τε τόλμης , ὁρῶντας τὸ ἡμίτομον τοῦ ποδὸς κείμενον , κ- ἐκεῖνον οὐ δυναμένους εὑρεῖν .
This done, he tunneled through the wall out of the way of the guards who kept watch over him, and so escaped to  Tegea. All night he journeyed, and all day he hid and lay hidden in the woods, till on the third night he came to  Tegea, while all the people of  Lacedaemon sought him. The latter were greatly amazed when they saw the half of his foot which had been cut off and lying there but not were unable to find the man himself.


9.37.4
9618
τότε μὲν οὕτω διαφυγὼν Λακεδαιμονίους καταφεύγει ἐς Τεγέην ἐοῦσαν οὐκ ἀρθμίην Λακεδαιμονίοισι τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ·
This, then, is the way in which he escaped the Lacedaemonians and took refuge in Tegea, which at that time was unfriendly to Lacedaemon.


9.37.4
9619
ὑγιὴς δὲ γενόμενος καὶ προσποιησάμενος ξύλινον πόδα κατεστήκεε ἐκ τῆς ἰθέης Λακεδαιμονίοισι πολέμιος .
After he was healed and had made himself a foot of wood, he declared himself an open enemy of the Lacedaemonians.


9.37.4
9620
οὐ μέντοι ἔς γε τέλος οἱ συνήνεικε τὸ ἔχθος τὸ ἐς Λακεδαιμονίους συγκεκυρημένον ·
Yet the enmity which he bore them brought him no good at the last,


9.37.4
9621
ἥλω γὰρ μαντευόμενος ἐν Ζακύνθῳ ὑπ’ αὐτῶν καὶ ἀπέθανε .
for they caught him at his divinations in Zacynthus and killed him.


9.38.1
9622
ὁ μέντοι θάνατος ὁ Ἡγησιστράτου ὕστερον ἐγένετο τῶν Πλαταιικῶν , τότε δὲ ἐπὶ τῷ Ἀσωπῷ Μαρδονίῳ μεμισθωμένος οὐκ ὀλίγου ἐθύετό τε καὶ προεθυμέετο κατά τε τὸ ἔχθος τὸ Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ κατὰ τὸ κέρδος .
The death of Hegesistratus, however, took place after the Plataean business. At the present he was by the Asopus, hired by Mardonius for no small wage, where he sacrificed and worked zealously, both for the hatred he bore the Lacedaemonians and for gain.


9.38.2
9623
ὡς δὲ οὐκ ἐκαλλιέρεε ὥστε μάχεσθαι οὔτε αὐτοῖσι Πέρσῃσι οὔτε τοῖσι μετ’ ἐκείνων ἐοῦσι Ἑλλήνων ( εἶχον γὰρ καὶ οὗτοι ἐπ’ ἑωυτῶν μάντιν Ἱππόμαχον Λευκάδιον ἄνδρα ) , ἐπιρρεόντων δὲ τῶν Ἑλλήνων καὶ γινομένων πλεύνων , Τιμηγενίδης ὁ Ἕρπυος ἀνὴρ Θηβαῖος συνεβούλευσε Μαρδονίῳ τὰς ἐκβολὰς τοῦ Κιθαιρῶνος φυλάξαι , λέγων ὡς ἐπιρρέουσι οἱ Ἕλληνες αἰεὶ ἀνὰ πᾶσαν ἡμέρην καὶ ὡς ἀπολάμψοιτο συχνούς .
When no favorable omens for battle could be won either by the Persians themselves or by the Greeks who were with them (for they too had a diviner of their own, Hippomachus of  Leucas), and the Greeks kept flocking in and their army grew, Timagenides son of Herpys, a Theban, advised Mardonius to guard the outlet of the pass over Cithaeron, telling him that the Greeks were coming in daily and that he would thereby cut off many of them.


9.39.1
9624
ἡμέραι δέ σφι ἀντικατημένοισι ἤδη ἐγεγόνεσαν ὀκτώ , ὅτε ταῦτα ἐκεῖνος συνεβούλευε Μαρδονίῳ .
The armies had already lain hidden opposite each other for eight days when he gave this counsel.


9.39.1
9625
ὁ δὲ μαθὼν τὴν παραίνεσιν εὖ ἔχουσαν , ὡς εὐφρόνη ἐγένετο , πέμπει τὴν ἵππον ἐς τὰς ἐκβολὰς τὰς Κιθαιρωνίδας αἳ ἐπὶ Πλαταιέων φέρουσι , τὰς Βοιωτοὶ μὲν Τρεῖς κεφαλὰς καλέουσι , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ Δρυὸς κεφαλάς .
Mardonius perceived that the advice was good, and when night had fallen, he sent his horsemen to the outlet of the pass over Cithaeron which leads towards Plataea.


9.39.1
9626
πεμφθέντες δὲ οἱ ἱππόται οὐ μάτην ἀπίκοντο ·
This pass the Boeotians call the Three Heads, and the Athenians the Oak's Heads. The horsemen who were sent out did not go in vain,


9.39.2
9627
ἐσβάλλοντα γὰρ ἐς τὸ πεδίον λαμβάνουσι ὑποζύγιά τε πεντακόσια , σιτία ἄγοντα ἀπὸ Πελοποννήσου ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον , καὶ ἀνθρώπους οἳ εἵποντο τοῖσι ζεύγεσι .
for they caught both five hundred beasts of burden which were going into the low country, bringing provisions from the Peloponnese for the army, and men who came with the wagons.


9.39.2
9628
ἑλόντες δὲ ταύτην τὴν ἄγρην οἱ Πέρσαι ἀφειδέως ἐφόνευον , οὐ φειδόμενοι οὔτε ὑποζυγίου οὐδενὸς οὔτε ἀνθρώπου .
When they had taken this quarry, the Persians killed without mercy, sparing neither man nor beast.


9.39.2
9629
ὡς δὲ ἄδην εἶχον κτείνοντες , τὰ λοιπὰ αὐτῶν ἤλαυνον περιβαλόμενοι παρά τε Μαρδόνιον καὶ ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον .
When they had their fill of slaughter, they encircled the rest and drove them to Mardonius and his camp.


9.40.1
9630
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον ἑτέρας δύο ἡμέρας διέτριψαν , οὐδέτεροι βουλόμενοι μάχης ἄρξαι ·
After this deed they waited two days more, neither side desiring to begin the battle,


9.40.1
9631
μέχρι μὲν γὰρ τοῦ Ἀσωποῦ ἐπήισαν οἱ βάρβαροι πειρώμενοι τῶν Ἑλλήνων , διέβαινον δὲ οὐδέτεροι .
for although the barbarians came to the Asopus to test the Greeks intent, neither army crossed it.


9.40.1
9632
ἡ μέντοι ἵππος ἡ Μαρδονίου αἰεὶ προσέκειτό τε καὶ ἐλύπεε τοὺς Ἕλληνας ·
Mardonius' cavalry, however, kept pressing upon and troubling the Greeks,


9.40.1
9633
οἱ γὰρ Θηβαῖοι , ἅτε μηδίζοντες μεγάλως , προθύμως ἔφερον τὸν πόλεμον καὶ αἰεὶ κατηγέοντο μέχρι μάχης , τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τούτου παραδεκόμενοι Πέρσαι τε καὶ Μῆδοι μάλα ἔσκον οἳ ἀπεδείκνυντο ἀρετάς .
for the Thebans, in their zeal for the Persian part, waged war heartily, and kept on guiding the horsemen to the encounter; thereafter it was the turn of the Persians and Medes, and they and none other would do deeds of valor.


9.41.1
9634
μέχρι μέν νυν τῶν δέκα ἡμερέων οὐδὲν ἐπὶ πλεῦν ἐγίνετο τούτων ·
Until ten days had passed, no more was done than this.


9.41.1
9635
ὡς δὲ ἑνδεκάτη ἐγεγόνεε ἡμέρη ἀντικατημένοισι ἐν Πλαταιῇσι , οἵ τε δὴ Ἕλληνες πολλῷ πλεῦνες ἐγεγόνεσαν καὶ Μαρδόνιος περιημέκτεε τῇ ἕδρῃ , ἐνθαῦτα ἐς λόγους ἦλθον Μαρδόνιός τε ὁ Γοβρύεω καὶ Ἀρτάβαζος ὁ Φαρνάκεος , ὃς ἐν ὀλίγοισι Περσέων ἦν ἀνὴρ δόκιμος παρὰ Ξέρξῃ .
On the eleventh day from their first encampment opposite each other, the Greeks growing greatly in number and Mardonius being greatly vexed by the delay, there was a debate held between Mardonius son of Gobryas and Artabazus son of Pharnaces, who stood as high as only few others in Xerxes' esteem.


9.41.2
9636
βουλευομένων δὲ αἵδε ἦσαν αἱ γνῶμαι , ἣ μὲν Ἀρταβάζου ὡς χρεὸν εἴη ἀναζεύξαντας τὴν ταχίστην πάντα τὸν στρατὸν ἰέναι ἐς τὸ τεῖχος τὸ Θηβαίων , ἔθα σῖτόν τέ σφι ἐσενηνεῖχθαι πολλὸν καὶ χόρτον τοῖσι ὑποζυγίοισι , κατ’ ἡσυχίην τε ἱζομένους διαπρήσσεσθαι ποιεῦντας τάδε ·
Their opinions in council were as I will show. Artabazus thought it best that they should strike their camp with all speed and lead the whole army within the walls of  Thebes. Here there was much food stored and fodder for their beasts of burden; furthermore, they could sit at their ease here and conclude the business by doing as follows:


9.41.3
9637
ἔχειν γὰρ χρυσὸν πολλὸν μὲν ἐπίσημον πολλὸν δὲ καὶ ἄσημον , πολλὸν δὲ ἄργυρόν τε καὶ ἐκπώματα ·
they could take the great store they had of gold, minted and other, and silver drinking-cups,


9.41.3
9638
τούτων φειδομένους μηδενὸς διαπέμπειν ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας , Ἑλλήνων δὲ μάλιστα ἐς τοὺς προεστεῶτας ἐν τῇσι πόλισι , καὶ ταχέως σφέας παραδώσειν τὴν ἐλευθερίην ·
and send all this to all places in Hellas without stint, excepting none, but especially to the chief men in the cities of Hellas.


9.41.3
9639
μηδὲ ἀνακινδυνεύειν συμβάλλοντας .
Let them do this (he said) and the Greeks would quickly surrender their liberty; but do not let the Persians risk the event of a battle.


9.41.4
9640
τούτου μὲν ἡ αὐτὴ ἐγίνετο καὶ Θηβαίων γνώμη , ὡς προειδότος πλεῦν τι καὶ τούτου , Μαρδονίου δὲ ἰσχυροτέρη τε καὶ ἀγνωμονεστέρη καὶ οὐδαμῶς συγγινωσκομένη ·
This opinion of his was the same as the Thebans, inasmuch as he too had special foreknowledge.


9.41.4
9641
δοκέειν τε γὰρ πολλῷ κρέσσονα εἶναι τὴν σφετέρην στρατιὴν τῆς Ἑλληνικῆς , συμβάλλειν τε τὴν ταχίστην μηδὲ περιορᾶν συλλεγομένους ἔτι πλεῦνας τῶν συλλελεγμένων , τά τε σφάγια τὰ Ἡγησιστράτου ἐᾶν μηδὲ βιάζεσθαι , ἀλλὰ νόμῳ τῷ Περσέων χρεωμένους συμβάλλειν .
Mardonius' counsel, however, was more vehement and intemperate and not at all leaning to moderation. He said that he thought that their army was much stronger than the Greeks and that they should give battle with all speed so as not to let more Greeks muster than were mustered already.


9.42.1
9642
τούτου δὲ οὕτω δικαιεῦντος ἀντέλεγε οὐδείς , ὥστε ἐκράτεε τῇ γνώμῃ ·
As for the sacrifices of Hegesistratus, let them pay no heed to these, nor seek to wring good from them, but rather give battle after Persian custom.


9.42.1
9643
τὸ γὰρ κράτος εἶχε τῆς στρατιῆς οὗτος ἐκ βασιλέος , ἀλλ’ οὐκ Ἀρτάβαζος .
No one withstood this argument, and his opinion accordingly prevailed;


9.42.1
9644
μεταπεμψάμενος ὦν τοὺς ταξιάρχους τῶν τελέων καὶ τῶν μετ’ ἑωυτοῦ ἐόντων Ἑλλήνων τοὺς στρατηγοὺς εἰρώτα εἴ τι εἰδεῖεν λόγιον περὶ Περσέων ὡς διαφθερέονται ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι .
for it was he and not Artabazus who was commander of the army by the king's commission. He therefore sent for the leaders of the battalions and the generals of those Greeks who were with him and asked them if they knew any oracle which prophesied that the Persians should perish in Hellas.


9.42.2
9645
σιγώντων δὲ τῶν ἐπικλήτων , τῶν μὲν οὐκ εἰδότων τοὺς χρησμούς , τῶν δὲ εἰδότων μὲν ἐν ἀδείῃ δὲ οὐ ποιευμένων τὸ λέγειν , αὐτὸς Μαρδόνιος ἔλεγε " ἐπεὶ τοίνυν ὑμεῖς ἢ ἴστε οὐδὲν ἢ οὐ τολμᾶτε λέγειν , ἀλλ’ ἐγὼ ἐρέω ὡς εὖ ἐπιστάμενος ·
Those who were summoned said nothing, some not knowing the prophecies, and some knowing them but thinking it perilous to speak, and then Mardonius himself said: “Since you either have no knowledge or are afraid to declare it, hear what I tell you based on the full knowledge that I have.


9.42.3
9646
ἔστι λόγιον ὡς χρεόν ἐστι Πέρσας ἀπικομένους ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα διαρπάσαι τὸ ἱρὸν τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖσι , μετὰ δὲ τὴν διαρπαγὴν ἀπολέσθαι πάντας .
There is an oracle that Persians are fated to come to Hellas and all perish there after they have plundered the temple at Delphi.


9.42.3
9647
ἡμεῖς τοίνυν αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἐπιστάμενοι οὔτε ἴμεν ἐπὶ τὸ ἱρὸν τοῦτο οὔτε ἐπιχειρήσομεν διαρπάζειν , ταύτης τε εἵνεκα τῆς αἰτίης οὐκ ἀπολεόμεθα .
Since we have knowledge of this same oracle, we will neither approach that temple nor attempt to plunder it; in so far as destruction hinges on that, none awaits us.


9.42.4
9648
ὥστε ὑμέων ὅσοι τυγχάνουσι εὔνοοι ἐόντες Πέρσῃσι , ἥδεσθε τοῦδε εἵνεκα ὡς περιεσομένους ἡμέας Ἑλλήνων " .
Therefore, as many of you as wish the Persian well may rejoice in that we will overcome the Greeks.”


9.42.4
9649
ταῦτά σφι εἴπας δεύτερα ἐσήμαινε παραρτέεσθαί τε πάντα καὶ εὐκρινέα ποιέεσθαι ὡς ἅμα ἡμέρῃ τῇ ἐπιούσῃ συμβολῆς ἐσομένης .
Having spoken in this way, he gave command to have everything prepared and put in good order for the battle which would take place early the next morning.


9.43.1
9650
τοῦτον δ’ ἔγωγε τὸν χρησμόν , τὸν Μαρδόνιος εἶπε ἐς Πέρσας ἔχειν , ἐς Ἰλλυριούς τε καὶ τὸν Ἐγχελέων στρατὸν οἶδα πεποιημένον , ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἐς Πέρσας .
Now for this prophecy, which Mardonius said was spoken of the Persians, I know it to have been made concerning not them but the Illyrians and the army of the Enchelees.


9.43.1
9651
ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν Βάκιδι ἐς ταύτην τὴν μάχην ἐστὶ πεποιημένα , τὴν δ’ ἐπὶ Θερμώδοντι καὶ Ἀσωπῷ λεχεποίῃ Ἑλλήνων σύνοδον καὶ βαρβαρόφωνον ἰυγήν , τῇ πολλοὶ πεσέονται ὑπὲρ λάχεσίν τε μόρον τε τοξοφόρων Μήδων , ὅταν αἴσιμον ἦμαρ ἐπέλθῃ , ταῦτα μὲν καὶ παραπλήσια τούτοισι ἄλλα Μουσαίῳ ἔχοντα οἶδα ἐς Πέρσας .
There is, however, a prophecy made by Bacis concerning this battle:


9.43.2
9652
ὁ δὲ Θερμώδων ποταμὸς ῥέει μεταξὺ Τανάγρης τε καὶ Γλίσαντος .
"  By Thermodon's stream and the grass-grown banks of Asopus,   Will be a gathering of Greeks for fight and the ring of the barbarian's war-cry;  Many a Median archer, by death untimely overtaken will fall There in the battle when the day of his doom is upon him. "  I know that these verses and others very similar to them from Musaeus referred to the Persians. As for the river Thermodon, it flows between  Tanagra and  Glisas.


9.44.1
9653
μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἐπειρώτησιν τῶν χρησμῶν καὶ παραίνεσιν τὴν ἐκ Μαρδονίου νύξ τε ἐγίνετο καὶ ἐς φυλακὰς ἐτάσσοντο .
After this inquiry about oracles and Mardonius' exhortation, night fell, and the armies posted their sentries.


9.44.1
9654
ὡς δὲ πρόσω τῆς νυκτὸς προελήλατο καὶ ἡσυχίη ἐδόκεε εἶναι ἀνὰ τὰ στρατόπεδα καὶ μάλιστα οἱ ἄνθρωποι εἶναι ἐν ὕπνῳ , τηνικαῦτα προσελάσας ἵππῳ πρὸς τὰς φυλακὰς τὰς Ἀθηναίων Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Ἀμύντεω , στρατηγός τε ἐὼν καὶ βασιλεὺς Μακεδόνων , ἐδίζητο τοῖσι στρατηγοῖσι ἐς λόγους ἐλθεῖν .
Now when the night was far advanced and it seemed that all was still in the camps and the men were sleeping deeply, at that hour Alexander son of Amyntas, the general and king of the Macedonians, rode up to the Athenian outposts and wanted to speak to their generals.


9.44.2
9655
τῶν δὲ φυλάκων οἱ μὲν πλεῦνες παρέμενον , οἳ δ’ ἔθεον ἐπὶ τοὺς στρατηγούς , ἐλθόντες δὲ ἔλεγον ὡς ἄνθρωπος ἥκοι ἐπ’ ἵππου ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου τοῦ Μήδων , ὃς ἄλλο μὲν οὐδὲν παραγυμνοῖ ἔπος , στρατηγοὺς δὲ ὀνομάζων ἐθέλειν φησὶ ἐς λόγους ἐλθεῖν .
The greater part of the sentries remained where they were, but the rest ran to their generals and told them that a horseman had ridden in from the Persian camp, imparting no other word save that he desired to speak to the generals and called them by their names.


9.45.1
9656
οἳ δὲ ἐπεὶ ταῦτα ἤκουσαν , αὐτίκα εἵποντο ἐς τὰς φυλακάς ·
Hearing that, the generals straightway went with the men to the outposts.


9.45.1
9657
ἀπικομένοισι δὲ ἔλεγε Ἀλέξανδρος τάδε .
When they had come, Alexander said to them:


9.45.1
9658
" ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , παραθήκην ὑμῖν τὰ ἔπεα τάδε τίθεμαι , ἀπόρρητα ποιεύμενος πρὸς μηδένα λέγειν ὑμέας ἄλλον ἢ Παυσανίην , μή με καὶ διαφθείρητε ·
“Men of Athens, I give you this message in trust as a secret which you must reveal to no one but Pausanias, or else you will be responsible for my undoing.


9.45.1
9659
οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἔλεγον , εἰ μὴ μεγάλως ἐκηδόμην συναπάσης τῆς Ἑλλάδος .
In truth I would not tell it to you if I did not care so much for all Hellas;


9.45.2
9660
αὐτός τε γὰρ Ἕλλην γένος εἰμὶ τ- ἀρχαῖον καὶ ἀντ’ ἐλευθέρης δεδουλωμένην οὐκ ἂν ἐθέλοιμι ὁρᾶν τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
I myself am by ancient descent a Greek, and I would not willingly see Hellas change her freedom for slavery.


9.45.2
9661
λέγω δὲ ὦν ὅτι Μαρδονίῳ τε καὶ τῇ στρατιῇ τὰ σφάγια οὐ δύναται καταθύμια γενέσθαι ·
I tell you, then, that Mardonius and his army cannot get omens to his liking from the sacrifices.


9.45.2
9662
πάλαι γὰρ ἂν ἐμάχεσθε .
Otherwise you would have fought long before this.


9.45.2
9663
νῦν δέ οἱ δέδοκται τὰ μὲν σφάγια ἐᾶν χαίρειν , ἅμ’ ἡμέρῃ δὲ διαφωσκούσῃ συμβολὴν ποιέεσθαι ·
Now, however, it is his purpose to pay no heed to the sacrifices, and to attack at the first glimmer of dawn,


9.45.2
9664
καταρρώδηκε γὰρ μὴ πλεῦνες συλλεχθῆτε , ὡς ἐγὼ εἰκάζω .
for he fears, as I surmise, that your numbers will become still greater.


9.45.2
9665
πρὸς ταῦτα ἑτοιμάζεσθε .
Therefore, I urge you to prepare,


9.45.2
9666
ἢν δὲ ἄρα ὑπερβάληται τὴν συμβολὴν Μαρδόνιος καὶ μὴ ποιέηται , λιπαρέετε μένοντες ·
and if (as may be) Mardonius should delay and not attack, wait patiently where you are;


9.45.2
9667
ὀλιγέων γάρ σφι ἡμερέων λείπεται σιτία .
for he has but a few days' provisions left.


9.45.3
9668
ἢν δὲ ὑμῖν ὁ πόλεμος ὅδε κατὰ νόον τελευτήσῃ , μνησθῆναι τινὰ χρὴ καὶ ἐμεῦ ἐλευθερώσιος πέρι , ὃς Ἑλλήνων εἵνεκα οὕτω ἔργον παράβολον ἔργασμαι ὑπὸ προθυμίης , ἐθέλων ὑμῖν δηλῶσαι τὴν διάνοιαν τὴν Μαρδονίου , ἵνα μὴ ἐπιπέσωσι ὑμῖν ἐξαίφνης οἱ βάρβαροι μὴ προσδεκομένοισί κω .
If, however, this war ends as you wish, then must you take thought how to save me too from slavery, who have done so desperate a deed as this for the sake of Hellas in my desire to declare to you Mardonius' intent so that the barbarians may not attack you suddenly before you yet expect them.


9.45.3
9669
εἰμὶ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Μακεδών " .
I who speak am Alexander the Macedonian.”


9.45.3
9670
ὃ μὲν ταῦτα εἴπας ἀπήλαυνε ὀπίσω ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον καὶ τὴν ἑωυτοῦ τάξιν .
With that he rode away back to the camp and his own station there.


9.46.1
9671
οἱ δὲ στρατηγοὶ τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἐλθόντες ἐπὶ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας ἔλεγον Παυσανίῃ τά περ ἤκουσαν Ἀλεξάνδρου .
The Athenian generals went to the right wing and told Pausanias what they had heard from Alexander.


9.46.1
9672
ὁ δὲ τούτῳ τῷ λόγῳ καταρρωδήσας τοὺς Πέρσας ἔλεγε τάδε .
At the message Pausanias was terrified by the Persians, and said:


9.46.2
9673
" ἐπεὶ τοίνυν ἐς ἠῶ ἡ συμβολὴ γίνεται , ὑμέας μὲν χρεόν ἐστι τοὺς Ἀθηναίους στῆναι κατὰ τοὺς Πέρσας , ἡμέας δὲ κατὰ τοὺς Βοιωτούς τε καὶ τοὺς κατ’ ὑμέας τεταγμένους Ἑλλήνων , τῶνδε εἵνεκα ·
“Since, therefore, the battle is to begin at dawn, it is best that you Athenians should take your stand opposite the Persians, and we opposite the Boeotians and the Greeks who are posted opposite you;


9.46.2
9674
ὑμεῖς ἐπίστασθε τοὺς Μήδους καὶ τὴν μάχην αὐτῶν ἐν Μαραθῶνι μαχεσάμενοι , ἡμεῖς δὲ ἄπειροί τε εἰμὲν καὶ ἀδαέες τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν ·
for you have fought with the Medes at Marathon and know them and their manner of fighting while we have no experience or knowledge of those men.


9.46.2
9675
Σπαρτιητέων γὰρ οὐδεὶς πεπείρηται Μήδων ·
Not one of us Spartans has experience with the Medes.


9.46.2
9676
ἡμεῖς δὲ Βοιωτῶν καὶ Θεσσαλῶν ἔμπειροι εἰμέν .
We Spartans have experience of the Boeotians and Thessalians.


9.46.3
9677
ἀλλ’ ἀναλαβόντας τὰ ὅπλα χρεόν ἐστι ἰέναι ὑμέας ἐς τόδε τὸ κέρας , ἡμέας δὲ ἐς τὸ εὐώνυμον " .
No, rather let us take up our equipment and change places, you to this wing and we to the left.”


9.46.3
9678
πρὸς δὲ ταῦτα εἶπαν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι τάδε .
“We, too,” the Athenians answered,


9.46.3
9679
" καὶ αὐτοῖσι ἡμῖν πάλαι ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς , ἐπείτε εἴδομεν κατ’ ὑμέας τασσομένους τοὺς Πέρσας , ἐν νόῳ ἐγένετο εἰπεῖν ταῦτα τά περ ὑμεῖς φθάντες προφέρετε ·
“even from the moment when we saw the Persians posted opposite you, had it in mind to make that suggestion which now has first come from you.


9.46.3
9680
ἀλλὰ ἀρρωδέομεν μὴ ὑμῖν οὐκ ἡδέες γένωνται οἱ λόγοι .
We feared, however, that we would displease you by making it.


9.46.3
9681
ἐπεὶ δ’ ὦν αὐτοὶ ἐμνήσθητε , καὶ ἡδομένοισι ἡμῖν οἱ λόγοι γεγόνασι καὶ ἕτοιμοι εἰμὲν ποιέειν ταῦτα " .
But since you have spoken the wish yourselves, we too hear your words very gladly and are ready to do as you say.


9.47.1
9682
ὡς δ’ ἤρεσκε ἀμφοτέροισι ταῦτα , ἠώς τε διέφαινε καὶ διαλλάσσοντο τὰς τάξις .
Since both were satisfied with this, they exchanged their places in the ranks at the first light of dawn.


9.47.1
9683
γνόντες δὲ οἱ Βοιωτοὶ τὸ ποιεύμενον ἐξαγορεύουσι Μαρδονίῳ .
The Boeotians noticed that and made it known to Mardonius.


9.47.1
9684
ὃ δ’ ἐπείτε ἤκουσε , αὐτίκα μετιστάναι καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπειρᾶτο , παράγων τοὺς Πέρσας κατὰ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους .
When he heard this, he straight away attempted to make a change for himself also, by moving the Persians opposite the Lacedaemonians.


9.47.1
9685
ὡς δὲ ἔμαθε τοῦτο τοιοῦτο γινόμενον ὁ Παυσανίης , γνοὺς ὅτι οὐ λανθάνει , ὀπίσω ἦγε τοὺς Σπαρτιήτας ἐπὶ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας ·
When Pausanias perceived what was being done, he saw that his action had been discovered and led the Spartans back to the right wing;


9.47.1
9686
ὣς δὲ οὕτως καὶ ὁ Μαρδόνιος ἐπὶ τοῦ εὐωνύμου .
Mardonius did the same thing on the left of his army.


9.48.1
9687
ἐπεὶ δὲ κατέστησαν ἐς τὰς ἀρχαίας τάξις , πέμψας ὁ Μαρδόνιος κήρυκα ἐς τοὺς Σπαρτιήτας ἔλεγε τάδε .
When all were at their former posts again, Mardonius sent a herald to the Lacedaemonians with this message:


9.48.1
9688
" ὦ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ὑμεῖς δὴ λέγεσθε εἶναι ἄνδρες ἄριστοι ὑπὸ τῶν τῇδε ἀνθρώπων , ἐκπαγλεομένων ὡς οὔτε φεύγετε ἐκ πολέμου οὔτε τάξιν ἐκλείπετε , μένοντές τε ἢ ἀπόλλυτε τοὺς ἐναντίους ἢ αὐτοὶ ἀπόλλυσθε .
“Men of Lacedaemon, you are said by the people of these parts to be very brave men. It is their boast of you that you neither flee from the field nor leave your post, but remain there and either slay your enemies or are yourselves killed. It would seem, however, that there is no truth in all this,


9.48.2
9689
τῶν δ’ ἄρ’ ἦν οὐδὲν ἀληθές ·
for before we could attack and fight hand to hand, we saw you even now fleeing and leaving your station,


9.48.2
9690
πρὶν γὰρ ἢ συμμῖξαι ἡμέας ἐς χειρῶν τε νόμον ἀπικέσθαι , καὶ δὴ φεύγοντας καὶ στάσιν ἐκλείποντας ὑμέας εἴδομεν , ἐν Ἀθηναίοισί τε τὴν πρόπειραν ποιευμένους αὐτούς τε ἀντία δούλων τῶν ἡμετέρων τασσομένους .
using Athenians for the first trial of your enemy and arraying yourselves opposite those who are but our slaves.


9.48.3
9691
ταῦτα οὐδαμῶς ἀνδρῶν ἀγαθῶν ἔργα , ἀλλὰ πλεῖστον δὴ ἐν ὑμῖν ἐψεύσθημεν .
This is not the action of brave men.


9.48.3
9692
προσδεκόμενοι γὰρ κατὰ κλέος ὡς δὴ πέμψετε ἐς ἡμέας κήρυκα προκαλεύμενοι καὶ βουλόμενοι μούνοισι Πέρσῃσι μάχεσθαι , ἄρτιοι ἐόντες ποιέειν ταῦτα οὐδὲν τοιοῦτο λέγοντας ὑμέας εὕρομεν ἀλλὰ πτώσσοντας μᾶλλον .
No, we have been grievously mistaken about you, for in accordance with what we heard about you, we expected that you would send us a herald challenging the Persians and none other to fight with you. That we were ready to do; but we find you making no such offer, but rather quailing before us.


9.48.3
9693
νῦν ὦν ἐπειδὴ οὐκ ὑμεῖς ἤρξατε τούτου τοῦ λόγου , ἀλλ’ ἡμεῖς ἄρχομεν .
Now, therefore, since the challenge comes not from you, take it from us instead.


9.48.4
9694
τί δὴ οὐ πρὸ μὲν τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὑμεῖς , ἐπείτε δεδόξωσθε εἶναι ἄριστοι , πρὸ δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων ἡμεῖς ἴσοι πρὸς ἴσους ἀριθμὸν ἐμαχεσάμεθα ;
What is there to prevent us from fighting with equal numbers on both sides, you for the Greeks (since you have the reputation of being their best), and we for the barbarians?


9.48.4
9695
καὶ ἢν μὲν δοκέῃ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους μάχεσθαι , οἱ δ’ ὦν μετέπειτα μαχέσθων ὕστεροι ·
If it is desirable that the others fight also, let them fight after us,


9.48.4
9696
εἰ δὲ καὶ μὴ δοκέοι ἀλλ’ ἡμέας μούνους ἀποχρᾶν , ἡμεῖς δὲ διαμαχεσώμεθα ·
but if, on the contrary, the opinion prevails that we alone suffice, then let us fight it out.


9.48.4
9697
ὁκότεροι δ’ ἂν ἡμέων νικήσωσι , τούτους τῷ ἅπαντι στρατοπέδῳ νικᾶν " .
Let the winner in this contest determine victory for the whole army.”


9.49.1
9698
ὃ μὲν ταῦτα εἴπας τε καὶ ἐπισχὼν χρόνον , ὥς οἱ οὐδεὶς οὐδὲν ὑπεκρίνατο , ἀπαλλάσσετο ὀπίσω , ἀπελθὼν δὲ ἐσήμαινε Μαρδονίῳ τὰ καταλαβόντα .
This is the proclamation made by the herald; and when he had waited a while and no one answered him, he went back again, and at his return told what had happened to him.


9.49.1
9699
ὁ δὲ περιχαρὴς γενόμενος καὶ ἐπαερθεὶς ψυχρῇ νίκῃ ἐπῆκε τὴν ἵππον ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἕλληνας .
Mardonius was overjoyed and proud of this semblance of victory, and sent his cavalry to attack the Greeks.


9.49.2
9700
ὡς δὲ ἐπήλασαν οἱ ἱππόται , ἐσίνοντο πᾶσαν τὴν στρατιὴν τὴν Ἑλληνικὴν ἐσακοντίζοντές τε καὶ τοξεύοντες ὥστε ἱπποτοξόται τε ἐόντες καὶ προσφέρεσθαι ἄποροι ·
The horsemen rode at them and shot arrows and javelins among the whole Greek army to its great hurt,


9.49.2
9701
τήν τε κρήνην τὴν Γαργαφίην , ἀπ’ ἧς ὑδρεύετο πᾶν τὸ στράτευμα τὸ Ἑλληνικόν , συνετάραξαν καὶ συνέχωσαν .
since they were mounted archers and difficult to deal with in an encounter; they spoiled and blocked the Gargaphian spring, from which the entire Greek army drew its water.


9.49.3
9702
ἦσαν μὲν ὦν κατὰ τὴν κρήνην Λακεδαιμόνιοι τεταγμένοι μοῦνοι , τοῖσι δὲ ἄλλοισι Ἕλλησι ἡ μὲν κρήνη πρόσω ἐγίνετο , ὡς ἕκαστοι ἔτυχον τεταγμένοι , ὁ δὲ Ἀσωπὸς ἀγχοῦ ·
None indeed but the Lacedaemonians were posted near the spring, and it was far from the several stations of the other Greeks, whereas the Asopus was near;


9.49.3
9703
ἐρυκόμενοι δὲ τοῦ Ἀσωποῦ οὕτω δὴ ἐπὶ τὴν κρήνην ἐφοίτων ·
nevertheless, they would always go to the spring, since they were barred from the Asopus,


9.49.3
9704
ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ γάρ σφι οὐκ ἐξῆν ὕδωρ φορέεσθαι ὑπό τε τῶν ἱππέων καὶ τοξευμάτων .
not being able to draw water from that river because of the horsemen and the arrows.


9.50.1
9705
τούτου δὲ τοιούτου γινομένου οἱ τῶν Ἑλλήνων στρατηγοί , ἅτε τοῦ τε ὕδατος στερηθείσης τῆς στρατιῆς καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς ἵππου ταρασσομένης , συνελέχθησαν περὶ αὐτῶν τε τούτων καὶ ἄλλων , ἐλθόντες παρὰ Παυσανίην ἐπὶ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας .
When this happened, seeing that their army was cut off from water and thrown into confusion by the horsemen, the generals of the Greeks went to Pausanias on the right wing, and debated concerning this and other matters;


9.50.1
9706
ἄλλα γὰρ τούτων τοιούτων ἐόντων μᾶλλον σφέας ἐλύπεε ·
for there were other problems which troubled them more than what I have told.


9.50.1
9707
οὔτε γὰρ σιτία εἶχον ἔτι , οἵ τε σφέων ὀπέωνες ἀποπεμφθέντες ἐς Πελοπόννησον ὡς ἐπισιτιεύμενοι ἀπεκεκληίατο ὑπὸ τῆς ἵππου , οὐ δυνάμενοι ἀπικέσθαι ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον .
They had no food left, and their followers whom they had sent into the Peloponnese to bring provisions had been cut off by the horsemen and could not make their way to the army.


9.51.1
9708
βουλευομένοισι δὲ τοῖσι στρατηγοῖσι ἔδοξε , ἣν ὑπερβάλωνται ἐκείνην τὴν ἡμέρην οἱ Πέρσαι συμβολὴν ποιεύμενοι , ἐς τὴν νῆσον ἰέναι .
So they resolved in their council that if the Persians held off through that day from giving battle, they would go to the Island.


9.51.1
9709
ἣ δὲ ἐστὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἀσωποῦ καὶ τῆς κρήνης τῆς Γαργαφίης , ἐπ’ ᾗ ἐστρατοπεδεύοντο τότε , δέκα σταδίους ἀπέχουσα , πρὸ τῆς Πλαταιέων πόλιος .
This is ten furlongs distant from the Asopus and the Gargaphian spring, near which their army then lay, and in front of the town of Plataea.


9.51.2
9710
νῆσος δὲ οὕτω ἂν εἴη ἐν ἠπείρῳ ·
It is like an island on dry land


9.51.2
9711
σχιζόμενος ὁ ποταμὸς ἄνωθεν ἐκ τοῦ Κιθαιρῶνος ῥέει κάτω ἐς τὸ πεδίον , διέχων ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων τὰ ῥέεθρα ὅσον περ τρία στάδια , καὶ ἔπειτα συμμίσγει ἐς τ- αὐτό .
because the river in its course down from Cithaeron into the plain is parted into two channels, and there is about three furlongs space in between till presently the two channels unite again,


9.51.2
9712
οὔνομα δέ οἱ Ὠερόη ·
and the name of that river is Oeroe,


9.51.3
9713
θυγατέρα δὲ ταύτην λέγουσι εἶναι Ἀσωποῦ οἱ ἐπιχώριοι .
who (as the people of the country say) was the daughter of Asopus.


9.51.3
9714
ἐς τοῦτον δὴ τὸν χῶρον ἐβουλεύσαντο μεταναστῆναι , ἵνα καὶ ὕδατι ἔχωσι χρᾶσθαι ἀφθόνῳ καὶ οἱ ἱππέες σφέας μὴ σινοίατο ὥσπερ κατιθὺ ἐόντων ·
To that place then they planned to go so that they might have plenty of water for their use and not be harmed by the horsemen, as now when they were face to face with them;


9.51.3
9715
μετακινέεσθαί τε ἐδόκεε τότε ἐπεὰν τῆς νυκτὸς ᾖ δευτέρη φυλακή , ὡς ἂν μὴ ἰδοίατο οἱ Πέρσαι ἐξορμωμένους καί σφεας ἑπόμενοι ταράσσοιεν οἱ ἱππόται .
and they resolved to change places in the second watch of the night, lest the Persians should see them setting forth and the horsemen press after them and throw them into confusion.


9.51.4
9716
ἀπικομένων δὲ ἐς τὸν χῶρον τοῦτον , τὸν δὴ ἡ Ἀσωπὶς Ὠερόη περισχίζεται ῥέουσα ἐκ τοῦ Κιθαιρῶνος , ὑπὸ τὴν νύκτα ταύτην ἐδόκεε τοὺς ἡμίσεας ἀποστέλλειν τοῦ στρατοπέδου πρὸς τὸν Κιθαιρῶνα , ὡς ἀναλάβοιεν τοὺς ὀπέωνας τοὺς ἐπὶ τὰ σιτία οἰχομένους ·
Furthermore, they resolved that when they had come to that place, which is encircled by the divided channels of Asopus' daughter Oeroe as she flows from Cithaeron, they would in that night send half of their army to Cithaeron, to remove their followers who had gone to get the provisions;


9.51.4
9717
ἦσαν γὰρ ἐν τῷ Κιθαιρῶνι ἀπολελαμμένοι .
for these were cut off from them on Cithaeron.


9.52.1
9718
ταῦτα βουλευσάμενοι κείνην μὲν τὴν ἡμέρην πᾶσαν προσκειμένης τῆς ἵππου εἶχον πόνον ἄτρυτον ·
Having made this plan, all that day they suffered constant hardship from the cavalry which continually pressed upon them.


9.52.1
9719
ὡς δὲ ἥ τε ἡμέρη ἔληγε καὶ οἱ ἱππέες ἐπέπαυντο , νυκτὸς δὴ γινομένης καὶ ἐούσης τῆς ὥρης ἐς τὴν συνέκειτό σφι ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι , ἐνθαῦτα ἀερθέντες οἱ πολλοὶ ἀπαλλάσσοντο , ἐς μὲν τὸν χῶρον ἐς τὸν συνέκειτο οὐκ ἐν νόῳ ἔχοντες , οἳ δὲ ὡς ἐκινήθησαν ἔφευγον ἄσμενοι τὴν ἵππον πρὸς τὴν Πλαταιέων πόλιν , φεύγοντες δὲ ἀπικνέονται ἐπὶ τὸ Ἥραιον ·
When the day ended, however, and the horsemen stopped their onslaught, then at that hour of the night at which it was agreed that they should depart, most of them rose and departed, not with intent to go to the place upon which they had agreed.


9.52.1
9720
τὸ δὲ πρὸ τῆς πόλιος ἐστὶ τῆς Πλαταιέων , εἴκοσι σταδίους ἀπὸ τῆς κρήνης τῆς Γαργαφίης ἀπέχον ·
Instead of that, once they were on their way, they joyfully shook off the horsemen and escaped to the town of Plataea.


9.52.1
9721
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ ἔθεντο πρὸ τοῦ ἱροῦ τὰ ὅπλα .
In the course of their flight they came to the temple of Hera which is outside of that town, twenty furlongs distant from the Gargaphian spring and piled their arms in front of the temple.


9.53.1
9722
καὶ οἳ μὲν περὶ τὸ Ἥραιον ἐστρατοπεδεύοντο , Παυσανίης δὲ ὁρῶν σφεας ἀπαλλασσομένους ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου παρήγγελλε καὶ τοῖσι Λακεδαιμονίοισι ἀναλαβόντας τὰ ὅπλα ἰέναι κατὰ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς προϊόντας , νομίσας αὐτοὺς ἐς τὸν χῶρον ἰέναι ἐς τὸν συνεθήκαντο .
So they encamped around the temple of Hera. Pausanias, however, seeing their departure from the camp, gave orders to the Lacedaemonians to take up their arms likewise and follow the others who had gone ahead, supposing that these were making for the place where they had agreed to go.


9.53.2
9723
ἐνθαῦτα οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι ἄρτιοι ἦσαν τῶν ταξιάρχων πείθεσθαι Παυσανίῃ , Ἀμομφάρετος δὲ ὁ Πολιάδεω λοχηγέων τοῦ Πιτανητέων λόχου οὐκ ἔφη τοὺς ξείνους φεύξεσθαι οὐδὲ ἑκὼν εἶναι αἰσχυνέειν τὴν Σπάρτην , ἐθώμαζέ τε ὁρέων τὸ ποιεύμενον ἅτε οὐ παραγενόμενος τῷ προτέρῳ λόγῳ .
Thereupon, all the rest of the captains being ready to obey Pausanias, Amompharetus son of Poliades, the leader of the Pitanate battalion, refused to flee from the barbarians or (save by compulsion) bring shame on  Sparta; the whole business seemed strange to him, for he had not been present in the council recently held.


9.53.3
9724
ὁ δὲ Παυσανίης τε καὶ ὁ Εὐρυάναξ δεινὸν μὲν ἐποιεῦντο τὸ μὴ πείθεσθαι ἐκεῖνον σφίσι , δεινότερον δὲ ἔτι , κείνου ταῦτ’ ἀναινομένου , ἀπολιπεῖν τὸν λόχον τὸν Πιτανήτην , μὴ ἢν ἀπολίπωσι ποιεῦντες τὰ συνεθήκαντο τοῖσι ἄλλοισι Ἕλλησι , ἀπόληται ὑπολειφθεὶς αὐτός τε Ἀμομφάρετος καὶ οἱ μετ’ αὐτοῦ .
Pausanias and Euryanax were outraged that Amompharetus disobeyed them. Still more, however, they disliked that his refusing would compel them to abandon the Pitanate battalion, for they feared that if they fulfilled their agreement with the rest of the Greeks and abandoned him, Amompharetus and his men would be left behind to perish.


9.53.4
9725
ταῦτα λογιζόμενοι ἀτρέμας εἶχον τὸ στρατόπεδον τὸ Λακωνικόν , καὶ ἐπειρῶντο πείθοντές μιν ὡς οὐ χρεὸν εἴη ταῦτα ποιέειν .
Bearing this in mind, they kept the Laconian army where it was and tried to persuade Amompharetus that he was in the wrong.


9.54.1
9726
καὶ οἳ μὲν παρηγόρεον Ἀμομφάρετον μοῦνον Λακεδαιμονίων τε καὶ Τεγεητέων λελειμμένον , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ἐποίευν τοιάδε ·
So they reasoned with Amompharetus, he being the only man left behind of all the Lacedaemonians and Tegeans.


9.54.1
9727
εἶχον ἀτρέμας σφέας αὐτοὺς ἵνα ἐτάχθησαν , ἐπιστάμενοι τὰ Λακεδαιμονίων φρονήματα ὡς ἄλλα φρονεόντων καὶ ἄλλα λεγόντων ·
As for the Athenians, they stood unmoved at their post, well aware that the purposes and the promises of Lacedaemonians were not alike.


9.54.2
9728
ὡς δὲ ἐκινήθη τὸ στρατόπεδον , ἔπεμπον σφέων ἱππέα ὀψόμενόν τε εἰ πορεύεσθαι ἐπιχειρέοιεν οἱ Σπαρτιῆται , εἴτε καὶ τὸ παράπαν μὴ διανοεῦνται ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι , ἐπειρέσθαι τε Παυσανίην τὸ χρεὸν εἴη ποιέειν .
But when the army left its station, they sent a horseman of their own to see whether the Spartans were attempting to march or whether they were not intending to depart, and to ask Pausanias what the Athenians should do.


9.55.1
9729
ὡς δὲ ἀπίκετο ὁ κῆρυξ ἐς τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους , ὥρα τε σφέας κατὰ χώρην τεταγμένους καὶ ἐς νείκεα ἀπιγμένους αὐτῶν τοὺς πρώτους .
When the messenger arrived among the Lacedaemonians, he saw them arrayed where they had been, and their chief men by now in hot dispute.


9.55.1
9730
ὡς γὰρ δὴ παρηγορέοντο τὸν Ἀμομφάρετον ὅ τε Εὐρυάναξ καὶ ὁ Παυσανίης μὴ κινδυνεύειν μένοντας μούνους Λακεδαιμονίων , οὔ κως ἔπειθον , ἐς ὃ ἐς νείκεά τε συμπεσόντες ἀπίκατο καὶ ὁ κῆρυξ τῶν Ἀθηναίων παρίστατό σφι ἀπιγμένος .
For though Euryanax and Pausanias reasoned with Amompharetus, that the Lacedaemonians should not be endangered by remaining there alone, they could in no way prevail upon him.


9.55.2
9731
νεικέων δὲ ὁ Ἀμομφάρετος λαμβάνει πέτρον ἀμφοτέρῃσι τῇσι χερσὶ καὶ τιθεὶς πρὸ ποδῶν τῶν Παυσανίεω ταύτῃ τῇ ψήφῳ ψηφίζεσθαι ἔφη μὴ φεύγειν τοὺς ξείνους , λέγων τοὺς βαρβάρους .
In this wrangling Amompharetus took up a stone with both hands and threw it down before Pausanias' feet, crying that it was the pebble with which he voted against fleeing from the strangers (meaning thereby the barbarians).


9.55.2
9732
ὁ δὲ μαινόμενον καὶ οὐ φρενήρεα καλέων ἐκεῖνον , πρὸς τε τὸν Ἀθηναῖον κήρυκα ἐπειρωτῶντα τὰ ἐντεταλμένα λέγειν ὁ Παυσανίης ἐκέλευε τὰ παρεόντα σφι πρήγματα , ἐχρήιζέ τε τῶν Ἀθηναίων προσχωρῆσαί τε πρὸς ἑωυτοὺς καὶ ποιέειν περὶ τῆς ἀπόδου τά περ ἂν καὶ σφεῖς .
Pausanias called him a madman; then when the Athenian messenger asked the question with which he had been charged, Pausanias asked the man to tell the Athenians of his present condition, and begged them to join themselves to the Lacedaemonians and, as for departure, to do as they did.


9.56.1
9733
καὶ ὃ μὲν ἀπαλλάσσετο ἐς τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ·
The messenger then went back to the Athenians.


9.56.1
9734
τοὺς δὲ ἐπεὶ ἀνακρινομένους πρὸς ἑωυτοὺς ἠὼς κατελάμβανε , ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ κατήμενος ὁ Παυσανίης , οὐ δοκέων τὸν Ἀμομφάρετον λείψεσθαι τῶν ἄλλων Λακεδαιμονίων ἀποστειχόντων , τὰ δὴ καὶ ἐγένετο , σημήνας ἀπῆγε διὰ τῶν κολωνῶν τοὺς λοιποὺς πάντας ·
When dawn found the dispute still continuing, Pausanias, who had up to this point kept his army where it was, now gave the word and led all the rest away between the hillocks, for he supposed that Amompharetus would not stay behind when the rest of the Lacedaemonians left him; this was in fact exactly what happened.


9.56.1
9735
εἵποντο δὲ καὶ Τεγεῆται .
the Tegeans followed.


9.56.2
9736
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ταχθέντες ἤισαν τὰ ἔμπαλιν ἢ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ·
The Athenians marshalled themselves and marched, but not by the same way as the Lacedaemonians,


9.56.2
9737
οἳ μὲν γὰρ τῶν τε ὄχθων ἀντείχοντο καὶ τῆς ὑπωρέης τοῦ Κιθαιρῶνος φοβεόμενοι τὴν ἵππον , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ κάτω τραφθέντες ἐς τὸ πεδίον .
who stayed close to the broken ground and the lower slopes of Cithaeron in order to stay clear of the Persian horse. The Athenians marched down into the plain instead.


9.57.1
9738
Ἀμομφάρετος δὲ ἀρχήν γε οὐδαμὰ δοκέων Παυσανίην τολμήσειν σφέας ἀπολιπεῖν , περιείχετο αὐτοῦ μένοντας μὴ ἐκλιπεῖν τὴν τάξιν ·
Now Amompharetus at first supposed that Pausanias would never have the heart to leave him and his men, and he insisted that they should remain where they were and not leave their post.


9.57.1
9739
προτερεόντων δὲ τῶν σὺν Παυσανίῃ , καταδόξας αὐτοὺς ἰθέῃ τέχνῃ ἀπολείπειν αὐτόν , ἀναλαβόντα τὸν λόχον τὰ ὅπλα ἦγε βάδην πρὸς τὸ ἄλλο στῖφος ·
When Pausanias' men had already proceeded some distance, he thought that they had really left him. He accordingly bade his battalion take up its arms and led it in marching step after the rest of the column,


9.57.2
9740
τὸ δὲ ἀπελθὸν ὅσον τε δέκα στάδια ἀνέμενε τὸν Ἀμομφαρέτου λόχον , περὶ ποταμὸν Μολόεντα ἱδρυμένον Ἀργιόπιόν τε χῶρον καλεόμενον , τῇ καὶ Δήμητρος Ἐλευσινίης ἱρὸν ἧσται .
which after going a distance of ten furlongs, was waiting for Amompharetus by the stream Molois and the place called Argiopium, where there is a shrine of Eleusinian Demeter.


9.57.2
9741
ἀνέμενε δὲ τοῦδε εἵνεκα , ἵνα ἢν μὴ ἀπολείπῃ τὸν χῶρον ἐν τῷ ἐτετάχατο ὁ Ἀμομφάρετός τε καὶ ὁ λόχος , ἀλλ’ αὐτοῦ μένωσι , βοηθέοι ὀπίσω παρ’ ἐκείνους .
The reason for their waiting was that, if Amompharetus and his battalion should not leave the place where it was posted but remain there, they would then be able to assist him.


9.57.3
9742
καὶ οἵ τε ἀμφὶ τὸν Ἀμομφάρετός παρεγίνοντό σφι καὶ ἡ ἵππος ἡ τῶν βαρβάρων προσέκειτο πᾶσα .
No sooner had Amompharetus' men come up than the barbarians' cavalry attacked the army,


9.57.3
9743
οἱ γὰρ ἱππόται ἐποίευν οἷον καὶ ἐώθεσαν ποιέειν αἰεί , ἰδόντες δὲ τὸν χῶρον κεινὸν ἐν τῷ ἐτετάχατο οἱ Ἕλληνες τῇσι προτέρῃσι ἡμέρῃσι , ἤλαυνον τοὺς ἵππους αἰεὶ τὸ πρόσω καὶ ἅμα καταλαβόντες προσεκέατό σφι .
for the horsemen acted as they always had. When they saw no enemy on the ground where the Greeks had been on the days before this, they kept riding forward and attacked the Greeks as soon as they overtook them.


9.58.1
9744
Μαρδόνιος δὲ ὡς ἐπύθετο τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἀποιχομένους ὑπὸ νύκτα εἶδέ τε τὸν χῶρον ἔρημον , καλέσας τὸν Ληρισαῖον Θώρηκα καὶ τοὺς ἀδελφεοὺς αὐτοῦ Εὐρύπυλον καὶ Θρασυδήιον ἔλεγε " ὦ παῖδες Ἀλεύεω , ἔτι τί λέξετε τάδε ὁρῶντες ἔρημα ;
When Mardonius learned that the Greeks had departed under cover of night and saw the ground deserted, he called to him Thorax of Larissa and his brothers Eurypylus and Thrasydeius and said:


9.58.2
9745
ὑμεῖς γὰρ οἱ πλησιόχωροι ἐλέγετε Λακεδαιμονίους οὐ φεύγειν ἐκ μάχης , ἀλλὰ ἄνδρας εἶναι τὰ πολέμια πρώτους ·
“What will you say now, sons of Aleuas, when you see this place deserted?


9.58.2
9746
τοὺς πρότερόν τε μετισταμένους ἐκ τῆς τάξιος εἴδετε , νῦν τε ὑπὸ τὴν παροιχομένην νύκτα καὶ οἱ πάντες ὁρῶμεν διαδράντας ·
For you, who are their neighbors, kept telling me that Lacedaemonians fled from no battlefield and were the masters of warfare. These same men, however, you just saw changing their post, and now you and all of us see that they have fled during the night.


9.58.2
9747
διέδεξάν τε , ἐπεί σφεας ἔδεε πρὸς τοὺς ἀψευδέως ἀρίστους ἀνθρώπων μάχῃ διακριθῆναι , ὅτι οὐδένες ἄρα ἐόντες ἐν οὐδαμοῖσι ἐοῦσι Ἕλλησι ἐναπεδεικνύατο .
The moment they had to measure themselves in battle with those that are in very truth the bravest on earth, they plainly showed that they are men of no account, and all other Greeks likewise.


9.58.3
9748
καὶ ὑμῖν μὲν ἐοῦσι Περσέων ἀπείροισι πολλὴ ἔκ γε ἐμεῦ ἐγίνετο συγγνώμη , ἐπαινεόντων τούτους τοῖσί τι καὶ συνῃδέατε ·
Now you, for your part, were strangers to the Persians, and I could readily pardon you for praising these fellows, who were in some sort known to you;


9.58.3
9749
Ἀρταβάζου δὲ θῶμα καὶ μᾶλλον ἐποιεύμην τὸ καὶ καταρρωδῆσαι Λακεδαιμονίους καταρρωδήσαντά τε ἀποδέξασθαι γνώμην δειλοτάτην , ὡς χρεὸν εἴη ἀναζεύξαντας τὸ στρατόπεδον ἰέναι ἐς τὸ Θηβαίων ἄστυ πολιορκησομένους ·
but I marvelled much more that Artabazus, be he ever so frightened, should give us a coward's advice to strike our camp, and march away to be besieged in Thebes.


9.58.3
9750
τὴν ἔτι πρὸς ἐμεῦ βασιλεὺς πεύσεται .
Of this advice the king will certainly hear from me, but it will be discussed elsewhere.


9.58.4
9751
καὶ τούτων μὲν ἑτέρωθι ἔσται λόγος .
Now we must not permit our enemies to do as they want;


9.58.4
9752
νῦν δὲ ἐκείνοισι ταῦτα ποιεῦσι οὐκ ἐπιτρεπτέα ἐστί , ἀλλὰ διωκτέοι εἰσὶ ἐς ὃ καταλαμφθέντες δώσουσι ἡμῖν τῶν δὴ ἐποίησαν Πέρσας πάντων δίκας " .
they must be pursued till they are overtaken and pay the penalty for all the harm they have done the Persians.”


9.59.1
9753
ταῦτα εἴπας ἦγε τοὺς Πέρσας δρόμῳ διαβάντας τὸν Ἀσωπὸν κατὰ στίβον τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὡς δὴ ἀποδιδρησκόντων , ἐπεῖχέ τε ἐπὶ Λακεδαιμονίους τε καὶ Τεγεήτας μούνους ·
With that, he led the Persians with all speed across the Asopus in pursuit of the Greeks, supposing that they were in flight;


9.59.1
9754
Ἀθηναίους γὰρ τραπομένους ἐς τὸ πεδίον ὑπὸ τῶν ὄχθων οὐ κατώρα .
it was the army of Lacedaemon and Tegea alone which was his goal, for the Athenians marched another way over the broken ground, and were out of his sight.


9.59.2
9755
Πέρσας δὲ ὁρῶντες ὁρμημένους διώκειν τοὺς Ἕλληνας οἱ λοιποὶ τῶν βαρβαρικῶν τελέων ἄρχοντες αὐτίκα πάντες ἤειραν τὰ σημήια , καὶ ἐδίωκον ὡς ποδῶν ἕκαστος εἶχον , οὔτε κόσμῳ οὐδενὶ κοσμηθέντες οὔτε τάξι .
Seeing the Persians setting forth in pursuit of the Greeks, the rest of the barbarian battalions straightway raised their standards and also gave pursuit, each at top speed, no battalion having order in its ranks nor place assigned in the line.


9.60.1
9756
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν βοῇ τε καὶ ὁμίλῳ ἐπήισαν ὡς ἀναρπασόμενοι τοὺς Ἕλληνας ·
So they ran pell-mell and shouting, as though they would utterly make an end of the Greeks.


9.60.1
9757
Παυσανίης δέ , ὡς προσέκειτο ἡ ἵππος , πέμψας πρὸς τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ἱππέα λέγει τάδε .
Pausanias, however, when the cavalry attacked him, sent a horseman to the Athenians with this message:


9.60.1
9758
" ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , ἀγῶνος μεγίστου προκειμένου ἐλευθέρην εἶναι ἢ δεδουλωμένην τὴν Ἑλλάδα , προδεδόμεθα ὑπὸ τῶν συμμάχων ἡμεῖς τε οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ ὑμεῖς οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ὑπὸ τὴν παροιχομένην νύκτα διαδράντων .
“Men of Athens, in this great contest which must give freedom or slavery to Hellas, we Lacedaemonians and you Athenians have been betrayed by the flight of our allies in the night that is past.


9.60.2
9759
νῦν ὦν δέδοκται τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν τὸ ποιητέον ἡμῖν ·
I have accordingly now resolved what we must do;


9.60.2
9760
ἀμυνομένους γὰρ τῇ δυνάμεθα ἄριστα περιστέλλειν ἀλλήλους .
we must protect each other by fighting as best we can.


9.60.2
9761
εἰ μέν νυν ἐς ὑμέας ὅρμησε ἀρχὴν ἡ ἵππος , χρῆν δὴ ἡμέας τε καὶ τοὺς μετ’ ἡμέων τὴν Ἑλλάδα οὐ προδιδόντας Τεγεήτας βοηθέειν ὑμῖν ·
If the cavalry had attacked you first, it would have been the duty of both ourselves and the Tegeans, who are faithful to Hellas, to aid you;


9.60.2
9762
νῦν δέ , ἐς ἡμέας γὰρ ἅπασα κεχώρηκε , δίκαιοι ἐστὲ ὑμεῖς πρὸς τὴν πιεζομένην μάλιστα τῶν μοιρέων ἀμυνέοντες ἰέναι .
but now, seeing that the whole brunt of their assault falls on us, it is right that you should come to the aid of that division which is hardest pressed.


9.60.3
9763
εἰ δ’ ἄρα αὐτοὺς ὑμέας καταλελάβηκε ἀδύνατόν τι βοηθέειν , ὑμεῖς δ’ ἡμῖν τοὺς τοξότας ἀποπέμψαντες χάριν θέσθε .
But if, as may be, anything has befallen you which makes it impossible for you to aid us, do us the service of sending us your archers.


9.60.3
9764
συνοίδαμεν δὲ ὑμῖν ὑπὸ τὸν παρεόντα τόνδε πόλεμον ἐοῦσι πολλὸν προθυμοτάτοισι , ὥστε καὶ ταῦτα ἐσακούειν " .
We are sure that you will obey us, as knowing that you have been by far more zealous than all others in this present war.”


9.61.1
9765
ταῦτα οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ὡς ἐπύθοντο , ὁρμέατο βοηθέειν καὶ τὰ μάλιστα ἐπαμύνειν ·
When the Athenians heard that, they attempted to help the Lacedaemonians and defend them with all their might.


9.61.1
9766
καί σφι ἤδη στείχουσι ἐπιτίθενται οἱ ἀντιταχθέντες Ἑλλήνων τῶν μετὰ βασιλέος γενομένων , ὥστε μηκέτι δύνασθαι βοηθῆσαι ·
But when their march had already begun, they were set upon by the Greeks posted opposite them, who had joined themselves to the king.


9.61.1
9767
τὸ γὰρ προσκείμενον σφέας ἐλύπεε .
For this reason, being now under attack by the foe which was closest, they could at the time send no aid.


9.61.2
9768
οὕτω δὴ μουνωθέντες Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ Τεγεῆται , ἐόντες σὺν ψιλοῖσι ἀριθμὸν οἳ μὲν πεντακισμύριοι Τεγεῆται δὲ τρισχίλιοι ( οὗτοι γὰρ οὐδαμὰ ἀπεσχίζοντο ἀπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων ) , ἐσφαγιάζοντο ὡς συμβαλέοντες Μαρδονίῳ καὶ τῇ στρατιῇ τῇ παρεούσῃ .
The Lacedaemonians and Tegeans accordingly stood alone, men-at-arms and light-armed together; there were of the Lacedaemonians fifty thousand and of the Tegeans, who had never been parted from the Lacedaemonians, three thousand. These offered sacrifice so that they would fare better in battle with Mardonius and the army which was with him.


9.61.3
9769
καὶ οὐ γάρ σφι ἐγίνετο τὰ σφάγια χρηστά , ἔπιπτον δὲ αὐτῶν ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ πολλοὶ καὶ πολλῷ πλεῦνες ἐτρωματίζοντο ·
They could get no favorable omen from their sacrifices, and in the meanwhile many of them were killed and by far more wounded (for the Persians set up their shields for a fence, and shot showers of arrows).


9.61.3
9770
φράξαντες γὰρ τὰ γέρρα οἱ Πέρσαι ἀπίεσαν τῶν τοξευμάτων πολλὰ ἀφειδέως , οὕτω ὥστε πιεζομένων τῶν Σπαρτιητέων καὶ τῶν σφαγίων οὐ γινομένων ἀποβλέψαντα τὸν Παυσανίην πρὸς τὸ Ἥραιον τὸ Πλαταιέων ἐπικαλέσασθαι τὴν θεόν , χρηίζοντα μηδαμῶς σφέας ψευσθῆναι τῆς ἐλπίδος .
Since the Spartans were being hard-pressed and their sacrifices were of no avail, Pausanias lifted up his eyes to the temple of Hera at Plataea and called on the goddess, praying that they might not be disappointed in their hope.


9.62.1
9771
ταῦτα δ’ ἔτι τούτου ἐπικαλεομένου προεξαναστάντες πρότεροι οἱ Τεγεῆται ἐχώρεον ἐς τοὺς βαρβάρους , καὶ τοῖσι Λακεδαιμονίοισι αὐτίκα μετὰ τὴν εὐχὴν τὴν Παυσανίεω ἐγίνετο θυομένοισι τὰ σφάγια χρηστά ·
While he was still in the act of praying, the men of Tegea leapt out before the rest and charged the barbarians,


9.62.1
9772
ὡς δὲ χρόνῳ κοτὲ ἐγένετο , ἐχώρεον καὶ οὗτοι ἐπὶ τοὺς Πέρσας , καὶ οἱ Πέρσαι ἀντίοι τὰ τόξα μετέντες .
and immediately after Pausanias' prayer the sacrifices of the Lacedaemonians became favorable. Now they too charged the Persians, and the Persians met them, throwing away their bows.


9.62.2
9773
ἐγίνετο δὲ πρῶτον περὶ τὰ γέρρα μάχη .
First they fought by the fence of shields,


9.62.2
9774
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ἐπεπτώκεε , ἤδη ἐγίνετο ἡ μάχη ἰσχυρὴ παρ’ αὐτὸ τὸ Δημήτριον καὶ χρόνον ἐπὶ πολλόν , ἐς ὃ ἀπίκοντο ἐς ὠθισμόν ·
and when that was down, there was a fierce and long fight around the temple of Demeter itself, until they came to blows at close quarters.


9.62.2
9775
τὰ γὰρ δόρατα ἐπιλαμβανόμενοι κατέκλων οἱ βάρβαροι .
For the barbarians laid hold of the spears and broke them short.


9.62.3
9776
λήματι μέν νυν καὶ ῥώμῃ οὐκ ἥσσονες ἦσαν οἱ Πέρσαι , ἄνοπλοι δὲ ἐόντες καὶ πρὸς ἀνεπιστήμονες ἦσαν καὶ οὐκ ὅμοιοι τοῖσι ἐναντίοισι σοφίην , προεξαΐσσοντες δὲ κατ’ ἕνα καὶ δέκα , καὶ πλεῦνές τε καὶ ἐλάσσονες συστρεφόμενοι , ἐσέπιπτον ἐς τοὺς Σπαρτιήτας καὶ διεφθείροντο .
Now the Persians were neither less valorous nor weaker, but they had no armor; moreover, since they were unskilled and no match for their adversaries in craft, they would rush out singly and in tens or in groups great or small, hurling themselves on the Spartans and so perishing.


9.63.1
9777
τῇ δὲ ἐτύγχανε αὐτὸς ἐὼν Μαρδόνιος , ἀπ’ ἵππου τε μαχόμενος λευκοῦ ἔχων τε περὶ ἑωυτὸν λογάδας Περσέων τοὺς ἀρίστους χιλίους , ταύτῃ δὲ καὶ μάλιστα τοὺς ἐναντίους ἐπίεσαν .
Where Mardonius was himself, riding a white horse in the battle and surrounded by a thousand picked men who were the flower of the Persians, there they pressed their adversaries hardest.


9.63.1
9778
ὅσον μέν νυν χρόνον Μαρδόνιος περιῆν , οἳ δὲ ἀντεῖχον καὶ ἀμυνόμενοι κατέβαλλον πολλοὺς τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ·
So long as Mardonius was alive the Persians stood their ground and defended themselves, overthrowing many Lacedaemonians.


9.63.2
9779
ὡς δὲ Μαρδόνιος ἀπέθανε καὶ τὸ περὶ ἐκεῖνον τεταγμένον ἐὸν ἰσχυρότατον ἔπεσε , οὕτω δὴ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι ἐτράποντο καὶ εἶξαν τοῖσι Λακεδαιμονίοισι .
When, however, Mardonius was killed and his guards, who were the strongest part of the army, had also fallen, then the rest too yielded and gave ground before the men of Lacedaemon.


9.63.2
9780
πλεῖστον γὰρ σφέας ἐδηλέετο ἡ ἐσθὴς ἔρημος ἐοῦσα ὅπλων ·
For what harmed them the most was the fact that they wore no armor over their clothes.


9.63.2
9781
πρὸς γὰρ ὁπλίτας ἐόντες γυμνῆτες ἀγῶνα ἐποιεῦντο .
They fought, as it were, naked against men fully armed.


9.64.1
9782
ἐνθαῦτα ἥ τε δίκη τοῦ Λεωνίδεω κατὰ τὸ χρηστήριον τοῖσι Σπαρτιήτῃσι ἐκ Μαρδονίου ἐπετελέετο , καὶ νίκην ἀναιρέεται καλλίστην ἁπασέων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν Παυσανίης ὁ Κλεομβρότου τοῦ Ἀναξανδρίδεω ·
On that day the Spartans, as the oracle had foretold, gained from Mardonius their full measure of vengeance for the slaying of Leonidas, and the most glorious of victories of all which we know was won by Pausanias, the son of Cleombrotus, who was the son of Anaxandrides.


9.64.2
9783
τῶν δὲ κατύπερθέ οἱ προγόνων τὰ οὐνόματα εἴρηται ἐς Λεωνίδην ·
(I have named the rest of Pausanias' ancestors in the lineage of Leonidas,


9.64.2
9784
ὡυτοὶ γάρ σφι τυγχάνουσι ἐόντες .
for they are the same for both.)


9.64.2
9785
ἀποθνήσκει δὲ Μαρδόνιος ὑπὸ Ἀειμνήστου ἀνδρὸς ἐν Σπάρτῃ λογίμου , ὃς χρόνῳ ὕστερον μετὰ τὰ Μηδικὰ ἔχων ἄνδρας τριηκοσίους συνέβαλε ἐν Στενυκλήρῳ πολέμου ἐόντος Μεσσηνίοισι πᾶσι , καὶ αὐτός τε ἀπέθανε καὶ οἱ τριηκόσιοι .
As for Mardonius, he was killed by Aeimnestus, a Spartan of note who long after the Persian business led three hundred men to battle at Stenyclerus against the whole army of Messenia, and was there killed, he and his three hundred.


9.65.1
9786
ἐν δὲ Πλαταιῇσι οἱ Πέρσαι ὡς ἐτράποντο ὑπὸ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων , ἔφευγον οὐδένα κόσμον ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον τὸ ἑωυτῶν καὶ ἐς τὸ τεῖχος τὸ ξύλινον τὸ ἐποιήσαντο ἐν μοίρῃ τῇ Θηβαΐδι .
At  Plataea, however, the Persians, routed by the Lacedaemonians, fled in disorder to their own camp and inside the wooden walls which they had made in the territory of  Thebes.


9.65.2
9787
θῶμα δέ μοι ὅκως παρὰ τῆς Δήμητρος τὸ ἄλσος μαχομένων οὐδὲ εἷς ἐφάνη τῶν Περσέων οὔτε ἐσελθὼν ἐς τὸ τέμενος οὔτε ἐναποθανών , περί τε τὸ ἱρὸν οἱ πλεῖστοι ἐν τῷ βεβήλῳ ἔπεσον .
It is indeed a marvel that although the battle was right by the grove of Demeter, there was no sign that any Persian had been killed in the precinct or entered into it;


9.65.2
9788
δοκέω δέ , εἴ τι περὶ τῶν θείων πρηγμάτων δοκέειν δεῖ , ἡ θεὸς αὐτή σφεας οὐκ ἐδέκετο ἐμπρήσαντας τὸ ἱρὸν τὸ ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι ἀνάκτορον .
most of them fell near the temple in unconsecrated ground. I think — if it is necessary to judge the ways of the gods — that the goddess herself denied them entry, since they had burnt her temple, the shrine at Eleusis.


9.66.1
9789
αὕτη μέν νυν ἡ μάχη ἐπὶ τοσοῦτο ἐγένετο .
This, then, is what happened in this battle.


9.66.1
9790
Ἀρτάβαζος δὲ ὁ Φαρνάκεος αὐτίκα τε οὐκ ἠρέσκετο κατ’ ἀρχὰς λειπομένου Μαρδονίου ἀπὸ βασιλέος , καὶ τότε πολλὰ ἀπαγορεύων οὐδὲν ἤνυε , συμβάλλειν οὐκ ἐῶν ·
But Artabazus son of Pharnaces had from the very first disapproved of the king's leaving Mardonius, and now all his counselling not to join battle had been of no avail.


9.66.1
9791
ἐποίησέ τε αὐτὸς τοιάδε ὡς οὐκ ἀρεσκόμενος τοῖσι πρήγμασι τοῖσι ἐκ Μαρδονίου ποιευμένοισι .
In his displeasure at what Mardonius was doing, he himself did as I will show.


9.66.2
9792
τῶν ἐστρατήγεε ὁ Ἀρτάβαζος ( εἶχε δὲ δύναμιν οὐκ ὀλίγην ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐς τέσσερας μυριάδας ἀνθρώπων περὶ ἑωυτόν ) , τούτους , ὅκως ἡ συμβολὴ ἐγίνετο , εὖ ἐξεπιστάμενος τὰ ἔμελλε ἀποβήσεσθαι ἀπὸ τῆς μάχης , ἦγε κατηρτημένως , παραγγείλας κατὰ τ- αὐτὸ ἰέναι πάντας τῇ ἂν αὐτὸς ἐξηγέηται , ὅκως ἂν αὐτὸν ὁρῶσι σπουδῆς ἔχοντα .
He had with him a great army, as many as forty thousand men. He knew full well what the outcome of the battle would be, and no sooner had the Greeks and Persians met than he led these with a fixed purpose, telling them to follow him all together wherever he should lead them, whatever they thought his intent might be.


9.66.3
9793
ταῦτα παραγγείλας ὡς ἐς μάχην ἦγε δῆθεν τὸν στρατόν .
With that command he pretended to lead them into battle.


9.66.3
9794
προτερέων δὲ τῆς ὁδοῦ ὥρα καὶ δὴ φεύγοντας τοὺς Πέρσας ·
As he came farther on his way, he saw the Persians already fleeing


9.66.3
9795
οὕτω δὴ οὐκέτι τὸν αὐτὸν κόσμον κατηγέετο , ἀλλὰ τὴν ταχίστην ἐτρόχαζε φεύγων οὔτε ἐς τὸ ξύλινον οὔτε ἐς τὸ Θηβαίων τεῖχος ἀλλ’ ἐς Φωκέας , ἐθέλων ὡς τάχιστα ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἀπικέσθαι .
and accordingly led his men, no longer in the same array, but took to his heels and fled with all speed not to the wooden fort nor to the walled city of Thebes, but to Phocis, so that he might make his way with all haste to the Hellespont.


9.67.1
9796
καὶ δὴ οὗτοι μὲν ταύτῃ ἐτράποντο ·
So Artabazus and his army turned that way.


9.67.1
9797
τῶν δὲ ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων τῶν μετὰ βασιλέος ἐθελοκακεόντων Βοιωτοὶ Ἀθηναίοισι ἐμαχέσαντο χρόνον ἐπὶ συχνόν .
All the rest of the Greeks who were on the king's side fought badly on purpose, but not so the Boeotians; they fought for a long time against the Athenians.


9.67.1
9798
οἱ γὰρ μηδίζοντες τῶν Θηβαίων , οὗτοι εἶχον προθυμίην οὐκ ὀλίγην μαχόμενοί τε καὶ οὐκ ἐθελοκακέοντες , οὕτω ὥστε τριηκόσιοι αὐτῶν οἱ πρῶτοι καὶ ἄριστοι ἐνθαῦτα ἔπεσον ὑπὸ Ἀθηναίων .
For those Thebans who were on the Persian side had great enthusiasm in the battle, and did not want to fight in a cowardly manner.


9.67.1
9799
ὡς δὲ ἐτράποντο καὶ οὗτοι , ἔφευγον ἐς τὰς Θήβας , οὐ τῇ περ οἱ Πέρσαι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων συμμάχων ὁ πᾶς ὅμιλος , οὔτε διαμαχεσάμενος οὐδενὶ οὔτε τι ἀποδεξάμενος , ἔφευγον .
As a result of this, three hundred of their first and best were killed there by the Athenians. At last, however, the Boeotians too yielded and they fled to Thebes, but not by the way which the Persians had fled and the multitude of the allies which had fought no fight to the end nor achieved any feat of arms.


9.68.1
9800
δηλοῖ τέ μοι ὅτι πάντα τὰ πρήγματα τῶν βαρβάρων ἤρτητο ἐκ Περσέων , εἰ καὶ τότε οὗτοι πρὶν ἢ καὶ συμμῖξαι τοῖσι πολεμίοισι ἔφευγον , ὅτι καὶ τοὺς Πέρσας ὥρων .
This flight of theirs which took place before the actual closing of battle and was prompted because they saw the Persians flee, proves to me that it was on the Persians that the fortune of the barbarians hung.


9.68.1
9801
οὕτω τε πάντες ἔφευγον πλὴν τῆς ἵππου τῆς τε ἄλλης καὶ τῆς Βοιωτίης ·
They accordingly all fled, save the cavalry, Boeotian and other;


9.68.1
9802
αὕτη δὲ τοσαῦτα προσωφέλεε τοὺς φεύγοντας , αἰεί τε πρὸς τῶν πολεμίων ἄγχιστα ἐοῦσα ἀπέργουσά τε τοὺς φιλίους φεύγοντας ἀπὸ τῶν Ἑλλήνων .
this helped the fleeing men in so far as it remained between them and their enemies and shielded its friends from the Greeks in their flight.


9.69.1
9803
οἳ μὲν δὴ νικῶντες εἵποντο τοὺς Ξέρξεω διώκοντές τε καὶ φονεύοντες .
So the Greeks, now having the upper hand, followed Xerxes' men, pursuing and slaying.


9.69.1
9804
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τῷ γινομένῳ φόβῳ ἀγγέλλεται τοῖσι ἄλλοισι Ἕλλησι τοῖσι τεταγμένοισι περὶ τὸ Ἥραιον καὶ ἀπογενομένοισι τῆς μάχης , ὅτι μάχη τε γέγονε καὶ νικῷεν οἱ μετὰ Παυσανίεω ·
During this steadily growing rout there came a message to the rest of the Greeks, who were by the temple of Hera and had stayed out of the fighting, that there had been a battle and that Pausanias' men were victorious.


9.69.1
9805
οἳ δὲ ἀκούσαντες ταῦτα , οὐδένα κόσμον ταχθέντες , οἱ μὲν ἀμφὶ Κορινθίους ἐτράποντο διὰ τῆς ὑπωρέης καὶ τῶν κολωνῶν τὴν φέρουσαν ἄνω ἰθὺ τοῦ ἱροῦ τῆς Δήμητρος , οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ Μεγαρέας τε καὶ Φλειασίους διὰ τοῦ πεδίου τὴν λειοτάτην τῶν ὁδῶν .
When they heard this, they set forth in no ordered array, those who were with the Corinthians keeping to the spurs of the mountain and the hill country, by the road that led upward straight to the temple of Demeter, and those who were with the Megarians and Philasians taking the most level route over the plain.


9.69.2
9806
ἐπείτε δὲ ἀγχοῦ τῶν πολεμίων ἐγίνοντο οἱ Μεγαρέες καὶ Φλειάσιοι , ἀπιδόντες σφέας οἱ τῶν Θηβαίων ἱππόται ἐπειγομένους οὐδένα κόσμον ἤλαυνον ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς τοὺς ἵππους , τῶν ἱππάρχεε Ἀσωπόδωρος ὁ Τιμάνδρου , ἐσπεσόντες δὲ κατεστόρεσαν αὐτῶν ἑξακοσίους , τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς κατήραξαν διώκοντες ἐς τὸν Κιθαιρῶνα .
However, when the Megarians and Philasians had come near the enemy, the Theban horsemen (whose captain was Asopodorus son of Timander) caught sight of them approaching in haste and disorder, and rode at them; in this attack they trampled six hundred of them, and pursued and drove the rest to Cithaeron.


9.70.1
9807
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ ἐν οὐδενὶ λόγῳ ἀπώλοντο ·
So these perished without anyone noticing.


9.70.1
9808
οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι καὶ ὁ ἄλλος ὅμιλος , ὡς κατέφυγον ἐς τὸ ξύλινον τεῖχος , ἔφθησαν ἐπὶ τοὺς πύργους ἀναβάντες πρὶν ἢ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἀπικέσθαι , ἀναβάντες δὲ ἐφράξαντο ὡς ἠδυνέατο ἄριστα τὸ τεῖχος ·
But when the Persians and the rest of the multitude had fled within the wooden wall, they managed to get up on the towers before the coming of the Lacedaemonians; then they strengthened the wall as best they could.


9.70.1
9809
προσελθόντων δὲ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων κατεστήκεέ σφι τειχομαχίη ἐρρωμενεστέρη .
When the Athenians arrived, an intense battle for the wall began.


9.70.2
9810
ἕως μὲν γὰρ ἀπῆσαν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , οἳ δ’ ἠμύνοντο καὶ πολλῷ πλέον εἶχον τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ὥστε οὐκ ἐπισταμένων τειχομαχέειν ·
For as long as the Athenians were not there, the barbarians defended themselves and had a great advantage over the Lacedaemonians who had no skill in the assault of walls.


9.70.2
9811
ὡς δέ σφι Ἀθηναῖοι προσῆλθον , οὕτω δὴ ἰσχυρὴ ἐγίνετο τειχομαχίη καὶ χρόνον ἐπὶ πολλόν .
When the Athenians came up, however, the fight for the wall became intense and lasted for a long time.


9.70.2
9812
τέλος δὲ ἀρετῇ τε καὶ λιπαρίῃ ἐπέβησαν Ἀθηναῖοι τοῦ τείχεος καὶ ἤριπον ·
In the end the Athenians, by valor and constant effort, scaled the wall and breached it.


9.70.2
9813
τῇ δὴ ἐσεχέοντο οἱ Ἕλληνες .
The Greeks poured in through the opening they had made;


9.70.3
9814
πρῶτοι δὲ ἐσῆλθον Τεγεῆται ἐς τὸ τεῖχος , καὶ τὴν σκηνὴν τὴν Μαρδονίου οὗτοι ἦσαν οἱ διαρπάσαντες , τά τε ἄλλα ἐξ αὐτῆς καὶ τὴν φάτνην τῶν ἵππων ἐοῦσαν χαλκέην πᾶσαν καὶ θέης ἀξίην .
the first to enter were the Tegeans, and it was they who plundered the tent of Mardonius, taking from it besides everything else the feeding trough of his horses which was all of bronze and a thing well worth looking at.


9.70.3
9815
τὴν μέν νυν φάτνην ταύτην τὴν Μαρδονίου ἀνέθεσαν ἐς τὸν νηὸν τῆς Ἀλέης Ἀθηναίης Τεγεῆται , τὰ δὲ ἄλλα ἐς τ- αὐτό , ὅσα περ ἔλαβον , ἐσήνεικαν τοῖσι Ἕλλησι .
The Tegeans dedicated this feeding trough of Mardonius in the temple of Athena Alea. Everything else which they took they brought into the common pool, as did the rest of the Greeks.


9.70.4
9816
οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι οὐδὲν ἔτι στῖφος ἐποιήσαντο πεσόντος τοῦ τείχεος , οὐδέ τις αὐτῶν ἀλκῆς ἐμέμνητο , ἀλύκταζόν τε οἷα ἐν ὀλίγῳ χώρῳ πεφοβημένοι τε καὶ πολλαὶ μυριάδες κατειλημέναι ἀνθρώπων ·
As for the barbarians, they did not form a unified body again once the wall was down, nor did anyone think of defense because the terrified men in the tiny space and the many myriads herded together were in great distress.


9.70.5
9817
παρῆν τε τοῖσι Ἕλλησι φονεύειν οὕτω ὥστε τριήκοντα μυριάδων στρατοῦ , καταδεουσέων τεσσέρων τὰς ἔχων Ἀρτάβαζος ἔφευγε , τῶν λοιπέων μηδὲ τρεῖς χιλιάδας περιγενέσθαι .
Such a slaughter were the Greeks able to make, that of two hundred and sixty thousand who remained after Artabazus had fled with his forty thousand, scarcely three thousand were left alive.


9.70.5
9818
Λακεδαιμονίων δὲ τῶν ἐκ Σπάρτης ἀπέθανον οἱ πάντες ἐν τῇ συμβολῇ εἷς καὶ ἐνενήκοντα , Τεγεητέων δὲ ἑκκαίδεκα , Ἀθηναίων δὲ δύο καὶ πεντήκοντα .
Of the Lacedaemonians from Sparta ninety-one all together were killed in battle; of the Tegeans, seventeen and of the Athenians, fifty-two.


9.71.1
9819
ἠρίστευσε δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων πεζὸς μὲν ὁ Περσέων , ἵππος δὲ ἡ Σακέων , ἀνὴρ δὲ λέγεται Μαρδόνιος ·
Among the barbarians, the best fighters were the Persian infantry and the cavalry of the Sacae, and of men, it is said, the bravest was Mardonius.


9.71.1
9820
Ἑλλήνων δέ , ἀγαθῶν γενομένων καὶ Τεγεητέων καὶ Ἀθηναίων , ὑπερεβάλοντο ἀρετῇ Λακεδαιμόνιοι .
Among the Greeks, the Tegeans and Athenians conducted themselves nobly, but the Lacedaemonians excelled all in valor.


9.71.2
9821
ἄλλῳ μὲν οὐδενὶ ἔχω ἀποσημήνασθαι ( ἅπαντες γὰρ οὗτοι τοὺς κατ’ ἑωυτοὺς ἐνίκων ) , ὅτι δὲ κατὰ τὸ ἰσχυρότερον προσηνείχθησαν καὶ τούτων ἐκράτησαν .
Of this my only clear proof is (for all these conquered the foes opposed to them) the fact that the Lacedaemonians fought with the strongest part of the army, and overcame it.


9.71.2
9822
καὶ ἄριστος ἐγένετο μακρῷ Ἀριστόδημος κατὰ γνώμας τὰς ἡμετέρας , ὃς ἐκ Θερμοπυλέων μοῦνος τῶν τριηκοσίων σωθεὶς εἶχε ὄνειδος καὶ ἀτιμίην .
According to my judgment, the bravest man by far was Aristodemus, who had been reviled and dishonored for being the only man of the three hundred that came alive from Thermopylae;


9.71.2
9823
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον ἠρίστευσαν Ποσειδώνιός τε καὶ Φιλοκύων καὶ Ἀμομφάρετος ὁ Σπαρτιήτης .
next after him in valor were Posidonius, Philocyon, and Amompharetus.


9.71.3
9824
καίτοι γενομένης λέσχης ὃς γένοιτο αὐτῶν ἄριστος , ἔγνωσαν οἱ παραγενόμενοι Σπαρτιητέων Ἀριστόδημον μὲν βουλόμενον φανερῶς ἀποθανεῖν ἐκ τῆς παρεούσης οἱ αἰτίης , λυσσῶντά τε καὶ ἐκλείποντα τὴν τάξιν ἔργα ἀποδέξασθαι μεγάλα , Ποσειδώνιον δὲ οὐ βουλόμενον ἀποθνήσκειν ἄνδρα γενέσθαι ἀγαθόν ·
Nevertheless, when there was a general discussion about who had borne himself most bravely, those Spartans who were there judged that Aristodemus, who plainly wished to die because of the reproach hanging over him and so rushed out and left the battle column behind, had achieved great deeds, but that Posidonius, who had no wish to die, proved himself a courageous fighter,


9.71.3
9825
τοσούτῳ τοῦτον εἶναι ἀμείνω .
and so in this way he was the better man.


9.71.4
9826
ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν καὶ φθόνῳ ἂν εἴποιεν ·
This they may have said merely out of jealousy,


9.71.4
9827
οὗτοι δὲ τοὺς κατέλεξα πάντες , πλὴν Ἀριστοδήμου , τῶν ἀποθανόντων ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ μάχῃ τίμιοι ἐγένοντο ·
but all the aforesaid who were killed in that fight received honor, save Aristodemus.


9.71.4
9828
Ἀριστόδημος δὲ βουλόμενος ἀποθανεῖν διὰ τὴν προειρημένην αἰτίην οὐκ ἐτιμήθη .
Aristodemus, because he desired death because of the reproach previously mentioned, received none.


9.72.1
9829
οὗτοι μὲν τῶν ἐν Πλαταιῇσι ὀνομαστότατοι ἐγένοντο .
These won the most renown of all who fought at Plataea.


9.72.1
9830
Καλλικράτης γὰρ ἔξω τῆς μάχης ἀπέθανε , ἐλθὼν ἀνὴρ κάλλιστος ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον τῶν τότε Ἑλλήνων , οὐ μοῦνον αὐτῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων ·
For Callicrates, who, when he came to the army, was the finest not only of the Lacedaemonians, but also of all the other Greeks, died away from the battle.


9.72.1
9831
ὅς , ἐπειδὴ ἐσφαγιάζετο Παυσανίης , κατήμενος ἐν τῇ τάξι ἐτρωματίσθη τοξεύματι τὰ πλευρά .
Callicrates, who was sitting in his place when Pausanias was offering sacrifice, was wounded in the side by an arrow.


9.72.2
9832
καὶ δὴ οἳ μὲν ἐμάχοντο , ὃ δ’ ἐξενηνειγμένος ἐδυσθανάτεέ τε καὶ ἔλεγε πρὸς Ἀρίμνηστον ἄνδρα Πλαταιέα οὐ μέλειν οἱ ὅτι πρὸ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἀποθνήσκει , ἀλλ’ ὅτι οὐκ ἐχρήσατο τῇ χειρὶ καὶ ὅτι οὐδέν ἐστί οἱ ἀποδεδεγμένον ἔργον ἑωυτοῦ ἄξιον προθυμευμένου ἀποδέξασθαι .
While his comrades were fighting, he was carried out of the battle and died a lingering death, saying to Arimnestus, a Plataean, that it was not a source of grief to him to die for  Hellas' sake; his sorrow was rather that he had struck no blow and achieved no deed worthy of his merit, despite all his eager desire to do so.


9.73.1
9833
Ἀθηναίων δὲ λέγεται εὐδοκιμῆσαι Σωφάνης ὁ Εὐτυχίδεω , ἐκ δήμου Δεκελεῆθεν , Δεκελέων δὲ τῶν κοτὲ ἐργασαμένων ἔργον χρήσιμον ἐς τὸν πάντα χρόνον , ὡς αὐτοὶ Ἀθηναῖοι λέγουσι .
Of the Athenians, Sophanes son of Eutychides is said to have won renown, a man from the town of Decelea, whose people once did a deed that was of eternal value, as the Athenians themselves say.


9.73.2
9834
ὡς γὰρ δὴ τὸ πάλαι κατὰ Ἑλένης κομιδὴν Τυνδαρίδαι ἐσέβαλον ἐς γῆν τὴν Ἀττικὴν σὺν στρατοῦ πλήθεϊ καὶ ἀνίστασαν τοὺς δήμους , οὐκ εἰδότες ἵνα ὑπεξέκειτο ἡ Ἑλένη , τότε λέγουσι τοὺς Δεκελέας , οἳ δὲ αὐτὸν Δέκελον ἀχθόμενόν τε τῇ Θησέος ὕβρι καὶ δειμαίνοντα περὶ πάσῃ τῇ Ἀθηναίων χώρῃ , ἐξηγησάμενόν σφι τὸ πᾶν πρῆγμα κατηγήσασθαι ἐπὶ τὰς Ἀφίδνας , τὰς δὴ Τιτακὸς ἐὼν αὐτόχθων καταπροδιδοῖ Τυνδαρίδῃσι .
For in the past when the sons of Tyndarus were trying to recover Helen, after breaking into  Attica with a great host, they turned the towns upside down because they did not know where Helen had been hidden, then (it is said) the Deceleans (and, as some say, Decelus himself, because he was angered by the pride of Theseus and feared for the whole land of  Attica) revealed the whole matter to the sons of Tyndarus, and guided them to Aphidnae, which Titacus, one of the autochthonoi, handed over to to the Tyndaridae.


9.73.3
9835
τοῖσι δὲ Δεκελεῦσι ἐν Σπάρτῃ ἀπὸ τούτου τοῦ ἔργου ἀτελείη τε καὶ προεδρίη διατελέει ἐς τόδε αἰεὶ ἔτι ἐοῦσα , οὕτω ὥστε καὶ ἐς τὸν πόλεμον τὸν ὕστερον πολλοῖσι ἔτεσι τούτων γενόμενον Ἀθηναίοισί τε καὶ Πελοποννησίοισι , σινομένων τὴν ἄλλην Ἀττικὴν Λακεδαιμονίων , Δεκελέης ἀπέχεσθαι .
For that deed the Deceleans have always had and still have freedom at  Sparta from all dues and chief places at feasts. In fact, even as recently as the war which was waged many years after this time between the Athenians and Peloponnesians, the Lacedaemonians laid no hand on Decelea when they harried the rest of  Attica.


9.74.1
9836
τούτου τοῦ δήμου ἐὼν ὁ Σωφάνης καὶ ἀριστεύσας τότε Ἀθηναίων διξοὺς λόγους λεγομένους ἔχει , τὸν μὲν ὡς ἐκ τοῦ ζωστῆρος τοῦ θώρηκος ἐφόρεε χαλκέῃ ἁλύσι δεδεμένην ἄγκυραν σιδηρέην , τὴν ὅκως πελάσειε ἀπικνεόμενος τοῖσι πολεμίοισι βαλλέσκετο , ἵνα δή μιν οἱ πολέμιοι ἐκπίπτοντες ἐκ τῆς τάξιος μετακινῆσαι μὴ δυναίατο ·
From that town was Sophanes, who now was the best Athenian fighter in the battle, and about him two tales are told.


9.74.1
9837
γινομένης δὲ φυγῆς τῶν ἐναντίων δέδοκτο τὴν ἄγκυραν ἀναλαβόντα οὕτω διώκειν .
According to the first, he bore an iron anchor attached to the belt of his cuirass with a chain of bronze. He would cast this anchor whenever he approached his enemies in an attack so that the enemy, as they left their ranks, might not be able to move him from his place. When they were put to flight, it was his plan that he would pull up his anchor and so pursue them.


9.74.2
9838
οὗτος μὲν οὕτω λέγεται , ὁ δ’ ἕτερος τῶν λόγων τῷ πρότερον λεχθέντι ἀμφισβατέων λέγεται , ὡς ἐπ’ ἀσπίδος αἰεὶ περιθεούσης καὶ οὐδαμὰ ἀτρεμιζούσης ἐφόρεε ἄγκυραν , καὶ οὐκ ἐκ τοῦ θώρηκος δεδεμένην σιδηρέην .
So runs this tale. The second which contradicts with the first and relates that he wore no iron anchor attached to his cuirass, but that his shield, which he constantly whirled round and never held still, had on it an anchor as a device.


9.75.1
9839
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἕτερον Σωφάνεϊ λαμπρὸν ἔργον ἐξεργασμένον , ὅτι περικατημένων Ἀθηναίων Αἴγιναν Εὐρυβάτην τὸν Ἀργεῖον ἄνδρα πεντάεθλον ἐκ προκλήσιος ἐφόνευσε .
There is yet another glorious deed which Sophanes did; when the Athenians were besieging Aegina, he challenged and killed Eurybates the Argive, a victor in the Five Contests.


9.75.1
9840
αὐτὸν δὲ Σωφάνεα χρόνῳ ὕστερον τούτων κατέλαβε ἄνδρα γενόμενον ἀγαθόν , Ἀθηναίων στρατηγέοντα ἅμα Λεάγρῳ τῷ Γλαύκωνος , ἀποθανεῖν ὑπὸ Ἠδωνῶν ἐν Δάτῳ περὶ τῶν μετάλλων τῶν χρυσέων μαχόμενον .
Long after this, Sophanes met his death when he was general of the Athenians with Leagrus, son of Glaucon. He was killed at Datus by the Edonians in a battle for the gold-mines.


9.76.1
9841
ὡς δὲ τοῖσι Ἕλλησι ἐν Πλαταιῇσι κατέστρωντο οἱ βάρβαροι , ἐνθαῦτά σφι ἐπῆλθε γυνὴ αὐτόμολος ·
Immediately after the Greeks had devastated the barbarians at Plataea, a woman, who was the concubine of Pharandates a Persian, son of Teaspis, deserting from the enemy, came to them.


9.76.1
9842
ἣ ἐπειδὴ ἔμαθε ἀπολωλότας τοὺς Πέρσας καὶ νικῶντας τοὺς Ἕλληνας , ἐοῦσα παλλακὴ Φαρανδάτεος τοῦ Τεάσπιος ἀνδρὸς Πέρσεω , κοσμησαμένη χρυσῷ πολλῷ καὶ αὐτὴ καὶ ἀμφίπολοι καὶ ἐσθῆτι τῇ καλλίστῃ τῶν παρεουσέων , καταβᾶσα ἐκ τῆς ἁρμαμάξης ἐχώρεε ἐς τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἔτι ἐν τῇσι φονῇσι ἐόντας , ὁρῶσα δὲ πάντα ἐκεῖνα διέποντα Παυσανίην , πρότερόν τε τὸ οὔνομα ἐξεπισταμένη καὶ τὴν πάτρην ὥστε πολλάκις ἀκούσασα , ἔγνω τε τὸν Παυσανίην καὶ λαβομένη τῶν γουνάτων ἔλεγε τάδε .
She, learning that the Persians were ruined and the Greeks victorious, decked herself (as did also her attendants) with many gold ornaments and the fairest clothing that she had, and alighting thus from her carriage came to the Lacedaemonians while they were still in the midst of slaughtering. When she saw Pausanias, whose name and country she had often heard of, directing everything, she knew that it was he, and supplicated him clasping his knees:


9.76.2
9843
" ὦ βασιλεῦ Σπάρτης , ῥῦσαί με τὴν ἱκέτιν αἰχμαλώτου δουλοσύνης .
“Save me, your suppliant, O king of Sparta, from captive slavery,


9.76.2
9844
σὺ γὰρ καὶ ἐς τόδε ὤνησας , τούσδε ἀπολέσας τοὺς οὔτε δαιμόνων οὔτε θεῶν ὄπιν ἔχοντας .
for you have aided me till now, by making an end of those men who hold sacred nothing of the gods or of any divinities.


9.76.2
9845
εἰμὶ δὲ γένος μὲν Κῴη , θυγάτηρ δὲ Ἡγητορίδεω τοῦ Ἀνταγόρεω ·
Coan I am by birth, the daughter of Hegetorides, son of Antagoras;


9.76.2
9846
βίῃ δέ με λαβὼν ἐν Κῷ εἶχε ὁ Πέρσης " .
in Cos the Persian seized me by force and held me prisoner.”


9.76.2
9847
ὁ δὲ ἀμείβεται τοῖσιδε .
Pausanias answered:


9.76.3
9848
" γύναι , θάρσεε καὶ ὡς ἱκέτις καὶ εἰ δὴ πρὸς τούτῳ τυγχάνεις ἀληθέα λέγουσα καὶ εἶς θυγάτηρ Ἡγητορίδεω τοῦ Κῴου , ὃς ἐμοὶ ξεῖνος μάλιστα τυγχάνει ἐὼν τῶν περὶ ἐκείνους τοὺς χώρους οἰκημένων " .
“Take heart, lady,for you are my suppliant, and furthermore if you are really the daughter of Hegetorides of Cos, he is my closest friend of all who dwell in those lands.”


9.76.3
9849
ταῦτα δὲ εἴπας τότε μὲν ἐπέτρεψε τῶν ἐφόρων τοῖσι παρεοῦσι , ὕστερον δὲ ἀπέπεμψε ἐς Αἴγιναν , ἐς τὴν αὐτὴ ἤθελε ἀπικέσθαι .
For the present, he then entrusted her to those of the ephors who were present. Later he sent her to Aegina, where she herself desired to go.


9.77.1
9850
μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἄπιξιν τῆς γυναικός , αὐτίκα μετὰ ταῦτα ἀπίκοντο Μαντινέες ἐπ’ ἐξεργασμένοισι ·
Immediately after the arrival of this woman, the men of Mantinea came when everything was already over.


9.77.1
9851
μαθόντες δὲ ὅτι ὕστεροι ἥκουσι τῆς συμβολῆς , συμφορὴν ἐποιεῦντο μεγάλην , ἄξιοί τε ἔφασαν εἶναι σφέας ζημιῶσαι .
Upon learning that they had come too late for the battle, they were extremely upset and said that they ought to punish themselves for that.


9.77.2
9852
πυνθανόμενοι δὲ τοὺς Μήδους τοὺς μετὰ Ἀρταβάζου φεύγοντας , τούτους ἐδίωκον μέχρι Θεσσαλίης ·
When they heard that those Medes with Artabazus were fleeing, they would have pursued them as far as Thessaly.


9.77.2
9853
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ οὐκ ἔων φεύγοντας διώκειν .
The Lacedaemonians, however, would not permit them to pursue the fleeing men.


9.77.2
9854
οἳ δὲ ἀναχωρήσαντες ἐς τὴν ἑωυτῶν τοὺς ἡγεμόνας τῆς στρατιῆς ἐδίωξαν ἐκ τῆς γῆς .
So when they returned to their own land, the Mantineans banished the leaders of their army from the country.


9.77.3
9855
μετὰ δὲ Μαντινέας ἧκον Ἠλεῖοι , καὶ ὡσαύτως οἱ Ἠλεῖοι τοῖσι Μαντινεῦσι συμφορὴν ποιησάμενοι ἀπαλλάσσοντο ·
After the Mantineans came the men of Elis, who also went away extremely upset,


9.77.3
9856
ἀπελθόντες δὲ καὶ οὗτοι τοὺς ἡγεμόνας ἐδίωξαν .
and after their departure, they too banished their leaders.


9.77.3
9857
τὰ κατὰ Μαντινέας μὲν καὶ Ἠλείους τοσαῦτα .
Such were the doings of the Mantineans and Eleans.


9.78.1
9858
ἐν δὲ Πλαταιῇσι ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ τῶν Αἰγινητέων ἦν Λάμπων Πυθέω , Αἰγινητέων ἐὼν τὰ πρῶτα ·
There was at Plataea in the army of the Aeginetans one Lampon, son of Pytheas, a leading man of Aegina.


9.78.1
9859
ὃς ἀνοσιώτατον ἔχων λόγον ἵετο πρὸς Παυσανίην , ἀπικόμενος δὲ σπουδῇ ἔλεγε τάδε .
He hastened to Pausanias with really outrageous counsel and coming upon him, said to him:


9.78.2
9860
" ὦ παῖ Κλεομβρότου , ἔργον ἔργασταί τοι ὑπερφυὲς μέγαθός τε καὶ κάλλος , καί τοι θεὸς παρέδωκε ῥυσάμενον τὴν Ἑλλάδα κλέος καταθέσθαι μέγιστον Ἑλλήνων τῶν ἡμεῖς ἴδμεν .
“Son of Cleombrotus, you have done a deed of surpassing greatness and glory; the god has granted to you in saving Hellas to have won greater renown than any Greek whom we know.


9.78.2
9861
σὺ δὲ καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ τὰ ἐπὶ τούτοισι ποίησον , ὅκως λόγος τε σὲ ἔχῃ ἔτι μέζων καί τις ὕστερον φυλάσσηται τῶν βαρβάρων μὴ ὑπάρχειν ἔργα ἀτάσθαλα ποιέων ἐς τοὺς Ἕλληνας .
But now you must finish what remains for the rest, so that your fame may be greater still and so that no barbarian will hereafter begin doing reckless deeds against the Greeks.


9.78.3
9862
Λεωνίδεω γὰρ ἀποθανόντος ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι Μαρδόνιός τε καὶ Ξέρξης ἀποταμόντες τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀνεσταύρωσαν ·
When Leonidas was killed at Thermopylae, Mardonius and Xerxes cut off his head and set it on a pole;


9.78.3
9863
τῷ σὺ τὴν ὁμοίην ἀποδιδοὺς ἔπαινον ἕξεις πρῶτα μὲν ὑπὸ πάντων Σπαρτιητέων , αὖτις δὲ καὶ πρὸς τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων ·
make them a like return, and you will win praise from all Spartans and the rest of Hellas besides.


9.78.3
9864
Μαρδόνιον γὰρ ἀνασκολοπίσας τετιμωρήσεαι ἐς πάτρων τὸν σὸν Λεωνίδην " .
For if you impale Mardonius, you will be avenged for your father's brother Leonidas.”


9.79.1
9865
ὃ μὲν δοκέων χαρίζεσθαι ἔλεγε τάδε , ὃ δ’ ἀνταμείβετο τοῖσιδε .
This is what Lampon, thinking to please, said. Pausanias, however, answered him as follows:


9.79.1
9866
" ὦ ξεῖνε Αἰγινῆτα , τὸ μὲν εὐνοέειν τε καὶ προορᾶν ἄγαμαί σευ , γνώμης μέντοι ἡμάρτηκας χρηστῆς ·
“Aeginetan, I thank you for your goodwill and forethought, but you have missed the mark of right judgment.


9.79.1
9867
ἐξαείρας γάρ με ὑψοῦ καὶ τὴν πάτρην καὶ τὸ ἔργον , ἐς τὸ μηδὲν κατέβαλες παραινέων νεκρῷ λυμαίνεσθαι , καὶ ἢν ταῦτα ποιέω , φὰς ἄμεινόν με ἀκούσεσθαι ·
First you exalt me and my fatherland and my deeds, yet next you cast me down to mere nothingness when you advise me to insult the dead, and say that I shall win more praise if I do so.


9.79.1
9868
τὰ πρέπει μᾶλλον βαρβάροισι ποιέειν ἤ περ Ἕλλησι ·
That would be an act more proper for barbarians than for Greeks and one that we consider worthy of censure even in barbarians.


9.79.2
9869
καὶ ἐκείνοισι δὲ ἐπιφθονέομεν .
No, as for myself, I would prefer to find no favor either with the people of Aegina or anyone else who is pleased by such acts.


9.79.2
9870
ἐγὼ δ’ ὦν τούτου εἵνεκα μήτε Αἰγινήτῃσι ἅδοιμι μήτε τοῖσι ταῦτα ἀρέσκεται , ἀποχρᾷ δέ μοι Σπαρτιήτῃσι ἀρεσκόμενον ὅσια μὲν ποιέειν , ὅσια δὲ καὶ λέγειν .
It is enough for me if I please the Spartans by righteous deeds and speech.


9.79.2
9871
Λεωνίδῃ δέ , τῷ με κελεύεις τιμωρῆσαι , φημὶ μεγάλως τετιμωρῆσθαι , ψυχῇσί τε τῇσι τῶνδε ἀναριθμήτοισι τετίμηται αὐτός τε καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι οἱ ἐν Θερμοπύλῃσι τελευτήσαντες .
As for Leonidas, whom you would have me avenge, I think that he has received a full measure of vengeance; the uncounted souls of these that you see have done honor to him and the rest of those who died at Thermopylae.


9.79.2
9872
σὺ μέντοι ἔτι ἔχων λόγον τοιόνδε μήτε προσέλθῃς ἔμοιγε μήτε συμβουλεύσῃς , χάριν τε ἴσθι ἐὼν ἀπαθής " .
But to you this is my warning: do not come again to me with words like these nor give me such counsel. Be thankful now that you go unpunished.”


9.80.1
9873
ὃ μὲν ταῦτα ἀκούσας ἀπαλλάσσετο .
With that Lampon departed.


9.80.1
9874
Παυσανίης δὲ κήρυγμα ποιησάμενος μηδένα ἅπτεσθαι τῆς ληίης , συγκομίζειν ἐκέλευε τοὺς εἵλωτας τὰ χρήματα .
Then Pausanias made a proclamation that no man should touch the spoils, and ordered the helots to gather all the stuff together.


9.80.1
9875
οἳ δὲ ἀνὰ τὸ στρατόπεδον σκιδνάμενοι εὕρισκον σκηνὰς κατεσκευασμένας χρυσῷ καὶ ἀργύρῳ , κλίνας τε ἐπιχρύσους καὶ ἐπαργύρους , κρητῆράς τε χρυσέους καὶ φιάλας τε καὶ ἄλλα ἐκπώματα ·
They, spreading all over the camp, found there tents adorned with gold and silver, and couches gilded and silver-plated, and golden bowls and cups and other drinking-vessels;


9.80.2
9876
σάκκους τε ἐπ’ ἁμαξέων εὕρισκον , ἐν τοῖσι λέβητες ἐφαίνοντο ἐνεόντες χρύσεοί τε καὶ ἀργύρεοι ·
and sacks they found on wagons, in which were seen cauldrons of gold and silver.


9.80.2
9877
ἀπό τε τῶν κειμένων νεκρῶν ἐσκύλευον ψέλιά τε καὶ στρεπτοὺς καὶ τοὺς ἀκινάκας ἐόντας χρυσέους , ἐπεὶ ἐσθῆτός γε ποικίλης λόγος ἐγίνετο οὐδείς .
They stripped from the dead who lay there their armlets and torques, and golden daggers; as for the embroidered clothing, it was disregarded.


9.80.3
9878
ἐνθαῦτα πολλὰ μὲν κλέπτοντες ἐπώλεον πρὸς τοὺς Αἰγινήτας οἱ εἵλωτες , πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἀπεδείκνυσαν , ὅσα αὐτῶν οὐκ οἷά τε ἦν κρύψαι ·
Much of all this the helots showed, as much as they could not conceal, but much they stole and sold to the Aeginetans.


9.80.3
9879
ὥστε Αἰγινήτῃσι οἱ μεγάλοι πλοῦτοι ἀρχὴν ἐνθεῦτεν ἐγένοντο , οἳ τὸν χρυσὸν ἅτε ἐόντα χαλκὸν δῆθεν παρὰ τῶν εἱλώτων ὠνέοντο .
As a result the Aeginetans laid the foundation of their great fortunes by buying gold from the helots as though it were bronze.


9.81.1
9880
συμφορήσαντες δὲ τὰ χρήματα καὶ δεκάτην ἐξελόντες τῷ ἐν Δελφοῖσι θεῷ , ἀπ’ ἧς ὁ τρίπους ὁ χρύσεος ἀνετέθη ὁ ἐπὶ τοῦ τρικαρήνου ὄφιος τοῦ χαλκέου ἐπεστεὼς ἄγχιστα τοῦ βωμοῦ , καὶ τῷ ἐν Ὀλυμπίῃ θεῷ ἐξελόντες , ἀπ’ ἧς δεκάπηχυν χάλκεον Δία ἀνέθηκαν , καὶ τῷ ἐν Ἰσθμῷ θεῷ , ἀπ’ ἧς ἑπτάπηχυς χάλκεος Ποσειδέων ἐξεγένετο , ταῦτα ἐξελόντες τὰ λοιπὰ διαιρέοντο , καὶ ἔλαβον ἕκαστοι τῶν ἄξιοι ἦσαν , καὶ τὰς παλλακὰς τῶν Περσέων καὶ τὸν χρυσὸν καὶ ἄργυρον καὶ ἄλλα χρήματα τε καὶ ὑποζύγια .
Having brought all the loot together, they set apart a tithe for the god of  Delphi. From this was made and dedicated that tripod which rests upon the bronze three-headed serpent, nearest to the altar; another they set apart for the god of  Olympia, from which was made and dedicated a bronze figure of Zeus, ten cubits high; and another for the god of the Isthmus, from which was fashioned a bronze Poseidon seven cubits high. When they had set all this apart, they divided what remained, and each received, according to his worth, concubines of the Persians and gold and silver, and all the rest of the stuff and the beasts of burden.


9.81.2
9881
ὃσα μέν νυν ἐξαίρετα τοῖσι ἀριστεύσασι αὐτῶν ἐν Πλαταιῇσι ἐδόθη , οὐ λέγεται πρὸς οὐδαμῶν , δοκέω δ’ ἔγωγε καὶ τούτοισι δοθῆναι ·
How much was set apart and given to those who had fought best at Plataea, no man says.


9.81.2
9882
Παυσανίη ·
[Bad line]


9.81.2
9883
δὲ πάντα δέκα ἐξαιρέθη τε καὶ ἐδόθη , γυναῖκες ἵπποι τάλαντα κάμηλοι , ὣς δὲ αὕτως καὶ τ- ἄλλα χρήματα .
I think that they also received gifts, but tenfold of every kind, women, horses, talents, camels, and all other things also, was set apart and given to Pausanias.


9.82.1
9884
λέγεται δὲ καὶ τάδε γενέσθαι , ὡς Ξέρξης φεύγων ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος Μαρδονίῳ τὴν κατασκευὴν καταλίποι τὴν ἑωυτοῦ ·
This other story is also told.


9.82.1
9885
Παυσανίην ὦν ὁρῶντα τὴν Μαρδονίου κατασκευὴν χρυσῷ τε καὶ ἀργύρῳ καὶ παραπετάσμασι ποικίλοισι κατεσκευασμένην , κελεῦσαι τούς τε ἀρτοκόπους καὶ τοὺς ὀψοποιοὺς κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ καθὼς Μαρδονίῳ δεῖπνον παρασκευάζειν .
When Xerxes fled from Hellas, he left to Mardonius his own establishment. Pausanias, seeing Mardonius' establishment with its display of gold and silver and gaily colored tapestry, ordered the bakers and the cooks to prepare a dinner such as they were accustomed to do for Mardonius.


9.82.2
9886
ὡς δὲ κελευόμενοι οὗτοι ἐποίευν ταῦτα , ἐνθαῦτα τὸν Παυσανίην ἰδόντα κλίνας τε χρυσέας καὶ ἀργυρέας εὖ ἐστρωμένας καὶ τραπέζας τε χρυσέας καὶ ἀργυρέας καὶ παρασκευὴν μεγαλοπρεπέα τοῦ δείπνου , ἐκπλαγέντα τὰ προκείμενα ἀγαθὰ κελεῦσαι ἐπὶ γέλωτι τοὺς ἑωυτοῦ διηκόνους παρασκευάσαι Λακωνικὸν δεῖπνον .
They did his bidding, but Pausanias, when he saw golden and silver couches richly covered, and tables of gold and silver, and all the magnificent service of the banquet, was amazed at the splendor before him, and for a joke commanded his own servants to prepare a dinner in Laconian fashion. When that meal, so different from the other, was ready, Pausanias burst out laughing and sent for the generals of the Greeks.


9.82.3
9887
ὡς δὲ τῆς θοίνης ποιηθείσης ἦν πολλὸν τὸ μέσον , τὸν Παυσανίην γελάσαντα μεταπέμψασθαι τῶν Ἑλλήνων τοὺς στρατηγούς , συνελθόντων δὲ τούτων εἰπεῖν τὸν Παυσανίην , δεικνύντα ἐς ἑκατέρην τοῦ δείπνου παρασκευήν , " ἄνδρες Ἕλληνες , τῶνδε εἵνεκα ἐγὼ ὑμέας συνήγαγον , βουλόμενος ὑμῖν τοῦδε τοῦ Μήδων ἡγεμόνος τὴν ἀφροσύνην δέξαι , ὃς τοιήνδε δίαιταν ἔχων ἦλθε ἐς ἡμέας οὕτω ὀϊζυρὴν ἔχοντας ἀπαιρησόμενος " .
When these had assembled, Pausanias pointed to the manner in which each dinner was served and said: “Men of Hellas, I have brought you here because I desired to show you the foolishness of the leader of the Medes who, with such provisions for life as you see, came here to take away from us our possessions which are so pitiful.”


9.82.3
9888
ταῦτα μὲν Παυσανίην λέγεται εἰπεῖν πρὸς τοὺς στρατηγοὺς τῶν Ἑλλήνων .
In this way, it is said, Pausanias spoke to the generals of the Greeks.


9.83.1
9889
ὑστέρῳ μέντοι χρόνῳ μετὰ ταῦτα καὶ τῶν Πλαταιέων εὗρον συχνοὶ θήκας χρυσοῦ καὶ ἀργύρου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων χρημάτων .
Long after these events many of the Plataeans also found chests full of gold and silver and other things.


9.83.2
9890
ἐφάνη δὲ καὶ τόδε ὕστερον τούτων ἐπὶ τῶν νεκρῶν περιψιλωθέντων τὰς σάρκας ·
Moreover, when their bodies (which the Plataeans gathered into one place) were laid bare of flesh, the following was found.


9.83.2
9891
συνεφόρεον γὰρ τὰ ὀστέα οἱ Πλαταιέες ἐς ἕνα χῶρον ·
The bone appeared all of one piece without suture.


9.83.2
9892
εὑρέθη κεφαλὴ οὐκ ἔχουσα ῥαφὴν οὐδεμίαν ἀλλ’ ἐξ ἑνὸς ἐοῦσα ὀστέου , ἐφάνη δὲ καὶ γνάθος κατὰ τὸ ἄνω τῆς γνάθου ἔχουσα ὀδόντας μουνοφυέας ἐξ ἑνὸς ὀστέου πάντας τούς τε προσθίους καὶ γομφίους , καὶ πενταπήχεος ἀνδρὸς ὀστέα ἐφάνη .
A jawbone also came to light in which the teeth of the upper jaw were one whole, a single bone, front teeth and grinders, and one could see the body of a man of five cubits stature.


9.84.1
9893
ἐπείτε δὲΜαρδονίου δευτέρῃ ἡμέρῃ ὁ νεκρὸς ἠφάνιστο , ὑπὸ ὅτευ μὲν ἀνθρώπων τὸ ἀτρεκὲς οὐκ ἔχω εἰπεῖν , πολλοὺς δὲ τινὰς ἤδη καὶ παντοδαποὺς ἤκουσα θάψαι Μαρδόνιον , καὶ δῶρα μεγάλα οἶδα λαβόντας πολλοὺς παρὰ Ἀρτόντεω τοῦ Μαρδονίου παιδὸς διὰ τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον ·
As for the body of Mardonius, it was removed on the day after the battle; by whom, I cannot with certainty say. I have, however, heard of very many countries that buried Mardonius, and I know of many that were richly rewarded for that act by Mardonius' son Artontes.


9.84.2
9894
ὅστις μέντοι ἦν αὐτῶν ὁ ὑπελόμενός τε καὶ θάψας τὸν νεκρὸν τὸν Μαρδονίου , οὐ δύναμαι ἀτρεκέως πυθέσθαι , ἔχει δὲ τινὰ φάτιν καὶ Διονυσοφάνης ἀνὴρ Ἐφέσιος θάψαι Μαρδόνιον .
Which of them it was that stole and buried the body of Mardonius I cannot learn for certain. Some report that it was buried by Dionysophanes, an Ephesian.


9.84.2
9895
ἀλλ’ ὃ μὲν τρόπῳ τοιούτῳ ἐτάφη .
Such was the manner of Mardonius' burial.


9.85.1
9896
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες ὡς ἐν Πλαταιῇσι τὴν ληίην διείλοντο , ἔθαπτον τοὺς ἑωυτῶν χωρὶς ἕκαστοι .
But the Greeks, when they had divided the spoils at Plataea, buried each contingent of their dead in a separate place.


9.85.1
9897
Λακεδαιμόνιοι μὲν τριξὰς ἐποιήσαντο θήκας ·
The Lacedaemonians made three tombs;


9.85.1
9898
ἔνθα μὲν τοὺς ἰρένας ἔθαψαν , τῶν καὶ Ποσειδώνιος καὶ Ἀμομφάρετος ἦσαν καὶ Φιλοκύων τε καὶ Καλλικράτης .
there they buried their “irens,” among whom were Posidonius, Amompharetus, Philocyon, and Callicrates.


9.85.2
9899
ἐν μὲν δὴ ἑνὶ τῶν τάφων ἦσαν οἱ ἰρένες , ἐν δὲ τῷ ἑτέρῳ οἱ ἄλλοι Σπαρτιῆται , ἐν δὲ τῷ τρίτῳ οἱ εἵλωτες .
In one of the tombs, then, were the “irens,” in the second the rest of the Spartans, and in the third the helots.


9.85.2
9900
οὗτοι μὲν οὕτω ἔθαπτον , Τεγεῆται δὲ χωρὶς πάντας ἁλέας , καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι τοὺς ἑωυτῶν ὁμοῦ , καὶ Μεγαρέες τε καὶ Φλειάσιοι τοὺς ὑπὸ τῆς ἵππου διαφθαρέντας .
This, then is how the Lacedaemonians buried their dead. The Tegeans, however, buried all theirs together in a place apart, and the Athenians did similarly with their own dead. So too did the Megarians and Phliasians with those who had been killed by the horsemen.


9.85.3
9901
τούτων μὲν δὴ πάντων πλήρεες ἐγένοντο οἱ τάφοι ·
All the tombs of these peoples were filled with dead;


9.85.3
9902
τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ὅσοι καὶ φαίνονται ἐν Πλαταιῇσι ἐόντες τάφοι , τούτους δέ , ὡς ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι , ἐπαισχυνομένους τῇ ἀπεστοῖ τῆς μάχης ἑκάστους χώματα χῶσαι κεινὰ τῶν ἐπιγινομένων εἵνεκεν ἀνθρώπων , ἐπεὶ καὶ Αἰγινητέων ἐστὶ αὐτόθι καλεόμενος τάφος , τὸν ἐγὼ ἀκούω καὶ δέκα ἔτεσι ὕστερον μετὰ ταῦτα δεηθέντων τῶν Αἰγινητέων χῶσαι Κλεάδην τὸν Αὐτοδίκου ἄνδρα Πλαταιέα , πρόξεινον ἐόντα αὐτῶν .
but as for the rest of the states whose tombs are to be seen at Plataeae, their tombs are but empty barrows that they built for the sake of men that should come after, because they were ashamed to have been absent from the battle. There is one there called the tomb of the Aeginetans, which, as I learn by inquiry, was built as late as ten years after, at the Aeginetans' desire, by their patron and protector Cleades son of Autodicus, a Plataean.


9.86.1
9903
ὡς δ’ ἄρα ἔθαψαν τοὺς νεκροὺς ἐν Πλαταιῇσι οἱ Ἕλληνες , αὐτίκα βουλευομένοισί σφι ἐδόκεε στρατεύειν ἐπὶ τὰς Θήβας καὶ ἐξαιτέειν αὐτῶν τοὺς μηδίσαντας , ἐν πρώτοισι δὲ αὐτῶν Τιμηγενίδην καὶ Ἀτταγῖνον , οἳ ἀρχηγέται ἀνὰ πρώτους ἦσαν ·
As soon as the Greeks had buried their dead at Plataea, they resolved in council that they would march against Thebes and demand surrender of those who had taken the Persian side — particularly of Timagenidas and Attaginus, who were chief among their foremost men.


9.86.1
9904
ἢν δὲ μὴ ἐκδιδῶσι , μὴ ἀπανίστασθαι ἀπὸ τῆς πόλιος πρότερον ἢ ἐξέλωσι .
If these men were not delivered to them, they would not withdraw from the area in front of the city till they had taken it.


9.86.2
9905
ὡς δέ σφι ταῦτα ἔδοξε , οὕτω δὴ ἑνδεκάτῃ ἡμέρῃ ἀπὸ τῆς συμβολῆς ἀπικόμενοι ἐπολιόρκεον Θηβαίους , κελεύοντες ἐκδιδόναι τοὺς ἄνδρας ·
They came with this purpose on the eleventh day after the battle and laid siege to the Thebans, demanding the surrender of the men.


9.86.2
9906
οὐ βουλομένων δὲ τῶν Θηβαίων ἐκδιδόναι , τήν τε γῆν αὐτῶν ἔταμνον καὶ προσέβαλλον πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος .
When the Thebans refused this surrender, they laid waste to their lands and assaulted the walls.


9.87.1
9907
καὶ οὐ γὰρ ἐπαύοντο σινόμενοι , εἰκοστῇ ἡμέρῃ ἔλεξε τοῖσι Θηβαίοισι Τιμηγενίδης τάδε .
Seeing that the Greeks would not cease from their harrying and nineteen days had passed, Timagenidas spoke as follows to the Thebans:


9.87.1
9908
" ἄνδρες Θηβαῖοι , ἐπειδὴ οὕτω δέδοκται τοῖσι Ἕλλησι , μὴ πρότερον ἀπαναστῆναι πολιορκέοντας ἢ ἐξέλωσι Θήβας ἢ ἡμέας αὐτοῖσι παραδῶτε , νῦν ὦν ἡμέων εἵνεκα γῆ ἡ Βοιωτίη πλέω μὴ ἀναπλήσῃ , ἀλλ’ εἰ μὲν χρημάτων χρηίζοντες πρόσχημα ἡμέας ἐξαιτέονται , χρήματά σφι δῶμεν ἐκ τοῦ κοινοῦ ( σὺν γὰρ τῷ κοινῷ καὶ ἐμηδίσαμεν οὐδὲ μοῦνοι ἡμεῖς ) , εἰ δὲ ἡμέων ἀληθέως δεόμενοι πολιορκέουσι , ἡμεῖς ἡμέας αὐτοὺς ἐς ἀντιλογίην παρέξομεν " .
“Men of Thebes, since the Greeks have resolved that they will not raise the siege till Thebes is taken or we are delivered to them, do not let the land of Boeotia increase the measure of its ills for our sake. If they demand us in truth and not in pretence, let us present ourselves for trial.”


9.87.2
9909
κάρτα τε ἔδοξε εὖ λέγειν καὶ ἐς καιρόν , αὐτίκα τε ἐπεκηρυκεύοντο πρὸς Παυσανίην οἱ Θηβαῖοι θέλοντες ἐκδιδόναι τοὺς ἄνδρας .
No, rather if it is money they desire and their demand for our surrender is but a pretext, let us give them money out of our common treasury (for it was by the common will and not ours alone that we took the Persian side). If, however, they are besieging the town for no other reason than to have us, then we will give ourselves up to be tried by them.” This seemed to be said well and at the right time, and the Thebans immediately sent a herald to Pausanias, offering to surrender the men.


9.88.1
9910
ὡς δὲ ὡμολόγησαν ἐπὶ τούτοισι , Ἀτταγῖνος μὲν ἐκδιδρήσκει ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεος , παῖδας δὲ αὐτοῦ ἀπαχθέντας Παυσανίης ἀπέλυσε τῆς αἰτίης , φὰς τοῦ μηδισμοῦ παῖδας οὐδὲν εἶναι μεταιτίους .
On these terms they made an agreement, but Attaginus escaped from the town.


9.88.1
9911
τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους ἄνδρας τοὺς ἐξέδοσαν οἱ Θηβαῖοι , οἳ μὲν ἐδόκεον ἀντιλογίης τε κυρήσειν καὶ δὴ χρήμασι ἐπεποίθεσαν διωθέεσθαι ·
His sons were seized, but Pausanias held them free of guilt, saying that the sons were not accessory to the treason.


9.88.1
9912
ὁ δὲ ὡς παρέλαβε , αὐτὰ ταῦτα ὑπονοέων τὴν στρατιὴν τὴν τῶν συμμάχων ἅπασαν ἀπῆκε καὶ ἐκείνους ἀγαγὼν ἐς Κόρινθον διέφθειρε .
As for the rest of the men whom the Thebans surrendered, they supposed that they would be put on trial, and were confident that they would defeat the impeachment by bribery.


9.88.1
9913
ταῦτα μὲν τὰ ἐν Πλαταιῇσι καὶ Θήβῃσι γενόμενα .
Pausanias, however, had that very suspicion of them, and when they were put into his hands he sent away the whole allied army and carried the men to Corinth, where he put them to death. This is what happened at Plataea and Thebes.


9.89.1
9914
Ἀρτάβαζος δὲ ὁ Φαρνάκεος φεύγων ἐκ Πλαταιέων καὶ δὴ πρόσω ἐγίνετο .
Artabazus the son of Pharnaces was by now far on his way in his flight from Plataea.


9.89.1
9915
ἀπικόμενον δὲ μιν οἱ Θεσσαλοὶ παρὰ σφέας ἐπί τε ξείνια ἐκάλεον καὶ ἀνειρώτων περὶ τῆς στρατιῆς τῆς ἄλλης , οὐδὲν ἐπιστάμενοι τῶν ἐν Πλαταιῇσι γενομένων .
The Thessalians, when he came among them, entertained him hospitably and inquired of him concerning the rest of the army, knowing nothing of what had happened at Plataea.


9.89.2
9916
ὁ δὲ Ἀρτάβαζος γνοὺς ὅτι εἰ ἐθέλει σφι πᾶσαν τὴν ἀληθείην τῶν ἀγώνων εἰπεῖν , αὐτός τε κινδυνεύσει ἀπολέσθαι καὶ ὁ μετ’ αὐτοῦ στρατός ·
Artabazus understood that if he told them the whole truth about the fighting, he would endanger his own life and the lives of all those with him,


9.89.2
9917
ἐπιθήσεσθαι γάρ οἱ πάντα τινὰ οἴετο πυνθανόμενον τὰ γεγονότα .
for he thought that every man would set upon him if they heard the story.


9.89.2
9918
ταῦτα ἐκλογιζόμενος οὔτε πρὸς τοὺς Φωκέας ἐξηγόρευε οὐδὲν πρός τε τοὺς Θεσσαλοὺς ἔλεγε τάδε .
Therefore, although he had revealed nothing to the Phocians, he spoke as follows to the Thessalians:


9.89.3
9919
" ἐγὼ μὲν ὦ ἄνδρες Θεσσαλοί , ὡς ὁρᾶτε , ἐπείγομαί τε κατὰ τάχος ἐλῶν ἐς Θρηίκην καὶ σπουδὴν ἔχω , πεμφθεὶς κατά τι πρῆγμα ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου μετὰ τῶνδε ·
“I myself, men of Thessaly, am pressing on with all speed and diligence to march into Thrace, being despatched from the army for a certain purpose with the men whom you see.


9.89.3
9920
αὐτὸς δὲ ὑμῖν Μαρδόνιος καὶ ὁ στρατὸς αὐτοῦ , οὗτος κατὰ πόδας ἐμεῦ ἐλαύνων προσδόκιμος ἐστί .
Mardonius and his army are expected marching close on my heels.


9.89.3
9921
τοῦτον καὶ ξεινίζετε καὶ εὖ ποιεῦντες φαίνεσθε ·
It is for you to entertain him, and show that you do him good service,


9.89.3
9922
οὐ γὰρ ὑμῖν ἐς χρόνον ταῦτα ποιεῦσι μεταμελήσει " .
for if you so do, you will not afterwards regret it.”


9.89.4
9923
ταῦτα δὲ εἴπας ἀπήλαυνε σπουδῇ τὴν στρατιὴν διὰ Θεσσαλίης τε καὶ Μακεδονίης ἰθὺ τῆς Θρηίκης , ὡς ἀληθέως ἐπειγόμενος , καὶ τὴν μεσόγαιαν τάμνων τῆς ὁδοῦ .
So saying, he used all diligence to lead his army away straight towards Thrace through Thessaly and Macedonia without any delay, following the shortest inland road.


9.89.4
9924
καὶ ἀπικνέεται ἐς Βυζάντιον , καταλιπὼν τοῦ στρατοῦ τοῦ ἑωυτοῦ συχνοὺς ὑπὸ Θρηίκων κατακοπέντας κατ’ ὁδὸν καὶ λιμῷ συστάντας καὶ καμάτῳ ·
So he came to Byzantium, but he left behind many of his army who had been cut down by the Thracians or overcome by hunger and weariness.


9.89.4
9925
ἐκ Βυζαντίου δὲ διέβη πλοίοισι .
From Byzantium he crossed over in boats.


9.89.4
9926
οὗτος μὲν οὕτω ἀπενόστησε ἐς τὴν Ἀσίην .
In such a way Artabazus returned to Asia.


9.90.1
9927
τῆς δὲ αὐτῆς ἡμέρης τῆς περ ἐν Πλαταιῇσι τὸ τρῶμα ἐγένετο , συνεκύρησε γενέσθαι καὶ ἐν Μυκάλῃ τῆς Ἰωνίης .
Now on the same day when the Persians were so stricken at Plataea, it so happened that they suffered a similar fate at Mykale in Ionia.


9.90.1
9928
ἐπεὶ γὰρ δὴ ἐν τῇ Δήλῳ κατέατο οἱ Ἕλληνες οἱ ἐν τῇσι νηυσὶ ἅμα Λευτυχίδῃ τῷ Λακεδαιμονίῳ ἀπικόμενοι , ἦλθόν σφι ἄγγελοι ἀπὸ Σάμου Λάμπων τε Θρασυκλέος καὶ Ἀθηναγόρης Ἀρχεστρατίδεω καὶ Ἡγησίστρατος Ἀρισταγόρεω , πεμφθέντες ὑπὸ Σαμίων λάθρῃ τῶν τε Περσέων καὶ τοῦ τυράννου Θεομήστορος τοῦ Ἀνδροδάμαντος , τὸν κατέστησαν Σάμου τύραννον οἱ Πέρσαι .
When the Greeks who had come in their ships with Leutychides the Lacedaemonian were encamped at Delos, certain messengers came to them there from Samos, Lampon of Thrasycles, Athenagoras son of Archestratides, and Hegesistratus son of Aristagoras.


9.90.2
9929
ἐπελθόντων δὲ σφέων ἐπὶ τοὺς στρατηγοὺς ἔλεγε Ἡγησίστρατος πολλὰ καὶ παντοῖα , ὡς ἢν μοῦνον ἴδωνται αὐτοὺς οἱ Ἴωνες ἀποστήσονται ἀπὸ Περσέων , καὶ ὡς οἱ βάρβαροι οὐκ ὑπομενέουσι ·
The Samians had sent these, keeping their despatch secret from the Persians and the tyrant Theomestor son of Androdamas, whom the Persians had made tyrant of Samos.


9.90.2
9930
ἢν δὲ καὶ ἂρα ὑπομείνωσι , οὐκ ἑτέρην ἄγρην τοιαύτην εὑρεῖν ἂν αὐτούς ·
When they came before the generals, Hegesistratus spoke long and vehemently: “If the Ionians but see you,” he said, “they will revolt from the Persians, and the barbarians will not remain;


9.90.2
9931
θεούς τε κοινοὺς ἀνακαλέων προέτραπε αὐτοὺς ῥύσασθαι ἄνδρας Ἕλληνας ἐκ δουλοσύνης καὶ ἀπαμῦναι τὸν βάρβαρον ·
but if they do remain, you will have such a prey as never again.


9.90.3
9932
εὐπετές τε αὐτοῖσι ἔφη ταῦτα γίνεσθαι ·
He begged them in the name of the gods of their common worship to deliver Greeks from slavery and drive the barbarian away.


9.90.3
9933
τάς τε γὰρ νέας αὐτῶν κακῶς πλέειν καὶ οὐκ ἀξιομάχους κείνοισι εἶναι .
That, he said, would be an easy matter for them, “for the Persian ships are unseaworthy and no match for yours;


9.90.3
9934
αὐτοί τε , εἴ τι ὑποπτεύουσι μὴ δόλῳ αὐτοὺς προάγοιεν , ἕτοιμοι εἶναι ἐν τῇσι νηυσὶ τῇσι ἐκείνων ἀγόμενοι ὅμηροι εἶναι .
and if you have any suspicion that we may be tempting you deceitfully, we are ready to be taken in your ships as hostages.”


9.91.1
9935
ὡς δὲ πολλὸς ἦν λισσόμενος ὁ ξεῖνος ὁ Σάμιος , εἴρετο Λευτυχίδης , εἴτε κληδόνος εἵνεκεν θέλων πυθέσθαι εἴτε καὶ κατὰ συντυχίην θεοῦ ποιεῦντος , " ὦ ξεῖνε Σάμιε , τί τοι τὸ οὔνομα " ;
As the Samian stranger was pleading so earnestly, Leutychides asked him (whether it was that he desired to know for the sake of a presage, or through some happy chance of a god), “Samian stranger, what is your name?”


9.91.1
9936
ὁ δὲ εἶπε " Ἡγησίστρατος " .
“Hegesistratus,” he replied.


9.91.2
9937
ὁ δὲ ὑπαρπάσας τὸν ἐπίλοιπον λόγον , εἴ τινα ὅρμητο λέγειν ὁ Ἡγησίστρατος , εἶπε " δέκομαι τὸν οἰωνὸν τὸν Ἡγησιστράτου , ὦ ξεῖνε Σάμιε .
Then Leutychides cut short whatever else Hegesistratus had begun to say, and cried: “I accept the omen of your name, Samian stranger;


9.91.2
9938
σὺ δὲ ἡμῖν ποίεε ὅκως αὐτός τε δοὺς πίστιν ἀποπλεύσεαι καὶ οἱ σὺν σοὶ ἐόντες οἵδε , ἦ μὲν Σαμίους ἡμῖν προθύμους ἔσεσθαι συμμάχους " .
now see to it that before you sail from here you and those who are with you pledge that the Samians will be our zealous allies.”


9.92.1
9939
ταῦτά τε ἅμα ἠγόρευε καὶ τὸ ἔργον προσῆγε .
He said this and added deed to word.


9.92.1
9940
αὐτίκα γὰρ οἱ Σάμιοι πίστιν τε καὶ ὅρκια ἐποιεῦντο συμμαχίης πέρι πρὸς τοὺς Ἕλληνας .
For straightway the Samians bound themselves by pledge and oath to alliance with the Greeks.


9.92.2
9941
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσαντες οἳ μὲν ἀπέπλεον ·
This done, the rest sailed away,


9.92.2
9942
μετὰ σφέων γὰρ ἐκέλευε πλέειν τὸν Ἡγησίστρατον , οἰωνὸν τὸ οὔνομα ποιεύμενος .
but Leutychides bade Hegesistratus to sail with the Greeks because of the good omen of his name.


9.93.1
9943
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες ἐπισχόντες ταύτην τὴν ἡμέρην τῇ ὑστεραίῃ ἐκαλλιερέοντο , μαντευομένου σφι Δηιφόνου τοῦ Εὐηνίου ἀνδρὸς Ἀπολλωνιήτεω , Ἀπολλωνίης δὲ τῆς ἐν τῷ Ἰονίῳ κόλπῳ .
The Greeks waited through that day, and on the next they sought and received favorable augury; their diviner was Deiphonus son of Evenius, a man of that Apollonia which is in the Ionian gulf.


9.93.1
9944
τούτου τὸν πατέρα Εὐήνιον κατέλαβε πρῆγμα τοιόνδε .
This man's father Evenius had once fared as I will now relate.


9.93.1
9945
ἔστι ἐν τῇ Ἀπολλωνίῃ ταύτῃ ἱρὰ ἡλίου πρόβατα , τὰ τὰς μὲν ἡμέρας βόσκεται παρὰ Χῶνα ποταμόν , ὃς ἐκ Λάκμονος ὄρεος ῥέει διὰ τῆς Ἀπολλωνίης χώρης ἐς θάλασσαν παρ’ Ὤρικον λιμένα , τὰς δὲ νύκτας ἀραιρημένοι ἄνδρες οἱ πλούτῳ τε καὶ γένεϊ δοκιμώτατοι τῶν ἀστῶν , οὗτοι φυλάσσουσι ἐνιαυτὸν ἕκαστος ·
There is at Apollonia a certain flock sacred to the Sun, which in the daytime is pastured beside the river Chon, which flows from the mountain called Lacmon through the lands of Apollonia and empties into the sea by the harbor of Oricum.


9.93.1
9946
περὶ πολλοῦ γὰρ δὴ ποιεῦνται Ἀπολλωνιῆται τὰ πρόβατα ταῦτα ἐκ θεοπροπίου τινός ·
By night, those townsmen who are most notable for wealth or lineage are chosen to watch it, each man serving for a year, for the people of Apollonia set great store by this flock, being so taught by a certain oracle.


9.93.1
9947
ἐν δὲ ἄντρῳ αὐλίζονται ἀπὸ τῆς πόλιος ἑκάς .
It is kept in a cave far distant from the town.


9.93.2
9948
ἔνθα δὴ τότε ὁ Εὐήνιος οὗτος ἀραιρημένος ἐφύλασσε .
Now at the time of which I speak, Evenius was the chosen watchman.


9.93.2
9949
καὶ κοτὲ αὐτοῦ κατακοιμήσαντος φυλακὴν παρελθόντες λύκοι ἐς τὸ ἄντρον διέφθειραν τῶν προβάτων ὡς ἑξήκοντα .
But one night he fell asleep, and wolves, coming past his guard into the cave, killed about sixty of the flock.


9.93.2
9950
ὁ δὲ ὡς ἐπήισε , εἶχε σιγῇ καὶ ἔφραζε οὐδενί , ἐν νόῳ ἔχων ἀντικαταστήσειν ἄλλα πριάμενος .
When Evenius was aware of it, he held his peace and told no man, intending to restore what was lost by buying others.


9.93.3
9951
καὶ οὐ γὰρ ἔλαθε τοὺς Ἀπολλωνιήτας ταῦτα γενόμενα , ἀλλ’ ὡς ἐπύθοντο , ὑπαγαγόντες μιν ὑπὸ δικαστήριον κατέκριναν , ὡς τὴν φυλακὴν κατακοιμήσαντα , τῆς ὄψιος στερηθῆναι .
This matter was not, however, hidden from the people of Apollonia, and when it came to their knowledge they brought him to judgment and condemned him to lose his eyesight for sleeping at his watch.


9.93.3
9952
ἐπείτε δὲ τὸν Εὐήνιον ἐξετύφλωσαν , αὐτίκα μετὰ ταῦτα οὔτε πρόβατά σφι ἔτικτε οὔτε γῆ ἔφερε ὁμοίως καρπόν .
So they blinded Evenius, but from the day of their so doing their flocks bore no offspring, nor did their land yield fruit as before.


9.93.4
9953
πρόφαντα δέ σφι ἔν τε Δωδώνῃ καὶ ἐν Δελφοῖσι ἐγίνετο , ἐπείτε ἐπειρώτων τοὺς προφήτας τὸ αἴτιον τοῦ παρεόντος κακοῦ , οἳ δὲ αὐτοῖσι ἔφραζον ὅτι ἀδίκως τὸν φύλακον τῶν ἱρῶν προβάτων Εὐήνιον τῆς ὄψιος ἐστέρησαν ·
Furthermore, a declaration was given to them at Dodona and Delphi, when they inquired of the prophets what might be the cause of their present ill: the gods told them by their prophets that they had done unjustly in blinding Evenius, the guardian of the sacred flock,


9.93.4
9954
αὐτοὶ γὰρ ἐπορμῆσαι τοὺς λύκους , οὐ πρότερόν τε παύσεσθαι τιμωρέοντες ἐκείνῳ πρὶν ἢ δίκας δῶσι τῶν ἐποίησαν ταύτας τὰς ἂν αὐτὸς ἕληται καὶ δικαιοῖ ·
“for we ourselves” (they said) “sent those wolves, and we will not cease from avenging him until you make him such restitution for what you did as he himself chooses and approves;


9.93.4
9955
τούτων δὲ τελεομένων αὐτοὶ δώσειν Εὐηνίῳ δόσιν τοιαύτην τὴν πολλούς μιν μακαριεῖν ἀνθρώπων ἔχοντα .
when that is fully done, we ourselves will give Evenius such a gift as will make many men consider him happy.”


9.94.1
9956
τὰ μὲν χρηστήρια ταῦτά σφι ἐχρήσθη , οἱ δὲ Ἀπολλωνιῆται ἀπόρρητα ποιησάμενοι προέθεσαν τῶν ἀστῶν ἀνδράσι διαπρῆξαι .
This was the oracle given to the people of Apollonia.


9.94.1
9957
οἳ δέ σφι διέπρηξαν ὧδε ·
They kept it secret and charged certain of their townsmen to carry the business through; they acted as I will now show.


9.94.1
9958
κατημένου Εὐηνίου ἐν θώκῳ ἐλθόντες οἱ παρίζοντο καὶ λόγους ἄλλους ἐποιεῦντο , ἐς ὃ κατέβαινον συλλυπεύμενοι τῷ πάθεϊ ·
Coming and sitting down by Evenius at the place where he sat, they spoke of other matters, till at last they fell to commiserating his misfortune.


9.94.1
9959
ταύτῃ δὲ ὑπάγοντες εἰρώτων τίνα δίκην ἂν ἕλοιτο , εἰ ἐθέλοιεν Ἀπολλωνιῆται δίκας ὑποστῆναι δώσειν τῶν ἐποίησαν .
Guiding the conversation in this way, they asked him what compensation he would choose, if the people of Apollonia should promise to requite him for what they had done.


9.94.2
9960
ὁ δὲ οὐκ ἀκηκοὼς τὸ θεοπρόπιον εἵλετο εἴπας εἴ τις οἱ δοίη ἀγρούς , τῶν ἀστῶν ὀνομάσας τοῖσι ἠπίστατο εἶναι καλλίστους δύο κλήρους τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀπολλωνίῃ , καὶ οἴκησιν πρὸς τούτοισι τὴν ᾔδεε καλλίστην ἐοῦσαν τῶν ἐν πόλι ·
He, knowing nothing of the oracle, said he would choose for a gift the lands of certain named townsmen whom he thought to have the two fairest estates in Apollonia, and a house besides which he knew to be the fairest in the town;


9.94.2
9961
τούτων δὲ ἔφη ἐπήβολος γενόμενος τοῦ λοιποῦ ἀμήνιτος εἶναι , καὶ δίκην οἱ ταύτην ἀποχρᾶν γενομένην .
let him (he said) have possession of these, and he would lay aside his anger, and be satisfied with that by way of restitution.


9.94.3
9962
καὶ ὃ μὲν ταῦτα ἔλεγε , οἳ δὲ πάρεδροι εἶπαν ὑπολαβόντες " Εὐήνιε , ταύτην δίκην Ἀπολλωνιῆται τῆς ἐκτυφλώσιος ἐκτίνουσί τοι κατὰ θεοπρόπια τὰ γενόμενα " .
So he said this, and those who were sitting beside him said in reply: “Evenius, the people of Apollonia hereby make you that restitution for the loss of your sight, obeying the oracle given to them.”


9.94.3
9963
ὃ μὲν δὴ πρὸς ταῦτα δεινὰ ἐποίεε , τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν πυθόμενος τὸν πάντα λόγον , ὡς ἐξαπατηθείς ·
At that he was very angry, for he learned through this the whole story and saw that they had cheated him.


9.94.3
9964
οἳ δὲ πριάμενοι παρὰ τῶν ἐκτημένων διδοῦσί οἱ τὰ εἵλετο .
They did, however, buy from the possessors and give him what he had chosen,


9.94.3
9965
καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα αὐτίκα ἔμφυτον μαντικὴν εἶχε , ὥστε καὶ ὀνομαστὸς γενέσθαι .
and from that day he had a natural gift of divination, through which he won fame.


9.95.1
9966
τούτου δὴ ὁ Δηίφονος ἐὼν παῖς τοῦ Εὐηνίου ἀγόντων Κορινθίων ἐμαντεύετο τῇ στρατιῇ .
Deiphonus, the son of this Evenius, had been brought by the Corinthians, and was the army's prophet.


9.95.1
9967
ἤδη δὲ καὶ τόδε ἤκουσα , ὡς ὁ Δηίφονος ἐπιβατεύων τοῦ Εὐηνίου οὐνόματος ἐξελάμβανε ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἔργα , οὐκ ἐὼν Εὐηνίου παῖς .
But I have heard it said before now, that Deiphonus was not the son of Evenius, but made a wrongful use of that name and worked for wages up and down Hellas.


9.96.1
9968
τοῖσι δὲ Ἕλλησι ὡς ἐκαλλιέρησε , ἀνῆγον τὰς νέας ἐκ τῆς Δήλου πρὸς τὴν Σάμον .
Having won favorable omens, the Greeks put out to sea from Delos for Samos.


9.96.1
9969
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐγένοντο τῆς Σαμίης πρὸς Καλαμίσοισι , οἳ μὲν αὐτοῦ ὁρμισάμενοι κατὰ τὸ Ἥραιον τὸ ταύτῃ παρεσκευάζοντο ἐς ναυμαχίην , οἳ δὲ Πέρσαι πυθόμενοι σφέας προσπλέειν ἀνῆγον καὶ αὐτοὶ πρὸς τὴν ἤπειρον τὰς νέας τὰς ἄλλας , τὰς δὲ Φοινίκων ἀπῆκαν ἀποπλέειν .
When they were now near Calamisa in the Samian territory, they anchored there near the temple of Hera which is in those parts, and prepared for a sea-fight.


9.96.1
9970
βουλευομένοισι γάρ σφι ἐδόκεε ναυμαχίην μὴ ποιέεσθαι ·
The Persians, learning of their approach, also put out to sea and made for the mainland with all their ships save the Phoenicians, whom they sent sailing away. It was determined by them in council that they would not do battle by sea,


9.96.2
9971
οὐ γὰρ ὦν ἐδόκεον ὅμοιοι εἶναι .
for they thought themselves overmatched;


9.96.2
9972
ἐς δὲ τὴν ἤπειρον ἀπέπλεον , ὅκως ἔωσι ὑπὸ τὸν πεζὸν στρατὸν τὸν σφέτερον ἐόντα ἐν τῇ Μυκάλῃ , ὃς κελεύσαντος Ξέρξεω καταλελειμμένος τοῦ ἄλλου στρατοῦ Ἰωνίην ἐφύλασσε ·
the reason of their making for the mainland was that they might be under the shelter of their army at Mykale, which had been left by Xerxes' command behind the rest of his host to hold Ionia.


9.96.2
9973
τοῦ πλῆθος μὲν ἦν ἓξ μυριάδες , ἐστρατήγεε δὲ αὐτοῦ Τιγράνης κάλλεϊ καὶ μεγάθεϊ ὑπερφέρων Περσέων .
There were sixty thousand men in it, and Tigranes, the noblest and tallest man in Persia, was their general.


9.96.3
9974
ὑπὸ τοῦτον μὲν δὴ τὸν στρατὸν ἐβουλεύσαντο καταφυγόντες οἱ τοῦ ναυτικοῦ στρατηγοὶ ἀνειρύσαι τὰς νέας καὶ περιβαλέσθαι ἕρκος ἔρυμά τε τῶν νεῶν καὶ σφέων αὐτῶν κρησφύγετον .
It was the design of the Persian admirals to flee to the shelter of that army, and there to beach their ships and build a fence round them which should be a protection for the ship and a refuge for themselves.


9.97.1
9975
ταῦτα βουλευσάμενοι ἀνήγοντο .
With this design they put to sea.


9.97.1
9976
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ παρὰ τὸ τῶν Ποτνιέων ἱρὸν τῆς Μυκάλης ἐς Γαίσωνά τε καὶ Σκολοπόεντα , τῇ Δήμητρος Ἐλευσινίης ἱρόν , τὸ Φίλιστος ὁ Πασικλέος ἱδρύσατο Νείλεῳ τῷ Κόδρου ἐπισπόμενος ἐπὶ Μιλήτου κτιστύν , ἐνθαῦτα τὰς τε νέας ἀνείρυσαν καὶ περιεβάλοντο ἕρκος καὶ λίθων καὶ ξύλων , δένδρεα ἐκκόψαντες ἥμερα , καὶ σκόλοπας περὶ τὸ ἕρκος κατέπηξαν , καὶ παρεσκευάδατο ὡς πολιορκησόμενοι καὶ ὡς νικήσοντες , ἐπ’ ἀμφότερα ἐπιλεγόμενοι γὰρ παρεσκευάζοντο ,
So when they came past the temple of the Goddesses at Mykale to the Gaeson and Scolopois, where there is a temple of Eleusinian Demeter (which was built by Philistus son of Pasicles when he went with Nileus son of Codrus to the founding of Miletus), they beached their ships and fenced them round with stones and the trunks of orchard trees which they cut down; they drove in stakes around the fence and prepared for siege or victory, making ready, after consideration, for either event.


9.98.1
9977
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες ὡς ἐπύθοντο οἰχωκότας τοὺς βαρβάρους ἐς τὴν ἤπειρον , ἤχθοντο ὡς ἐκπεφευγότων ἀπορίῃ τε εἴχοντο ὅ τι ποιέωσι , εἴτε ἀπαλλάσσωνται ὀπίσω εἴτε καταπλέωσι ἐπ’ Ἑλλησπόντου .
When the Greeks learned that the barbarians had gone off to the mainland, they were not all pleased that their enemy had escaped them, and did not know whether to return back or set sail for the Hellespont.


9.98.1
9978
τέλος δὲ ἔδοξε τούτων μὲν μηδέτερα ποιέειν , ἐπιπλέειν δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν ἤπειρον .
At last they resolved that they would do neither, but sail to the mainland.


9.98.2
9979
παρασκευασάμενοι ὦν ἐς ναυμαχίην καὶ ἀποβάθρας καὶ ἄλλα ὅσων ἔδεε , ἔπλεον ἐπὶ τῆς Μυκάλης .
Equipping themselves for this with gangways and everything else necessary for a sea-fight, they held their course for Mykale.


9.98.2
9980
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀγχοῦ τε ἐγίνοντο τοῦ στρατοπέδου καὶ οὐδεὶς ἐφαίνετό σφι ἐπαναγόμενος , ἀλλ’ ὥρων νέας ἀνελκυσμένας ἔσω τοῦ τείχεος , πολλὸν δὲ πεζὸν παρακεκριμένον παρὰ τὸν αἰγιαλόν , ἐνθαῦτα πρῶτον μὲν ἐν τῇ νηὶ παραπλέων , ἐγχρίμψας τῷ αἰγιαλῷ τὰ μάλιστα , Λευτυχίδης ὑπὸ κήρυκος προηγόρευε τοῖσι Ἴωσι λέγων " ἄνδρες Ἴωνες , οἳ ὑμέων τυγχάνουσι ἐπακούοντες , μάθετε τὰ λέγω ·
When they approached the camp, no one put out to meet them. Seeing the ships beached within the wall and a great host of men drawn up in array along the strand, Leutychides first sailed along in his ship, keeping as near to the shore as he could, and made this proclamation to the Ionians by the voice of a herald: “Men of Ionia, you who hear us, understand what I say,


9.98.3
9981
πάντως γὰρ οὐδὲν συνήσουσι Πέρσαι τῶν ἐγὼ ὑμῖν ἐντέλλομαι .
for by no means will the Persians understand anything I charge you with


9.98.3
9982
ἐπεὰν συμμίσγωμεν , μεμνῆσθαι τινὰ χρὴ ἐλευθερίης μὲν πάντων πρῶτον , μετὰ δὲ τοῦ συνθήματος Ἥβης .
when we join battle, first of all it is right for each man to remember his freedom and next the battle-cry ‘Hebe’:


9.98.3
9983
καὶ τάδε ἴστω καὶ ὁ μὴ ἀκούσας ὑμέων πρὸς τοῦ ἀκούσαντος " .
and let him who hears me tell him who has not heard it.”


9.98.4
9984
ὡυτὸς δὲ οὗτος ἐὼν τυγχάνει νόος τοῦ πρήγματος καὶ ὁ Θεμιστοκλέος ὁ ἐπ’ Ἀρτεμισίῳ ·
The purpose of this act was the same as Themistocles' purpose at Artemisium;


9.98.4
9985
ἢ γὰρ δὴ λαθόντα τὰ ῥήματα τοὺς βαρβάρους ἔμελλε τοὺς Ἴωνας πείσειν , ἢ ἔπειτα ἀνενειχθέντα ἐς τοὺς βαρβάρους ποιήσειν ἀπίστους τοῖσι Ἕλλησι .
either the message would be unknown to the barbarians and would prevail with the Ionians, or if it were thereafter reported to the barbarians, it would cause them to mistrust their Greek allies.


9.99.1
9986
Λευτυχίδεω δὲ ταῦτα ὑποθεμένου δεύτερα δὴ τάδε ἐποίευν οἱ Ἕλληνες ·
After this counsel of Leutychides, the Greeks did the following.


9.99.1
9987
προσσχόντες τὰς νέας ἀπέβησαν ἐς τὸν αἰγιαλόν .
They brought their ships to land and disembarked on the beach.


9.99.1
9988
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν ἐτάσσοντο , οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ὡς εἶδον τοὺς Ἕλληνας παρασκευαζομένους ἐς μάχην καὶ τοῖσι Ἴωσι παραινέσαντας , τοῦτο μὲν ὑπονοήσαντες τοὺς Σαμίους τὰ Ἑλλήνων φρονέειν ἀπαιρέονται τὰ ὅπλα .
There they formed a battle column. But the Persians, seeing the Greeks prepare for battle and exhort the Ionians, first of all took away the Samians' armor, suspecting that they would aid the Greeks;


9.99.2
9989
οἱ γὰρ ὦν Σάμιοι ἀπικομένων Ἀθηναίων αἰχμαλώτων ἐν τῇσι νηυσὶ τῶν βαρβάρων , τοὺς ἔλαβον ἀνὰ τὴν Ἀττικὴν λελειμμένους οἱ Ξέρξεω , τούτους λυσάμενοι πάντας ἀποπέμπουσι ἐποδιάσαντες ἐς Ἀθήνας ·
for indeed when the barbarian's ships brought certain Athenian captives, who had been left in Attica and taken by Xerxes' army, the Samians had set them all free and sent them away to Athens with provisions for the journey;


9.99.2
9990
τῶν εἵνεκεν οὐκ ἥκιστα ὑποψίην εἶχον , πεντακοσίας κεφαλὰς τῶν Ξέρξεω πολεμίων λυσάμενοι .
for this reason in particular they were held suspect, as having set free five hundred souls of Xerxes' enemies.


9.99.3
9991
τοῦτο δὲ τὰς διόδους τὰς ἐς τὰς κορυφὰς τῆς Μυκάλης φερούσας προστάσσουσι τοῖσι Μιλησίοισι φυλάσσειν ὡς ἐπισταμένοισι δῆθεν μάλιστα τὴν χώρην .
Furthermore, they appointed the Milesians to guard the passes leading to the heights of Mykale, alleging that they were best acquainted with the country.


9.99.3
9992
ἐποίευν δὲ τοῦτο τοῦδε εἵνεκεν , ἵνα ἐκτὸς τοῦ στρατοπέδου ἔωσι .
Their true reason, however, for so doing was that the Milesians should be separate from the rest of their army.


9.99.3
9993
τούτους μὲν Ἰώνων , τοῖσι καὶ κατεδόκεον νεοχμὸν ἄν τι ποιέειν δυνάμιος ἐπιλαβομένοισι , τρόποισι τοιούτοισι προεφυλάσσοντο οἱ Πέρσαι , αὐτοὶ δὲ συνεφόρησαν τὰ γέρρα ἕρκος εἶναι σφίσι .
In such a manner the Persians safeguarded themselves from those Ionians who (they supposed) might turn against them if opportunity were given for themselves: they set their shields close to make a barricade.


9.100.1
9994
ὡς δὲ ἄρα παρεσκευάδατο τοῖσι Ἕλλησι , προσήισαν πρὸς τοὺς βαρβάρους ·
The Greeks, having made all their preparations advanced their line against the barbarians.


9.100.1
9995
ἰοῦσι δέ σφι φήμη τε ἐσέπτατο ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον πᾶν καὶ κηρυκήιον ἐφάνη ἐπὶ τῆς κυματωγῆς κείμενον ·
As they went, a rumor spread through the army, and a herald's wand was seen lying by the water-line.


9.100.1
9996
ἡ δὲ φήμη διῆλθέ σφι ὧδε , ὡς οἱ Ἕλληνες τὴν Μαρδονίου στρατιὴν νικῷεν ἐν Βοιωτοῖσι μαχόμενοι .
The rumor that ran was to the effect that the Greeks were victors over Mardonius' army at a battle in Boeotia.


9.100.2
9997
δῆλα δὴ πολλοῖσι τεκμηρίοισι ἐστὶ τὰ θεῖα τῶν πρηγμάτων , εἰ καὶ τότε , τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρης συμπιπτούσης τοῦ τε ἐν Πλαταιῇσι καὶ τοῦ ἐν Μυκάλῃ μέλλοντος ἔσεσθαι τρώματος , φήμη τοῖσι Ἕλλησι τοῖσι ταύτῃ ἐσαπίκετο , ὥστε θαρσῆσαί τε τὴν στρατιὴν πολλῷ μᾶλλον καὶ ἐθέλειν προθυμότερον κινδυνεύειν .
Now there are many clear indications of the divine ordering of things, seeing that a message, which greatly heartened the army and made it ready to face danger, arrived amongst the Greeks the very day on which the Persians' disaster at  Plataea and that other which was to befall them at  Mykale took place.


9.101.1
9998
καὶ τόδε ἕτερον συνέπεσε γενόμενον , Δήμητρος τεμένεα Ἐλευσινίης παρὰ ἀμφοτέρας τὰς συμβολὰς εἶναι ·
Moreover, there was the additional coincidence, that there were precincts of Eleusinian Demeter on both battlefields;


9.101.1
9999
καὶ γὰρ δὴ ἐν τῇ Πλαταιίδι παρ’ αὐτὸ τὸ Δημήτριον ἐγίνετο , ὡς καὶ πρότερόν μοι εἴρηται , ἡ μάχη , καὶ ἐν Μυκάλῃ ἔμελλε ὡσαύτως ἔσεσθαι .
for at Plataea the fight was near the temple of Demeter, as I have already said, and so it was to be at Mykale also.


9.101.2
10000
γεγονέναι δὲ νίκην τῶν μετὰ Παυσανίεω Ἑλλήνων ὀρθῶς σφι ἡ φήμη συνέβαινε ἐλθοῦσα ·
It happened that the rumor of a victory won by the Greeks with Pausanias was true,


9.101.2
10001
τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἐν Πλαταιῇσι πρωὶ ἔτι τῆς ἡμέρης ἐγίνετο , τὸ δὲ ἐν Μυκάλῃ περὶ δείλην ·
for the defeat at Plataea happened while it was yet early in the day, and the defeat of Mykale in the afternoon.


9.101.2
10002
ὅτι δὲ τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρης συνέβαινε γίνεσθαι μηνός τε τοῦ αὐτοῦ , χρόνῳ οὐ πολλῷ σφι ὕστερον δῆλα ἀναμανθάνουσι ἐγίνετο .
That the two fell on the same day of the same month was proven to the Greeks when they examined the matter not long afterwards.


9.101.3
10003
ἦν δὲ ἀρρωδίη σφι , πρὶν τὴν φήμην ἐσαπικέσθαι , οὔτι περὶ σφέων αὐτῶν οὕτω ὡς τῶν Ἑλλήνων , μὴ περὶ Μαρδονίῳ πταίσῃ ἡ Ἑλλάς .
Now before this rumor came they had been faint-hearted, fearing less for themselves than for the Greeks with Pausanias, that Hellas should stumble over Mardonius.


9.101.3
10004
ὡς μέντοι ἡ κληδὼν αὕτη σφι ἐσέπτατο , μᾶλλόν , τι καὶ ταχύτερον τὴν πρόσοδον ἐποιεῦντο .
But when the report sped among them, they grew stronger and swifter in their onset.


9.101.3
10005
οἱ μὲν δὴ Ἕλληνες καὶ οἱ βάρβαροι ἔσπευδον ἐς τὴν μάχην , ὥς σφι καί αἱ νῆσοι καὶ ὁ Ἑλλήσποντος ἄεθλα προέκειτο .
So Greeks and barbarians alike were eager for battle, seeing that the islands and the Hellespont were the prizes of victory.


9.102.1
10006
τοῖσι μέν νυν Ἀθηναίοισι καὶ τοῖσι προσεχέσι τούτοισι τεταγμένοισι , μέχρι κου τῶν ἡμισέων , ἡ ὁδὸς ἐγίνετο κατ’ αἰγιαλόν τε καὶ ἄπεδον χῶρον , τοῖσι δὲ Λακεδαιμονίοισι καὶ τοῖσι ἐπεξῆς τούτοισι τεταγμένοισι κατά τε χαράδραν καὶ ὄρεα .
As for the Athenians and those whose place was nearest them, that is, for about half of the line, their way lay over the beach and level ground;


9.102.1
10007
ἐν ᾧ δὲ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι περιήισαν , οὗτοι οἱ ἐπὶ τῷ ἑτέρῳ κέρεϊ ἔτι καὶ δὴ ἐμάχοντο .
for the Lacedaemonians and those that were next to them, their way lay through a ravine and among hills. While the Lacedaemonians were making a circuit, those others on the other wing were already fighting.


9.102.2
10008
ἕως μέν νυν τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι ὀρθὰ ἦν τὰ γέρρα , ἠμύνοντό τε καὶ οὐδὲν ἔλασσον εἶχον τῇ μάχῃ ·
As long as the Persians' shields stood upright, they defended themselves and held their own in the battle,


9.102.2
10009
ἐπεὶ δὲ τῶν Ἀθηναίων καὶ τῶν προσεχέων ὁ στρατός , ὅκως ἑωυτῶν γένηται τὸ ἔργον καὶ μὴ Λακεδαιμονίων , παρακελευσάμενοι ἔργου εἴχοντο προθυμότερον , ἐνθεῦτεν ἤδη ἑτεροιοῦτο τὸ πρῆγμα .
but when the Athenians and their neighbors in the line passed the word and went more zealously to work, that they and not the Lacedaemonians might win the victory, immediately the face of the fight changed.


9.102.3
10010
διωσάμενοι γὰρ τὰ γέρρα οὗτοι φερόμενοι ἐσέπεσον ἁλέες ἐς τοὺς Πέρσας , οἳ δὲ δεξάμενοι καὶ χρόνον συχνὸν ἀμυνόμενοι τέλος ἔφευγον ἐς τὸ τεῖχος .
Breaking down the shields they charged all together into the midst of the Persians, who received the onset and stood their ground for a long time, but at last fled within their wall.


9.102.3
10011
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ καὶ Κορίνθιοι καὶ Σικυώνιοι καὶ Τροιζήνιοι ( οὕτω γὰρ ἦσαν ἐπεξῆς τεταγμένοι ) συνεπισπόμενοι συνεσέπιπτον ἐς τὸ τεῖχος .
The Athenians and Corinthians and Sicyonians and Troezenians, who were next to each other in the line, followed close after and rushed in together.


9.102.3
10012
ὡς δὲ καὶ τὸ τεῖχος ἀραίρητο , οὔτ’ ἔτι πρὸς ἀλκὴν ἐτράποντο οἱ βάρβαροι πρὸς φυγήν τε ὁρμέατο οἱ ἄλλοι πλὴν Περσέων ·
But when the walled place had been razed, the barbarians made no further defense, but took to flight, all save the Persians,


9.102.4
10013
οὗτοι δὲ κατ’ ὀλίγους γινόμενοι ἐμάχοντο τοῖσι αἰεὶ ἐς τὸ τεῖχος ἐσπίπτουσι Ἑλλήνων .
who gathered into bands of a few men and fought with whatever Greeks came rushing within the walls.


9.102.4
10014
καὶ τῶν στρατηγῶν τῶν Περσικῶν δύο μὲν ἀποφεύγουσι , δύο δὲ τελευτῶσι ·
Of the Persian leaders two escaped by flight and two were killed; Artayntes and Ithanitres, who were admirals of the fleet, escaped;


9.102.4
10015
Ἀρταΰντης μὲν καὶ Ἰθαμίτρης τοῦ ναυτικοῦ στρατηγέοντες ἀποφεύγουσι , Μαρδόντης δὲ καὶ ὁ τοῦ πεζοῦ στρατηγὸς Τιγράνης μαχόμενοι τελευτῶσι .
Mardontes and Tigranes, the general of the land army, were killed fighting.


9.103.1
10016
ἔτι δὲ μαχομένων τῶν Περσέων ἀπίκοντο Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ οἱ μετ’ αὐτῶν , καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ συνδιεχείριζον .
While the Persians still fought, the Lacedaemonians and their comrades came up and finished what was left of the business.


9.103.1
10017
ἔπεσον δὲ καὶ αὐτῶν τῶν Ἑλλήνων συχνοὶ ἐνθαῦτα ἄλλοι τε καὶ Σικυώνιοι καὶ στρατηγὸς Περίλεως ·
The Greeks too lost many men there, notably the men of Sicyon and their general Perilaus.


9.103.2
10018
τῶν τε Σαμίων οἱ στρατευόμενοι ἐόντες τε ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ τῷ Μηδικῷ καὶ ἀπαραιρημένοι τὰ ὅπλα , ὡς εἶδον αὐτίκα κατ’ ἀρχὰς γινομένην ἑτεραλκέα τὴν μάχην , ἔρδον ὅσον ἐδυνέατο προσωφελέειν ἐθέλοντες τοῖσι Ἕλλησι .
As for the Samians who served in the Median army and had been disarmed, they, seeing from the first that victory hung in the balance, did what they could in their desire to aid the Greeks.


9.103.2
10019
Σαμίους δὲ ἰδόντες οἱ ἄλλοι Ἴωνες ἄρξαντας οὕτω δὴ καὶ αὐτοὶ ἀποστάντες ἀπὸ Περσέων ἐπέθεντο τοῖσι βαρβάροισι .
When the other Ionians saw the Samians set the example, they also abandoned the Persians and attacked the foreigners.


9.104.1
10020
Μιλησίοισι δὲ προσετέτακτο μὲν ἐκ τῶν Περσέων τὰς διόδους τηρέειν σωτηρίης εἵνεκά σφι , ὡς ἢν ἄρα σφέας καταλαμβάνῃ οἷά περ κατέλαβε , ἔχοντες ἡγεμόνας σώζωνται ἐς τὰς κορυφὰς τῆς Μυκάλης .
The Persians had for their own safety appointed the Milesians to watch the passes, so that if anything should happen to the Persian army such as did happen to it, they might have guides to bring them safely to the heights of Mykale.


9.104.1
10021
ἐτάχθησαν μέν νυν ἐπὶ τοῦτο τὸ πρῆγμα οἱ Μιλήσιοι τούτου τε εἵνεκεν καὶ ἵνα μὴ παρεόντες ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ τι νεοχμὸν ποιέοιεν ·
This was the task to which the Milesians were appointed for the reason mentioned above and so that they might not be present with the army and so turn against it.


9.104.1
10022
οἳ δὲ πᾶν τ- ἐναντίον τοῦ προστεταγμένου ἐποίεον , ἄλλας τε κατηγεόμενοί σφι ὁδοὺς φεύγουσι , αἳ δὴ ἔφερον ἐς τοὺς πολεμίους , καὶ τέλος αὐτοί σφι ἐγίνοντο κτείνοντες πολεμιώτατοι .
They acted wholly contrary to the charge laid upon them; they misguided the fleeing Persians by ways that led them among their enemies, and at last they themselves became their worst enemies and killed them.


9.104.1
10023
οὕτω δὴ τὸ δεύτερον Ἰωνίη ἀπὸ Περσέων ἀπέστη .
In this way Ionia revolted for the second time from the Persians.


9.105.1
10024
ἐν δὲ ταύτῃ τῇ μάχῃ Ἑλλήνων ἠρίστευσαν Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ Ἀθηναίων Ἑρμόλυκος ὁ Εὐθοίνου , ἀνὴρ παγκράτιον ἐπασκήσας .
In that battle those of the Greeks who fought best were the Athenians, and the Athenian who fought best was one who practised the pancratium, Hermolycus son of Euthoenus.


9.105.1
10025
τοῦτον δὲ τὸν Ἑρμόλυκον κατέλαβε ὕστερον τούτων , πολέμου ἐόντος Ἀθηναίοισί τε καὶ Καρυστίοισι , ἐν Κύρνῳ τῆς Καρυστίης χώρης ἀποθανόντα ἐν μάχῃ κεῖσθαι ἐπὶ Γεραιστῷ .
This Hermolycus on a later day met his death in a battle at Cyrnus in Carystus during a war between the Athenians and Carystians, and lay dead on Geraestus.


9.105.1
10026
μετὰ δὲ Ἀθηναίους Κορίνθιοι καὶ Τροιζήνιοι καὶ Σικυώνιοι ἠρίστευσαν .
Those who fought best after the Athenians were the men of Corinth and Troezen and Sicyon.


9.106.1
10027
ἐπείτε δὲ κατεργάσαντο οἱ Ἕλληνες τοὺς πολλοὺς τοὺς μὲν μαχομένους τοὺς δὲ καὶ φεύγοντας τῶν βαρβάρων , τὰς νέας ἐνέπρησαν καὶ τὸ τεῖχος ἅπαν , τὴν ληίην προεξαγαγόντες ἐς τὸν αἰγιαλόν , καὶ θησαυρούς τινας χρημάτων εὗρον ·
When the Greeks had made an end of most of the barbarians, either in battle or in flight, they brought out their booty onto the beach, and found certain stores of wealth.


9.106.1
10028
ἐμπρήσαντες δὲ τὸ τεῖχος καὶ τὰς νέας ἀπέπλεον .
Then after burning the ships and the whole of the wall, they sailed away.


9.106.2
10029
ἀπικόμενοι δὲ ἐς Σάμον οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐβουλεύοντο περὶ ἀναστάσιος τῆς Ἰωνίης , καὶ ὅκῃ χρεὸν εἴη τῆς Ἑλλάδος κατοικίσαι τῆς αὐτοὶ ἐγκρατέες ἦσαν , τὴν δὲ Ἰωνίην ἀπεῖναι τοῖσι βαρβάροισι ·
When they had arrived at Samos, they debated in council over the removal of all Greeks from Ionia, and in what Greek lands under their dominion it would be best to plant the Ionians, leaving the country itself to the barbarians;


9.106.2
10030
ἀδύνατον γὰρ ἐφαίνετό σφι εἶναι ἑωυτούς τε Ἰώνων προκατῆσθαι φρουρέοντας τὸν πάντα χρόνον , καὶ ἑωυτῶν μὴ προκατημένων Ἴωνας οὐδεμίαν ἐλπίδα εἶχον χαίροντας πρὸς τῶν Περσέων ἀπαλλάξειν .
for it seemed impossible to stand on guard between the Ionians and their enemies forever. If, however, they should not so stand, they had no hope that the Persians would permit the Ionians to go unpunished.


9.106.3
10031
πρὸς ταῦτα Πελοποννησίων μὲν τοῖσι ἐν τέλεϊ ἐοῦσι ἐδόκεε τῶν μηδισάντων ἐθνέων τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν τὰ ἐμπολαῖα ἐξαναστήσαντας δοῦναι τὴν χώρην Ἴωσι ἐνοικῆσαι , Ἀθηναίοισι δὲ οὐκ ἐδόκεε ἀρχὴν Ἰωνίην γενέσθαι ἀνάστατον οὐδὲ Πελοποννησίοισι περὶ τῶν σφετερέων ἀποικιέων βουλεύειν ·
In this matter the Peloponnesians who were in charge were for removing the people from the lands of those Greek nations which had sided with the Persians and giving their land to the Ionians to dwell in.


9.106.3
10032
ἀντιτεινόντων δὲ τούτων προθύμως , εἶξαν οἱ Πελοποννήσιοι .
The Athenians disliked the whole plan of removing the Greeks from Ionia, or allowing the Peloponnesians to determine the lot of Athenian colonies, and as they resisted vehemently, the Peloponnesians yielded.


9.106.4
10033
καὶ οὕτω δὴ Σαμίους τε καὶ Χίους καὶ Λεσβίους καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους νησιώτας , οἳ ἔτυχον συστρατευόμενοι τοῖσι Ἕλλησι , ἐς τὸ συμμαχικὸν ἐποιήσαντο , πίστι τε καταλαβόντες καὶ ὁρκίοισι ἐμμενέειν τε καὶ μὴ ἀποστήσεσθαι .
It accordingly came about that they admitted to their alliance the Samians, Chians, Lesbians, and all other islanders who had served with their forces, and bound them by pledge and oaths to remain faithful and not desert their allies.


9.106.4
10034
τούτους δὲ καταλαβόντες ὁρκίοισι ἔπλεον τὰς γεφύρας λύσοντες ·
When the oaths had been sworn, the Greeks set sail to break the bridges.


9.106.4
10035
ἔτι γὰρ ἐδόκεον ἐντεταμένας εὑρήσειν .
They supposed that these still held fast.


9.106.4
10036
οὗτοι μὲν δὴ ἐπ’ Ἑλλησπόντου ἔπλεον .
So they laid their course for the Hellespont.


9.107.1
10037
τῶν δὲ ἀποφυγόντων βαρβάρων ἐς τὰ ἄκρα τῆς Μυκάλης κατειληθέντων , ἐόντων οὐ πολλῶν , ἐγίνετο κομιδὴ ἐς Σάρδις .
The few barbarians who escaped were driven to the heights of Mykale, and made their way from there to Sardis.


9.107.1
10038
πορευομένων δὲ κατ’ ὁδὸν Μασίστης ὁ Δαρείου παρατυχὼν τῷ πάθεϊ τῷ γεγονότι τὸν στρατηγὸν Ἀρταΰντην ἔλεγε πολλά τε καὶ κακά , ἄλλα τε καὶ γυναικὸς κακίω φὰς αὐτὸν εἶναι τοιαῦτα στρατηγήσαντα , καὶ ἄξιον εἶναι παντὸς κακοῦ τὸν βασιλέος οἶκον κακώσαντα .
While they were making their way along the road, Masistes son of Darius, who happened to have been present at the Persian disaster, reviled the admiral Artayntes very bitterly, telling him (with much beside) that such generalship as his proved him worse than a woman, and that no punishment was too severe for the harm he had done the king's estate.


9.107.1
10039
παρὰ δὲ τοῖσι Πέρσῃσι γυναικὸς κακίω ἀκοῦσαι δέννος μέγιστος ἐστι .
Now it is the greatest of all taunts in Persia to be called worse than a woman.


9.107.2
10040
ὁ δὲ ἐπεὶ πολλὰ ἤκουσε , δεινὰ ποιεύμενος σπᾶται ἐπὶ τὸν Μασίστην τὸν ἀκινάκην , ἀποκτεῖναι θέλων .
These many insults angered Artayntes so much that he drew his sword upon Masistes to kill him,


9.107.2
10041
καί μιν ἐπιθέοντα φρασθεὶς Ξειναγόρης ὁ Πρηξίλεω ἀνὴρ Ἁλικαρνησσεὺς ὄπισθε ἑστεὼς αὐτοῦ Ἀρταΰντεω ἁρπάζει μέσον καὶ ἐξαείρας παίει ἐς τὴν γῆν ·
but Xenagoras son of Praxilaus of Halicarnassus, who stood behind Artayntes himself saw him run at Masistes, and caught him round the middle and lifted and hurled him to the ground.


9.107.2
10042
καὶ ἐν τούτῳ οἱ δορυφόροι οἱ Μασίστεω προέστησαν .
In the meantime Masistes' guards had also come between them.


9.107.3
10043
ὁ δὲ Ξειναγόρης ταῦτα ἐργάσατο χάριτα αὐτῷ τε Μασίστῃ τιθέμενος καὶ Ξέρξῃ .
By doing so Xenagoras won the gratitude of Masistes himself and Xerxes,


9.107.3
10044
ἐκσώζων τὸν ἀδελφεὸν τὸν ἐκείνου ·
for saving the king's brother.


9.107.3
10045
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον Ξειναγόρης Κιλικίης πάσης ἦρξε δόντος βασιλέος .
For this deed he was made ruler of all Cilicia by the king's gift.


9.107.3
10046
τῶν δὲ κατ’ ὁδὸν πορευομένων οὐδὲν ἐπὶ πλέον τούτων ἐγένετο , ἀλλ’ ἀπικνέονται ἐς Σάρδις .
Then they went on their way without anything further happening and came to Sardis.


9.108.1
10047
ἐν δὲ τῇσι Σάρδισι ἐτύγχανε ἐὼν βασιλεὺς ἐξ ἐκείνου τοῦ χρόνου , ἐπείτε ἐξ Ἀθηνέων προσπταίσας τῇ ναυμαχίῃ φυγὼν ἀπίκετο .
Now it happened that the king had been at Sardis ever since he came there in flight from Athens after his overthrow in the sea-fight.


9.108.1
10048
τότε δὴ ἐν τῇσι Σάρδισι ἐὼν ἄρα ἤρα τῆς Μασίστεω γυναικός , ἐούσης καὶ ταύτης ἐνθαῦτα .
Being then at Sardis he became enamored of Masistes' wife, who was also there.


9.108.1
10049
ὡς δέ οἱ προσπέμποντι οὐκ ἐδύνατο κατεργασθῆναι , οὐδὲ βίην προσεφέρετο προμηθεόμενος τὸν ἀδελφεὸν Μασίστην ·
But as all his messages could not bring her to yield to him, and he would not force her to his will, out of regard for his brother Masistes (which indeed counted with the woman also,


9.108.1
10050
τ- αὐτὸ δὲ τοῦτο εἶχε καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα ·
for she knew well that no force would be used against her),


9.108.1
10051
εὖ γὰρ ἐπίστατο βίης οὐ τευξομένη ·
Xerxes found no other way to accomplish his purpose than that he should make a marriage between his own son Darius and the daughter of this woman and Masistes,


9.108.1
10052
ἐνθαῦτα δὴ Ξέρξης ἐργόμενος τῶν ἄλλων πρήσσει τὸν γάμον τοῦτον τῷ παιδὶ τῷ ἑωυτοῦ Δαρείῳ , θυγατέρα τῆς γυναικὸς ταύτης καὶ Μασίστεω , δοκέων αὐτὴν μᾶλλον λάμψεσθαι ἢν ταῦτα ποιήσῃ .
for he thought that by doing so he would be most likely to win her.


9.108.2
10053
ἁρμόσας δὲ καὶ τὰ νομιζόμενα ποιήσας ἀπήλαυνε ἐς Σοῦσα ·
So he betrothed them with all due ceremony and rode away to Susa.


9.108.2
10054
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐκεῖ τε ἀπίκετο καὶ ἠγάγετο ἐς ἑωυτοῦ Δαρείῳ τὴν γυναῖκα , οὕτω δὴ τῆς Μασίστεω μὲν γυναικὸς ἐπέπαυτο , ὁ δὲ διαμειψάμενος ἤρα τε καὶ ἐτύγχανε τῆς Δαρείου μὲν γυναικὸς Μασίστεω δὲ θυγατρός ·
But when he had come and had taken Darius' bride into his house, he thought no more of Masistes' wife, but changed his mind and wooed and won this girl Artaynte, Darius' wife and Masistes' daughter.


9.108.2
10055
οὔνομα δὲ τῇ γυναικὶ ταύτῃ ἦν Ἀρταΰντη .
Her name was Artaynte.


9.109.1
10056
χρόνου δὲ προϊόντος ἀνάπυστα γίνεται τρόπῳ τοιῷδε .
As time went on, however, the truth came to light, and in such manner as I will show.


9.109.1
10057
ἐξυφήνασα Ἄμηστρις ἡ Ξέρξεω γυνὴ φᾶρος μέγα τε καὶ ποικίλον καὶ θέης ἄξιον διδοῖ Ξέρξῃ .
Xerxes' wife, Amestris, wove and gave to him a great gaily-colored mantle, marvellous to see.


9.109.1
10058
ὁ δὲ ἡσθεὶς περιβάλλεταί τε καὶ ἔρχεται παρὰ τὴν Ἀρταΰντην ·
Xerxes was pleased with it, and went to Artaynte wearing it.


9.109.2
10059
ἡσθεὶς δὲ καὶ ταύτῃ ἐκέλευσε αὐτὴν αἰτῆσαι ὃ τι βούλεταί οἱ γενέσθαι ἀντὶ τῶν αὐτῷ ὑπουργημένων ·
Being pleased with her too, he asked her what she wanted in return for her favors,


9.109.2
10060
πάντα γὰρ τεύξεσθαι αἰτήσασαν .
for he would deny nothing at her asking.


9.109.2
10061
τῇ δὲ κακῶς γὰρ ἔδεε πανοικίῃ γενέσθαι , πρὸς ταῦτα εἶπε Ξέρξῃ " δώσεις μοι τὸ ἄν σε αἰτήσω " ;
Thereupon — for she and all her house were doomed to evil — she said to Xerxes, “Will you give me whatever I ask of you?”


9.109.2
10062
ὁ δὲ πᾶν μᾶλλον δοκέων κείνην αἰτῆσαι ὑπισχνέετο καὶ ὤμοσε .
He promised this, supposing that she would ask anything but that;


9.109.2
10063
ἣ δὲ ὡς ὤμοσε ἀδεῶς αἰτέει τὸ φᾶρος .
when he had sworn, she asked boldly for his mantle.


9.109.3
10064
Ξέρξης δὲ παντοῖος ἐγίνετο οὐ βουλόμενος δοῦναι , κατ’ ἄλλο μὲν οὐδέν , φοβεόμενος δὲ Ἄμηστριν , μὴ καὶ πρὶν κατεικαζούσῃ τὰ γινόμενα οὕτω ἐπευρεθῇ πρήσσων ·
Xerxes tried to refuse her, for no reason except that he feared that Amestris might have clear proof of his doing what she already guessed.


9.109.3
10065
ἀλλὰ πόλις τε ἐδίδου καὶ χρυσὸν ἄπλετον καὶ στρατόν , τοῦ ἔμελλε οὐδεὶς ἄρξειν ἀλλ’ ἢ ἐκείνη .
He accordingly offered her cities instead and gold in abundance and an army for none but herself to command.


9.109.3
10066
Περσικὸν δὲ κάρτα ὁ στρατὸς δῶρον .
Armies are the most suitable of gifts in Persia.


9.109.3
10067
ἀλλ’ οὐ γὰρ ἔπειθε , διδοῖ τὸ φᾶρος .
But as he could not move her, he gave her the mantle;


9.109.3
10068
ἣ δὲ περιχαρὴς ἐοῦσα τῷ δώρῳ ἐφόρεέ τε καὶ ἀγάλλετο .
and she, rejoicing greatly in the gift, went flaunting her finery.


9.110.1
10069
καὶ ἡ Ἄμηστρις πυνθάνεταί μιν ἔχουσαν ·
Amestris heard that she had the mantle, but when she learned the truth, it was not the girl with whom she was angry.


9.110.1
10070
μαθοῦσα δὲ τὸ ποιεύμενον τῇ μὲν γυναικὶ ταύτῃ οὐκ εἶχε ἔγκοτον , ἣ δὲ ἐλπίζουσα τὴν μητέρα αὐτῆς εἶναι αἰτίην καὶ ταῦτα ἐκείνην πρήσσειν , τῇ Μασίστεω γυναικὶ ἐβούλευε ὄλεθρον .
She supposed rather that the girl's mother was guilty and that this was her doing, and so it was Masistes' wife whom she plotted to destroy.


9.110.2
10071
φυλάξασα δὲ τὸν ἄνδρα τὸν ἑωυτῆς Ξέρξην βασιλήιον δεῖπνον προτιθέμενον ·
She waited therefore till Xerxes her husband should be giving his royal feast.


9.110.2
10072
τοῦτο δὲ τὸ δεῖπνον παρασκευάζεται ἅπαξ τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ ἡμέρῃ τῇ ἐγένετο βασιλεύς .
This banquet is served once a year, on the king's birthday;


9.110.2
10073
οὔνομα δὲ τῷ δείπνῳ τούτῳ Περσιστὶ μὲν τυκτά , κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἑλλήνων γλῶσσαν τέλειον ·
the Persian name for it is “tukta,” which is in the Greek language “perfect.”


9.110.2
10074
τότε καὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν σμᾶται μοῦνον βασιλεὺς καὶ Πέρσας δωρέεται ·
On that day (and none other) the king anoints his head and makes gifts to the Persians.


9.110.2
10075
ταύτην δὴ τὴν ἡμέρην φυλάξασα ἡ Ἄμηστρις χρηίζει τοῦ Ξέρξεω δοθῆναί οἱ τὴν Μασίστεω γυναῖκα .
Waiting for that day, Amestris then asked of Xerxes that Masistes' wife should be given to her.


9.110.3
10076
ὁ δὲ δεινόν τε καὶ ἀνάρσιον ἐποιέετο τοῦτο μὲν ἀδελφεοῦ γυναῖκα παραδοῦναι , τοῦτο δὲ ἀναιτίην ἐοῦσαν τοῦ πρήγματος τούτου ·
Xerxes considered it a terrible and wicked act to give up his brother's wife, and that too when she was innocent of the deed;


9.110.3
10077
συνῆκε γὰρ τοῦ εἵνεκεν ἐδέετο .
for he knew the purpose of the request.


9.111.1
10078
τέλος μέντοι ἐκείνης τε λιπαρεούσης καὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ νόμου ἐξεργόμενος , ὅτι ἀτυχῆσαι τὸν χρηίζοντα οὔ σφι δυνατόν ἐστι βασιληίου δείπνου προκειμένου , κάρτα δὴ ἀέκων κατανεύει , καὶ παραδοὺς ποιέει ὧδε ·
Nevertheless, since Amestris was insistent and the law compelled him (for at this royal banquet in Persia every request must of necessity be granted), he unwillingly consented, and delivered the woman to Amestris.


9.111.1
10079
τὴν μὲν κελεύει ποιέειν τὰ βούλεται , ὁ δὲ μεταπεμψάμενος τὸν ἀδελφεὸν λέγει τάδε .
Then, bidding her do what she wanted, he sent for his brother and spoke as follows:


9.111.2
10080
" Μασίστα , σὺ εἶς Δαρείου τε παῖς καὶ ἐμὸς ἀδελφεός , πρὸς δ’ ἔτι τούτοισι καὶ εἶς ἀνὴρ ἀγαθός ·
“Masistes, you are Darius' son and my brother, and a good man; hear me then.


9.111.2
10081
γυναικὶ δὴ ταύτῃ τῇ νῦν συνοικέεις μὴ συνοίκεε , ἀλλά τοι ἀντ’ αὐτῆς ἐγὼ δίδωμι θυγατέρα τὴν ἐμήν .
You must no longer live with her who is now your wife. I give you my daughter in her place.


9.111.2
10082
ταύτῃ συνοίκεε ·
Take her for your own,


9.111.2
10083
τὴν δὲ νῦν ἔχεις , οὐ γὰρ δοκέει ἐμοί , μὴ ἔχε γυναῖκα " .
but do away with the wife that you have, for it is not my will that you should have her.”


9.111.3
10084
ὁ δὲ Μασίστης ἀποθωμάσας τὰ λεγόμενα λέγει τάδε .
At that Masistes was amazed;


9.111.3
10085
" ὦ δέσποτα , τίνα μοι λόγον λέγεις ἄχρηστον , κελεύων με γυναῖκα , ἐκ τῆς μοι παῖδές τε νεηνίαι εἰσὶ καὶ θυγατέρες , τῶν καὶ σὺ μίαν τῷ παιδὶ τῷ σεωυτοῦ ἠγάγεο γυναῖκα , αὐτή τέ μοι κατὰ νόον τυγχάνει κάρτα ἐοῦσα ·
“Sire,” he said, “what is this evil command that you lay upon me, telling me to deal with my wife in this way? I have by her young sons and daughters, of whom you have taken a wife for your own son, and I am very content with her herself.


9.111.3
10086
ταύτην με κελεύεις μετέντα θυγατέρα τὴν σὴν γῆμαι ;
Yet you are asking me to get rid of my wife and wed your daughter?


9.111.4
10087
ἐγὼ δὲ βασιλεῦ μεγάλα μὲν ποιεῦμαι ἀξιεύμενος θυγατρὸς τῆς σῆς , ποιήσω μέντοι τούτων οὐδέτερα .
Truly, O king, I consider it a great honor to be accounted worthy of your daughter, but I will do neither the one nor the other.


9.111.4
10088
σὺ δὲ μηδαμῶς βιῶ πρήγματος τοιοῦδε δεόμενος ·
No, rather, do not force me to consent to such a desire.


9.111.4
10089
ἀλλὰ τῇ τε σῇ θυγατρὶ ἀνὴρ ἄλλος φανήσεται ἐμεῦ οὐδὲν ἥσσων , ἐμέ τε ἔα γυναικὶ τῇ ἐμῇ συνοικέειν " .
You will find another husband for your daughter as good as I, but permit me to keep my own wife.”


9.111.5
10090
ὃ μὲν δὴ τοιούτοισι ἀμείβεται , Ξέρξης δὲ θυμωθεὶς λέγει τάδε .
This was Masistes' response, but Xerxes was very angry and said: “You have come to this pass, Masistes.


9.111.5
10091
" οὕτω τοι , Μασίστα , πέπρηκται ·
I will give you no daughter of mine as a wife, nor will you any longer live with her whom you now have.


9.111.5
10092
οὔτε γὰρ ἄν τοι δοίην θυγατέρα τὴν ἐμὴν γῆμαι , οὔτε ἐκείνῃ πλεῦνα χρόνον συνοικήσεις , ὡς μάθῃς τὰ διδόμενα δέκεσθαι " .
In this way you will learn to accept that which is offered you.”


9.111.5
10093
ὁ δὲ ὡς ταῦτα ἤκουσε , εἴπας τοσόνδε ἐχώρεε ἔξω " δέσποτα , οὐ δὴ κώ με ἀπώλεσας " .
Hearing that, Masistes said “No, sire, you have not destroyed me yet!” and so departed.


9.112.1
10094
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ διὰ μέσου χρόνῳ , ἐν τῷ Ξέρξης τῷ ἀδελφεῷ διελέγετο , ἡ Ἄμηστρις μεταπεμψαμένη τοὺς δορυφόρους τοῦ Ξέρξεω διαλυμαίνεται τὴν γυναῖκα τοῦ Μασίστεω ·
In the meantime, while Xerxes talked with his brother, Amestris sent for Xerxes' guards and treated Masistes' wife very cruelly; she cut off the woman's breasts and threw them to dogs, and her nose and ears and lips also, and cut out her tongue.


9.112.1
10095
τούς τε μαζοὺς ἀποταμοῦσα κυσὶ προέβαλε καὶ ῥῖνα καὶ ὦτα καὶ χείλεα καὶ γλῶσσαν ἐκταμοῦσα ἐς οἶκόν μιν ἀποπέμπει διαλελυμασμένην .
Then she sent her home after she had undergone this dreadful ordeal.


9.113.1
10096
ὁ δὲ Μασίστης οὐδέν κω ἀκηκοὼς τούτων , ἐλπόμενος δέ τί οἱ κακὸν εἶναι , ἐσπίπτει δρόμῳ ἐς τὰ οἰκία .
Knowing nothing of this as yet, but fearing evil, Masistes ran home.


9.113.1
10097
ἰδὼν δὲ διεφθαρμένην τὴν γυναῖκα , αὐτίκα μετὰ ταῦτα συμβουλευσάμενος τοῖσι παισὶ ἐπορεύετο ἐς Βάκτρα σύν τε τοῖσι ἑωυτοῦ υἱοῖσι καὶ δή κου τισὶ καὶ ἄλλοισι ὡς ἀποστήσων νομὸν τὸν Βάκτριον καὶ ποιήσων τὰ μέγιστα κακῶν βασιλέα ·
Seeing what had been done to his wife, he immediately took counsel with his children and set out for Bactra with his own sons (and others too), intending to raise the province of Bactra in revolt and do the king the greatest of harm.


9.113.2
10098
τά περ ἂν καὶ ἐγένετο , ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέειν , εἴ περ ἔφθη ἀναβὰς ἐς τοὺς Βακτρίους καὶ τοὺς Σάκας ·
This he would have done, to my thinking, had he escaped to the country of the Bactrians and Sacae.


9.113.2
10099
καὶ γὰρ ἔστεργόν μιν καὶ ἦν ὕπαρχος τῶν Βακτρίων .
They were fond of him, and he was viceroy over the Bactrians.


9.113.2
10100
ἀλλὰ γὰρ Ξέρξης πυθόμενος ταῦτα ἐκεῖνον πρήσσοντα , πέμψας ἐπ’ αὐτὸν στρατιὴν ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ κατέκτεινε αὐτόν τε ἐκεῖνον καὶ τοὺς παῖδας αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν στρατιὴν τὴν ἐκείνου .
But it was of no use, for Xerxes learned what he intended and sent against him an army which killed him on his way, and his sons and his army.


9.113.2
10101
κατὰ μὲν τὸν ἔρωτα τὸν Ξέρξεω καὶ τὸν Μασίστεω θάνατον τοσαῦτα ἐγένετο .
Such is the story of Xerxes' love and Masistes' death.


9.114.1
10102
οἱ δὲ ἐκ Μυκάλης ὁρμηθέντες Ἕλληνες ἐπ’ Ἑλλησπόντου πρῶτον μὲν περὶ Λεκτὸν ὅρμεον , ὑπὸ ἀνέμων ἀπολαμφθέντες , ἐνθεῦτεν δὲ ἀπίκοντο ἐς Ἄβυδον καὶ τὰς γεφύρας εὗρον διαλελυμένας , τὰς ἐδόκεον εὑρήσειν ἔτι ἐντεταμένας , καὶ τούτων οὐκ ἥκιστα εἵνεκεν ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἀπίκοντο .
The Greeks who had set out from  Mykale for the  Hellespont first anchored off Lectum having been stopped by contrary winds, and came from there to  Abydos, where they found the bridges broken which they thought would still be in place; these were in fact the chief cause of their coming to the  Hellespont.


9.114.2
10103
τοῖσι μέν νυν ἀμφὶ Λευτυχίδην Πελοποννησίοις ἔδοξε ἀποπλέειν ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα , Ἀθηναίοισι δὲ καὶ Ξανθίππῳ τῷ στρατηγῷ αὐτοῦ ὑπομείναντας πειρᾶσθαι τῆς Χερσονήσου .
The Peloponnesians then who were with Leutychides decided to sail away to Hellas, but the Athenians, with Xanthippus their general, that they would remain there and attack the Chersonesus.


9.114.2
10104
οἳ μὲν δὴ ἀπέπλεον , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ἐκ τῆς Ἀβύδου διαβάντες ἐς τὴν Χερσόνησον Σηστὸν ἐπολιόρκεον .
So the rest sailed away, but the Athenians crossed over to the Chersonesus and laid siege to Sestus.


9.115.1
10105
ἐς δὲ τὴν Σηστὸν ταύτην , ὡς ἐόντος ἰσχυροτάτου τείχεος τῶν ταύτῃ , συνῆλθον , ὡς ἤκουσαν παρεῖναι τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον , ἔκ τε τῶν ἀλλέων τῶν περιοικίδων , καὶ δὴ καὶ ἐκ Καρδίης πόλιος Οἰόβαζος ἀνὴρ Πέρσης , ὃς τὰ ἐκ τῶν γεφυρέων ὅπλα ἐνθαῦτα ἦν κεκομικώς .
Now when the Persians heard that the Greeks were at the Hellespont, they had come in from the neighboring towns and assembled at this same Sestus, seeing that it was the strongest walled place in that region.


9.115.1
10106
εἶχον δὲ ταύτην ἐπιχώριοι Αἰολέες , συνῆσαν δὲ Πέρσαι τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων συμμάχων συχνὸς ὅμιλος .
Among them there was a Persian named Oeobazus from Cardia, and he had carried the equipment of the bridges there. Sestus was held by the Aeolians of the country, but with him were Persians and a great multitude of their allies.


9.116.1
10107
ἐτυράννευε δὲ τούτου τοῦ νομοῦ Ξέρξεω ὕπαρχος Ἀρταΰκτης , ἀνὴρ μὲν Πέρσης , δεινὸς δὲ καὶ ἀτάσθαλος , ὃς καὶ βασιλέα ἐλαύνοντα ἐπ’ Ἀθήνας ἐξηπάτησε , τὰ Πρωτεσίλεω τοῦ Ἰφίκλου χρήματα ἐξ Ἐλαιοῦντος ὑπελόμενος .
This province was ruled by Xerxes' viceroy Artayctes, a cunning man and a wicked one; witness the deceit that he practised on the king in his march to  Athens, how he stole away from Elaeus the treasure of Protesilaus son of Iphiclus.


9.116.2
10108
ἐν γὰρ Ἐλαιοῦντι τῆς Χερσονήσου ἐστὶ Πρωτεσίλεω τάφος τε καὶ τέμενος περὶ αὐτόν , ἔνθα ἦν χρήματα πολλὰ καὶ φιάλαι χρύσεαι καὶ ἀργύρεαι καὶ χαλκὸς καὶ ἐσθὴς καὶ ἄλλα ἀναθήματα , τὰ Ἀρταΰκτης ἐσύλησε βασιλέος δόντος .
This was the way of it; there is at Elaeus in the Chersonesus the tomb of Protesilaus, and a precinct around it, which contained much treasure: vessels of gold and silver, bronze, clothing, and other dedications; all of which Artayctes carried off by the king's gift.


9.116.2
10109
λέγων δὲ τοιάδε Ξέρξην διεβάλετο .
He said deceitfully to Xerxes:


9.116.3
10110
" δέσποτα , ἔστι οἶκος ἀνδρὸς Ἕλληνος ἐνθαῦτα , ὃς ἐπὶ γῆν σὴν στρατευσάμενος δίκης κυρήσας ἀπέθανε ·
“Sire, there is here the house of a certain Greek, who met a just death for invading your territory with an army;


9.116.3
10111
τούτου μοι δὸς τὸν οἶκον , ἵνα καί τις μάθῃ ἐπὶ γῆν τὴν σὴν μὴ στρατεύεσθαι " .
give me this man's house, so that all may be taught not to invade your territory.”


9.116.3
10112
ταῦτα λέγων εὐπετέως ἔμελλε ἀναπείσειν Ξέρξην δοῦναι ἀνδρὸς οἶκον , οὐδὲν ὑποτοπηθέντα τῶν ἐκεῖνος ἐφρόνεε .
One would think that this plea would easily persuade Xerxes to give him a man's house, since the latter had no suspicion of Artayctes' meaning.


9.116.3
10113
ἐπὶ γῆν δὲ τὴν βασιλέος στρατεύεσθαι Πρωτεσίλεων ἔλεγε νοέων τοιάδε ·
His reason for saying that Protesilaus had invaded the king's territory was the following:


9.116.3
10114
τὴν Ἀσίην πᾶσαν νομίζουσι ἑωυτῶν εἶναι Πέρσαι καὶ τοῦ αἰεὶ βασιλεύοντος .
the Persians believe all Asia to belong to themselves and whoever is their king.


9.116.3
10115
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐδόθη , τὰ χρήματα ἐξ Ἐλαιοῦντος ἐς Σηστὸν ἐξεφόρησε , καὶ τὸ τέμενος ἔσπειρε καὶ ἐνέμετο , αὐτός τε ὅκως ἀπίκοιτο ἐς Ἐλαιοῦντα ἐν τῷ ἀδύτῳ γυναιξὶ ἐμίσγετο .
So when the treasure was given to him, he carried it away from Elaeus to Sestus, and planted and farmed the precinct. He would also come from Elaeus and have intercourse with women in the shrine.


9.116.3
10116
τότε δὲ ἐπολιορκέετο ὑπὸ Ἀθηναίων οὔτε παρεσκευασμένος ἐς πολιορκίην οὔτε προσδεκόμενος τοὺς Ἕλληνας , ἀφύκτως δέ κως αὐτῷ ἐπέπεσον .
Now, when the Athenians laid siege to him, he had made no preparation for it; he did not think that the Greeks would come, and he had no way of escaping from their attack.


9.117.1
10117
ἐπεὶ δὲ πολιορκεομένοισί σφι φθινόπωρον ἐπεγίνετο , καὶ ἤσχαλλον οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἀπό τε τῆς ἑωυτῶν ἀποδημέοντες καὶ οὐ δυνάμενοι ἐξελεῖν τὸ τεῖχος , ἐδέοντό τε τῶν στρατηγῶν ὅκως ἀπάγοιεν σφέας ὀπίσω , οἳ δὲ οὐκ ἔφασαν πρὶν ἢ ἐξέλωσι ἢ τὸ Ἀθηναίων κοινόν σφεας μεταπέμψηται ·
Since the siege continued into the late autumn, the Athenians grew weary of their absence from home and their lack of success at taking the fortress.


9.117.1
10118
οὕτω δὴ ἔστεργον τὰ παρεόντα .
They accordingly entreated their generals to lead them away again, but the generals refused to do that till they should take the place or be recalled by the Athenian state. At that the men endured their plight patiently.


9.118.1
10119
οἱ δὲ ἐν τῷ τείχεϊ ἐς πᾶν ἤδη κακοῦ ἀπιγμένοι ἦσαν , οὕτω ὥστε τοὺς τόνους ἕψοντες τῶν κλινέων ἐσιτέοντο .
But those who were within the walls were by now reduced to the last extremity, so much so that they boiled the thongs of their beds for food.


9.118.1
10120
ἐπείτε δὲ οὐδὲ ταῦτα ἔτι εἶχον , οὕτω δὴ ὑπὸ νύκτα οἴχοντο ἀποδράντες οἵ τε Πέρσαι καὶ ὁ Ἀρταΰκτης καὶ ὁ Οἰόβαζος , ὄπισθε τοῦ τείχεος καταβάντες , τῇ ἦν ἐρημότατον τῶν πολεμίων .
At last, however, even these failed them, and Artayctes and Oeobazus and all the Persians made their way down from the back part of the fortress, where the fewest of their enemies were, and fled at nightfall.


9.118.2
10121
ὡς δὲ ἡμέρη ἐγένετο , οἱ Χερσονησῖται ἀπὸ τῶν πύργων ἐσήμηναν τοῖσι Ἀθηναίοισι τὸ γεγονὸς καὶ τὰς πύλας ἄνοιξαν .
When morning came, the people of the Chersonese signified from their towers to the Athenians what had happened, and opened their gates.


9.118.2
10122
τῶν δὲ οἱ μὲν πλεῦνες ἐδίωκον , οἳ δὲ τὴν πόλιν εἶχον .
The greater part of the Athenians then went in pursuit, while the rest stayed to hold the town.


9.119.1
10123
Ὀιόβαζον μέν νυν ἐκφεύγοντα ἐς τὴν Θρηίκην Θρήικες Ἀψίνθιοι λαβόντες ἔθυσαν Πλειστώρῳ ἐπιχωρίῳ θεῷ τρόπῳ τῷ σφετέρῳ , τοὺς δὲ μετ’ ἐκείνου ἄλλῳ τρόπῳ ἐφόνευσαν .
As Oeobazus was making his escape into  Thrace, the Apsinthians of that country caught and sacrificed him in their customary manner to Plistorus the god of their land; as for his companions, they did away with them by other means.


9.119.2
10124
οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ τὸν Ἀρταΰκτην ὕστεροι ὁρμηθέντες φεύγειν , καὶ ὡς κατελαμβάνοντο ὀλίγον ἐόντες ὑπὲρ Αἰγὸς ποταμῶν , ἀλεξόμενοι χρόνον ἐπὶ συχνὸν οἳ μὲν ἀπέθανον οἳ δὲ ζῶντες ἐλάμφθησαν .
Artayctes and his company had begun their flight later, and were overtaken a little way beyond the Goat's Rivers, where after they had defended themselves a long time, some of them were killed and the rest taken alive.


9.119.2
10125
καὶ συνδήσαντες σφέας οἱ Ἕλληνες ἦγον ἐς Σηστόν , μετ’ αὐτῶν δὲ καὶ Ἀρταΰκτην δεδεμένον αὐτόν τε καὶ τὸν παῖδα αὐτοῦ .
The Greeks bound them and carried them to Sestus, and together with them Artayctes and his son also in bonds.


9.120.1
10126
καί τεῳ τῶν φυλασσόντων λέγεται ὑπὸ Χερσονησιτέων ταρίχους ὀπτῶντι τέρας γενέσθαι τοιόνδε ·
It is related by the people of the Chersonese that a marvellous thing happened one of those who guarded Artayctes.


9.120.1
10127
οἱ τάριχοι ἐπὶ τῷ πυρὶ κείμενοι ἐπάλλοντό τε καὶ ἤσπαιρον ὅκως περ ἰχθύες νεοάλωτοι .
He was frying dried fish, and these as they lay over the fire began to leap and writhe as though they had just been caught.


9.120.2
10128
καὶ οἳ μὲν περιχυθέντες ἐθώμαζον , ὁ δὲ Ἀρταΰκτης ὡς εἶδε τὸ τέρας , καλέσας τὸν ὀπτῶντα τοὺς ταρίχους ἔφη " ξεῖνε Ἀθηναῖε , μηδὲν φοβέο τὸ τέρας τοῦτο ·
The rest gathered around, amazed at the sight, but when Artayctes saw this strange thing, he called the one who was frying the fish and said to him:


9.120.2
10129
οὐ γὰρ σοὶ πέφηνε , ἀλλ’ ἐμοὶ σημαίνει ὁ ἐν Ἐλαιοῦντι Πρωτεσίλεως ὅτι καὶ τεθνεὼς καὶ τάριχος ἐὼν δύναμιν πρὸς θεῶν ἔχει τὸν ἀδικέοντα τίνεσθαι .
“Athenian, do not be afraid of this portent, for it is not to you that it has been sent; it is to me that Protesilaus of Elaeus is trying to signify that although he is dead and dry, he has power given him by the god to take vengeance on me, the one who wronged him.


9.120.3
10130
νῦν ὦν ἄποινά μοι τάδε ἐθέλω ἐπιθεῖναι , ἀντὶ μὲν χρημάτων τῶν ἔλαβον ἐκ τοῦ ἱροῦ ἑκατὸν τάλαντα καταθεῖναι τῷ θεῷ , ἀντὶ δ’ ἐμεωυτοῦ καὶ τοῦ παιδὸς ἀποδώσω τάλαντα διηκόσια Ἀθηναίοισι περιγενόμενος " .
Now therefore I offer a ransom, the sum of one hundred talents to the god for the treasure that I took from his temple. I will also pay to the Athenians two hundred talents for myself and my son, if they spare us.”


9.120.4
10131
ταῦτα ὑπισχόμενος τὸν στρατηγὸν Ξάνθιππον οὐκ ἔπειθε ·
But Xanthippus the general was unmoved by this promise,


9.120.4
10132
οἱ γὰρ Ἐλαιούσιοι τῷ Πρωτεσίλεῳ τιμωρέοντες ἐδέοντό μιν καταχρησθῆναι , καὶ αὐτοῦ τοῦ στρατηγοῦ ταύτῃ νόος ἔφερε .
for the people of Elaeus desired that Artayctes should be put to death in revenge for Protesilaus, and the general himself was so inclined.


9.120.4
10133
ἀπαγαγόντες δὲ αὐτὸν ἐς τὴν Ξέρξης ἔζευξε τὸν πόρον , οἳ δὲ λέγουσι ἐπὶ τὸν κολωνὸν τὸν ὑπὲρ Μαδύτου πόλιος , πρὸς σανίδας προσπασσαλεύσαντες ἀνεκρέμασαν ·
So they carried Artayctes away to the headland where Xerxes had bridged the strait (or, by another story, to the hill above the town of Madytus), and there nailed him to boards and hanged him.


9.120.4
10134
τὸν δὲ παῖδα ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖσι τοῦ Ἀρταΰκτεω κατέλευσαν .
As for his son, they stoned him to death before his father's eyes.


9.121.1
10135
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσαντες ἀπέπλεον ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα , τά τε ἄλλα χρήματα ἄγοντες καὶ δὴ καὶ τὰ ὅπλα τῶν γεφυρέων ὡς ἀναθήσοντες ἐς τὰ ἱρά .
This done, they sailed away to Hellas, carrying with them the cables of the bridges to be dedicated in their temples, and all sorts of things in addition.


9.121.1
10136
καὶ κατὰ τὸ ἔτος τοῦτο οὐδὲν ἐπὶ πλέον τούτων ἐγένετο .
This, then, is all that was done in this year.


9.122.1
10137
τούτου δὲ Ἀρταΰκτεω τοῦ ἀνακρεμασθέντος προπάτωρ Ἀρτεμβάρης ἐστὶ ὁ Πέρσῃσι ἐξηγησάμενος λόγον τὸν ἐκεῖνοι ὑπολαβόντες Κύρῳ προσήνεικαν λέγοντα τάδε .
This Artayctes who was crucified was the grandson of that Artembares who instructed the Persians in a design which they took from him and laid before Cyrus; this was its purport:


9.122.2
10138
" ἐπεὶ Ζεὺς Πέρσῃσι ἡγεμονίην διδοῖ , ἀνδρῶν δὲ σοὶ Κῦρε , κατελὼν Ἀστυάγην , φέρε , γῆν γὰρ ἐκτήμεθα ὀλίγην καὶ ταύτην τρηχέαν , μεταναστάντες ἐκ ταύτης ἄλλην σχῶμεν ἀμείνω .
“Seeing that Zeus grants lordship to the Persian people, and to you, Cyrus, among them, let us, after reducing Astyages, depart from the little and rugged land which we possess and occupy one that is better.


9.122.2
10139
εἰσὶ δὲ πολλαὶ μὲν ἀστυγείτονες πολλαὶ δὲ καὶ ἑκαστέρω , τῶν μίαν σχόντες πλέοσι ἐσόμεθα θωμαστότεροι .
There are many such lands on our borders, and many further distant. If we take one of these, we will all have more reasons for renown.


9.122.2
10140
οἰκὸς δὲ ἄνδρας ἄρχοντας τοιαῦτα ποιέειν ·
It is only reasonable that a ruling people should act in this way,


9.122.2
10141
κότε γὰρ δὴ καὶ παρέξει κάλλιον ἢ ὅτε γε ἀνθρώπων τε πολλῶν ἄρχομεν πάσης τε τῆς Ἀσίης ;
for when will we have a better opportunity than now, when we are lords of so many men and of all Asia?”


9.122.3
10142
" Κῦρος δὲ ταῦτα ἀκούσας καὶ οὐ θωμάσας τὸν λόγον ἐκέλευε ποιέειν ταῦτα , οὕτω δὲ αὐτοῖσι παραίνεε κελεύων παρασκευάζεσθαι ὡς οὐκέτι ἄρξοντας ἀλλ’ ἀρξομένους ·
Cyrus heard them, and found nothing to marvel at in their design; “Go ahead and do this,” he said; “but if you do so, be prepared no longer to be rulers but rather subjects.


9.122.3
10143
φιλέειν γὰρ ἐκ τῶν μαλακῶν χώρων μαλακοὺς γίνεσθαι ·
Soft lands breed soft men;


9.122.3
10144
οὐ γὰρ τι τῆς αὐτῆς γῆς εἶναι καρπόν τε θωμαστὸν φύειν καὶ ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς τὰ πολέμια .
wondrous fruits of the earth and valiant warriors grow not from the same soil.”


9.122.4
10145
ὥστε συγγνόντες Πέρσαι οἴχοντο ἀποστάντες , ἑσσωθέντες τῇ γνώμῃ πρὸς Κύρου , ἄρχειν τε εἵλοντο λυπρὴν οἰκέοντες μᾶλλον ἢ πεδιάδα σπείροντες ἄλλοισι δουλεύειν .
The Persians now realized that Cyrus reasoned better than they, and they departed, choosing rather to be rulers on a barren mountain side than dwelling in tilled valleys to be slaves to others.


