

1.1.1
1
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐ πολλαῖς ἡμέραις ὕστερον ἦλθεν ἐξ Ἀθηνῶν Θυμοχάρης ἔχων ναῦς ὀλίγας ·
After this, not many days later, Thymochares came from Athens with a few ships;


1.1.1
2
καὶ εὐθὺς ἐναυμάχησαν αὖθις Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι , ἐνίκησαν δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἡγουμένου Ἀγησανδρίδου .
and thereupon the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians fought another naval battle, and the Lacedaemonians were victorious, under the leadership of Agesandridas.


1.1.2
3
μετ’ ὀλίγον δὲ τούτων Δωριεὺς ὁ Διαγόρου ἐκ Ῥόδου εἰς Ἑλλήσποντον εἰσέπλει ἀρχομένου χειμῶνος τέτταρσι καὶ δέκα ναυσὶν ἅμα ἡμέρᾳ .
Shortly after this, at the beginning of the winter, Dorieus, the son of Diagoras, sailed into the Hellespont from Rhodes with fourteen ships, arriving at daybreak.


1.1.2
4
κατιδὼν δὲ ὁ τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἡμεροσκόπος ἐσήμηνε τοῖς στρατηγοῖς .
And when the Athenian day-watcher described him, he signalled to the generals,


1.1.2
5
οἱ δὲ ἀνηγάγοντο ἐπ’ αὐτὸν εἴκοσι ναυσίν , ἃς ὁ Δωριεὺς φυγὼν πρὸς τὴν γῆν ἀνεβίβαζε τὰς αὑτοῦ τριήρεις , ὡς ἤνοιγε , περὶ τὸ Ῥοίτειον .
and they put out against him with twenty ships; and Dorieus, fleeing from them towards the shore, beached his triremes, as fast as he got them clear of the enemy, in the neighbourhood of Rhoeteum.


1.1.3
6
ἐγγὺς δὲ γενομένων τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἐμάχοντο ἀπό τε τῶν νεῶν καὶ τῆς γῆς μέχρι οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἀπέπλευσαν εἰς Μάδυτον πρὸς τὸ ἄλλο στρατόπεδον οὐδὲν πράξαντες .
And when the Athenians came near, the men under Dorieus fought, from								their ships and from the shore, until the Athenians sailed away to								Madytus, to the rest of their fleet, without having accomplished								anything.


1.1.4
7
Μίνδαρος δὲ κατιδὼν τὴν μάχην ἐν Ἰλίῳ θύων τῇ Ἀθηνᾷ , ἐβοήθει ἐπὶ τὴν θάλατταν , καὶ καθελκύσας τὰς ἑαυτοῦ τριήρεις ἀπέπλει , ὅπως ἀναλάβοι τὰς μετὰ Δωριέως .
Now Mindarus caught sight of the								battle as he was sacrificing to Athena at Ilium, and hurrying to the								sea he launched his triremes and set out, in order to pick up the								ships under Dorieus.


1.1.5
8
οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι ἀνταναγαγόμενοι ἐναυμάχησαν περὶ Ἄβυδον κατὰ τὴν ᾐόνα , μέχρι δείλης ἐξ ἑωθινοῦ .
And the Athenians set out against him and did battle, along the strand near Abydus, from morning till late afternoon.


1.1.5
9
καὶ τὰ μὲν νικώντων , τὰ δὲ νικωμένων , Ἀλκιβιάδης ἐπεισπλεῖ δυοῖν δεούσαις εἴκοσι ναυσίν .
They were at some points victorious and at others defeated, when Alcibiades sailed into the Hellespont to their support, with eighteen ships.


1.1.6
10
ἐντεῦθεν δὲ φυγὴ τῶν Πελοποννησίων ἐγένετο πρὸς τὴν Ἄβυδον ·
Thereupon the Peloponnesians took to flight in the direction of Abydus;


1.1.6
11
καὶ ὁ Φαρνάβαζος παρεβοήθει , καὶ ἐπεισβαίνων τῷ ἵππῳ εἰς τὴν θάλατταν μέχρι δυνατὸν ἦν ἐμάχετο , καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις τοῖς αὑτοῦ ἱππεῦσι καὶ πεζοῖς παρεκελεύετο .
and Pharnabazus came along the shore to their aid, and riding his horse into the sea as far as possible, bore a share in the fighting and cheered on his followers, cavalry and infantry.


1.1.7
12
συμφράξαντες δὲ τὰς ναῦς οἱ Πελοποννήσιοι καὶ παραταξάμενοι πρὸς τῇ γῇ ἐμάχοντο .
Meanwhile the Peloponnesians made a barrier of their ships and marshalled themselves on the shore and fought.


1.1.7
13
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ ἀπέπλευσαν , τριάκοντα ναῦς τῶν πολεμίων λαβόντες κενὰς καὶ ἃς αὐτοὶ ἀπώλεσαν κομισάμενοι , εἰς Σηστόν .
At length the Athenians sailed away to Sestus after capturing thirty of the enemy’s ships, though without their crews, and recovering those which they had previously lost themselves.


1.1.8
14
ἐντεῦθεν πλὴν τετταράκοντα νεῶν ἄλλαι ἄλλῃ ᾤχοντο ἐπ’ ἀργυρολογίαν ἔξω τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου ·
From Sestus all but forty of their ships went off in different directions, outside the Hellespont, to collect money;


1.1.8
15
καὶ ὁ Θράσυλλος , εἷς ὢν τῶν στρατηγῶν , εἰς Ἀθήνας ἔπλευσε ταῦτα ἐξαγγελῶν καὶ στρατιὰν καὶ ναῦς αἰτήσων .
and Thrasyllus, who was one of the generals, set sail for Athens to report these events and to ask for troops and ships.


1.1.9
16
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Τισσαφέρνης ἦλθεν εἰς Ἑλλήσποντον ·
After this Tissaphernes came to the Hellespont;


1.1.9
17
ἀφικόμενον δὲ παρ’ αὐτὸν μιᾷ τριήρει Ἀλκιβιάδην ξένιά τε καὶ δῶρα ἄγοντα συλλαβὼν εἶρξεν ἐν Σάρδεσι , φάσκων κελεύειν βασιλέα πολεμεῖν Ἀθηναίοις .
and when Alcibiades with a single trireme went to visit him, bearing friendly offerings and gifts, Tissaphernes seized him and imprisoned him in Sardis, saying that the King ordered him to make war upon the Athenians.


1.1.10
18
ἡμέραις δὲ τριάκοντα ὕστερον Ἀλκιβιάδης ἐκ Σάρδεων μετὰ Μαντιθέου τοῦ ἁλόντος ἐν Καρίᾳ ἵππων εὐπορήσαντες νυκτὸς ἀπέδρασαν εἰς Κλαζομενάς ·
Thirty days later, however, Alcibiades, together with Mantitheus, who								had been taken prisoner in Caria, provided themselves with horses								and made their escape from Sardis by night to Clazomenae.


1.1.11
19
οἱ δ’ ἐν Σηστῷ Ἀθηναῖοι , αἰσθόμενοι Μίνδαρον πλεῖν ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς μέλλοντα ναυσὶν ἑξήκοντα , νυκτὸς ἀπέδρασαν εἰς Καρδίαν .
Meanwhile the Athenians at Sestus, learning that Mindarus was planning to sail against them with sixty ships, withdrew by night to Cardia.


1.1.11
20
ἐνταῦθα δὲ καὶ Ἀλκιβιάδης ἧκεν ἐκ τῶν Κλαζομενῶν σὺν πέντε τριήρεσι καὶ ἐπακτρίδι .
There Alcibiades joined them, coming from Clazomenae with five triremes and a dispatch boat.


1.1.11
21
πυθόμενος δὲ ὅτι αἱ τῶν Πελοποννησίων νῆες ἐξ Ἀβύδου ἀνηγμέναι εἶεν εἰς Κύζικον , αὐτὸς μὲν πεζῇ ἦλθεν εἰς Σηστόν , τὰς δὲ ναῦς περιπλεῖν ἐκεῖσε ἐκέλευσεν .
But upon learning that the Peloponnesian ships had set out from Abydus to Cyzicus, he proceeded overland to Sestus and gave orders that the ships should sail around to that place.


1.1.12
22
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἦλθον , ἀνάγεσθαι ἤδη αὐτοῦ μέλλοντος ὡς ἐπὶ ναυμαχίαν ἐπεισπλεῖ Θηραμένης εἴκοσι ναυσὶν ἀπὸ Μακεδονίας , ἅμα δὲ καὶ Θρασύβουλος εἴκοσιν ἑτέραις ἐκ Θάσου , ἀμφότεροι ἠργυρολογηκότες .
When they had arrived there and he was on the point of putting out to								sea for battle, Theramenes sailed in from Macedonia with a								reinforcement of twenty ships, and at the same time Thrasybulus								arrived from Thasos with twenty more, both of them having been								engaged in collecting money.


1.1.13
23
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ εἰπὼν καὶ τούτοις διώκειν αὐτὸν ἐξελομένοις τὰ μεγάλα ἱστία αὐτὸς ἔπλευσεν εἰς Πάριον ·
And after bidding them also to follow after him when they had removed their cruising sails, Alcibiades set off with his own ships to Parium;


1.1.13
24
ἁθρόαι δὲ γενόμεναι αἱ νῆες ἅπασαι ἐν Παρίῳ ἓξ καὶ ὀγδοήκοντα τῆς ἐπιούσης νυκτὸς ἀνηγάγοντο , καὶ τῇ ἄλλῃ ἡμέρᾳ περὶ ἀρίστου ὥραν ἧκον εἰς Προκόννησον .
and when all the ships had come together at Parium, to the number of eighty-six, they set sail during the ensuing night, and on the next day at breakfast time arrived at Proconnesus.


1.1.14
25
ἐκεῖ δ’ ἐπύθοντο ὅτι Μίνδαρος ἐν Κυζίκῳ εἴη καὶ Φαρνάβαζος μετὰ τοῦ πεζοῦ .
There they learned that Mindarus was at Cyzicus, and also Pharnabazus with his army.


1.1.14
26
ταύτην μὲν οὖν τὴν ἡμέραν αὐτοῦ ἔμειναν , τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίᾳ Ἀλκιβιάδης ἐκκλησίαν ποιήσας παρεκελεύετο αὐτοῖς ὅτι ἀνάγκη εἴη καὶ ναυμαχεῖν καὶ πεζομαχεῖν καὶ τειχομαχεῖν ·
Accordingly they remained that day at Proconnesus, but on the following day Alcibiades called an assembly of his men and told them that they must needs fight at sea, fight on land, and fight against fortresses.


1.1.14
27
οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν , ἔφη , χρήματα ἡμῖν , τοῖς δὲ πολεμίοις ἄφθονα παρὰ βασιλέως .
For we, he said, have no money, but the enemy have an abundance of it from the King.


1.1.15
28
τῇ δὲ προτεραίᾳ , ἐπειδὴ ὡρμίσαντο , τὰ πλοῖα πάντα καὶ τὰ μικρὰ συνήθροισε παρ’ ἑαυτόν , ὅπως μηδεὶς ἐξαγγείλαι τοῖς πολεμίοις τὸ πλῆθος τῶν νεῶν , ἐπεκήρυξέ τε , ὃς ἂν ἁλίσκηται εἰς τὸ πέραν διαπλέων , θάνατον τὴν ζημίαν .
Now on the preceding day, when they had come to anchor, Alcibiades								had taken into his custody all the vessels in the harbour, even the								small ones, in order that no one should report to the enemy the size								of his fleet, and he made proclamation that death would be the								punishment of any one who was caught sailing across to the other								side of the strait.


1.1.16
29
μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν παρασκευασάμενος ὡς ἐπὶ ναυμαχίαν ἀνηγάγετο ἐπὶ τὴν Κύζικον ὕοντος πολλῷ .
And after the assembly he made preparations for battle and, in the midst of a heavy rain, set out for Cyzicus.


1.1.16
30
ἐπειδὴ δ’ ἐγγὺς τῆς Κυζίκου ἦν , αἰθρίας γενομένης καὶ τοῦ ἡλίου ἐκλάμψαντος καθορᾷ τὰς τοῦ Μινδάρου ναῦς γυμναζομένας πόρρω ἀπὸ τοῦ λιμένος καὶ ἀπειλημμένας ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ , ἑξήκοντα οὔσας .
When he was near Cyzicus, the weather cleared and the sun came out, and he sighted the ships under Mindarus, sixty in number, engaged in practice at some distance from the harbour and already cut off from it by his own fleet.


1.1.17
31
οἱ δὲ Πελοποννήσιοι ἰδόντες τὰς τῶν Ἀθηναίων τριήρεις οὔσας πλείους τε πολλῷ ἢ πρότερον καὶ πρὸς τῷ λιμένι , ἔφυγον εἰς τὴν γῆν ·
But the Peloponnesians, when they saw that the Athenian triremes were far more numerous than before and were near the harbour, fled to the shore;


1.1.17
32
καὶ συνορμίσαντες τὰς ναῦς ἐμάχοντο ἐπιπλέουσι τοῖς ἐναντίοις .
and mooring their ships together, they fought with their adversaries as they sailed down upon them.


1.1.18
33
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ ταῖς εἴκοσι τῶν νεῶν περιπλεύσας ἀπέβη εἰς τὴν γῆν .
Alcibiades, however, with twenty of his ships sailed round the fleets and landed on the shore.


1.1.18
34
ἰδὼν δὲ ὁ Μίνδαρος , καὶ αὐτὸς ἀποβὰς ἐν τῇ γῇ μαχόμενος ἀπέθανεν ·
When Mindarus saw this, he also landed, and fell fighting on the shore;


1.1.18
35
οἱ δὲ μετ’ αὐτοῦ ὄντες ἔφυγον .
and those who were with him fled.


1.1.18
36
τὰς δὲ ναῦς οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ᾤχοντο ἄγοντες ἁπάσας εἰς Προκόννησον πλὴν τῶν Συρακοσίων ·
And the Athenians took away with them to Proconnesus all the Peloponnesian ships, except those of the Syracusans;


1.1.18
37
ἐκείνας δὲ αὐτοὶ κατέκαυσαν οἱ Συρακόσιοι .
for these were burned by their own crews.


1.1.19
38
ἐκεῖθεν δὲ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ἔπλεον οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐπὶ Κύζικον .
From Proconnesus the Athenians sailed on the next day against Cyzicus;


1.1.19
39
οἱ δὲ Κυζικηνοὶ τῶν Πελοποννησίων καὶ Φαρναβάζου ἐκλιπόντων αὐτὴν ἐδέχοντο τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ·
and the Cyzicenes admitted them, inasmuch as the Peloponnesians and Pharnabazus had evacuated the city.


1.1.20
40
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ μείνας αὐτοῦ εἴκοσιν ἡμέρας καὶ χρήματα πολλὰ λαβὼν παρὰ τῶν Κυζικηνῶν , οὐδὲν ἄλλο κακὸν ἐργασάμενος ἐν τῇ πόλει ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Προκόννησον .
There Alcibiades remained for twenty days, and after obtaining a great deal of money from the Cyzicenes, but without doing any further harm in the city, sailed back to Proconnesus.


1.1.20
41
ἐκεῖθεν δ’ ἔπλευσεν εἰς Πέρινθον καὶ Σηλυμβρίαν .
From there he sailed to Perinthus and Selymbria.


1.1.21
42
καὶ Περίνθιοι μὲν εἰσεδέξαντο εἰς τὸ ἄστυ τὸ στρατόπεδον ·
And the Perinthians admitted the Athenian forces to their city,


1.1.21
43
Σηλυμβριανοὶ δὲ ἐδέξαντο μὲν οὔ , χρήματα δὲ ἔδοσαν .
and the Selymbrians, while not admitting them, gave them money.


1.1.22
44
ἐντεῦθεν δ’ ἀφικόμενοι τῆς Καλχηδονίας εἰς Χρυσόπολιν ἐτείχισαν αὐτήν , καὶ δεκατευτήριον κατεσκεύασαν ἐν αὐτῇ , καὶ τὴν δεκάτην ἐξέλεγον τῶν ἐκ τοῦ Πόντου πλοίων , καὶ φυλακὴν ἐγκαταλιπόντες ναῦς τριάκοντα καὶ στρατηγὼ δύο , Θηραμένην καὶ Εὔμαχον , τοῦ τε χωρίου ἐπιμελεῖσθαι καὶ τῶν ἐκπλεόντων πλοίων καὶ εἴ τι ἄλλο δύναιντο βλάπτειν τοὺς πολεμίους .
From there they proceeded to Chrysopolis, in Calchedonia, and fortified it, established a custom house in the city, and proceeded to collect the tithe-duty from vessels sailing out of the Pontus; they also left there as a garrison thirty ships and two of the generals, Theramenes and Eumachus, to have charge of the fort, to attend to the outgoing ships, and to harm the enemy in any other way they could.


1.1.22
45
οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι στρατηγοὶ εἰς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ᾤχοντο .
The other generals returned to the Hellespont.


1.1.23
46
παρὰ δὲ Ἱπποκράτους τοῦ Μινδάρου ἐπιστολέως εἰς Λακεδαίμονα γράμματα πεμφθέντα ἑάλωσαν εἰς Ἀθήνας λέγοντα τάδε ·
Meanwhile a letter dispatched to Lacedaemon by Hippocrates, vice-admiral under Mindarus, was intercepted and taken to Athens; it ran as follows:


1.1.23
47
&quot; ἔρρει τὰ κᾶλα .
"The ships are gone.


1.1.23
48
Μίνδαρος ἀπεσσύα .
Mindarus is dead.


1.1.23
49
πεινῶντι τ- ἄνδρες .
The men are starving.


1.1.23
50
ἀπορίομες τί χρὴ δρᾶν &quot; .
We know not what to do."


1.1.24
51
Φαρνάβαζος δὲ παντὶ τῷ τῶν Πελοποννησίων στρατεύματι καὶ τοῖς συμμάχοις παρακελευσάμενος μὴ ἀθυμεῖν ἕνεκα ξύλων , ὡς ὄντων πολλῶν ἐν τῇ βασιλέως , ἕως ἂν τὰ σώματα σῶα ᾖ , ἱμάτιόν τ’ ἔδωκεν ἑκάστῳ καὶ ἐφόδιον δυοῖν μηνοῖν , καὶ ὁπλίσας τοὺς ναύτας φύλακας κατέστησε τῆς ἑαυτοῦ παραθαλαττίας γῆς .
Pharnabazus, however, urged the whole Peloponnesian army and their								allies not to be discouraged over a matter of ship-timber—for he								said there was plenty of that in the King’s land—so long as their								bodies were safe; and he not only gave to each man a cloak and								subsistence for two months, but he also armed the sailors and set								them as guards over his own coastline.


1.1.25
52
καὶ συγκαλέσας τούς τε ἀπὸ τῶν πόλεων στρατηγοὺς καὶ τριηράρχους ἐκέλευε ναυπηγεῖσθαι τριήρεις ἐν Ἀντάνδρῳ ὅσας ἕκαστοι ἀπώλεσαν , χρήματά τε διδοὺς καὶ ὕλην ἐκ τῆς Ἴδης κομίζεσθαι φράζων .
Furthermore, calling together the generals and ship-captains from the								various states, he bade them build triremes at Antandrus to equal								the number which they had severally lost, giving them money for the								purpose and telling them to get timber from Mount Ida.


1.1.26
53
ναυπηγουμένων δὲ οἱ Συρακόσιοι ἅμα τοῖς Ἀντανδρίοις τοῦ τείχους τι ἐπετέλεσαν , καὶ ἐν τῇ φρουρᾷ ἤρεσαν πάντων μάλιστα .
And while the ship-building was going on, the Syracusans helped the Antandrians to finish a portion of their wall, and in the garrison-duty made themselves most popular.


1.1.26
54
διὰ ταῦτα δὲ εὐεργεσία τε καὶ πολιτεία Συρακοσίοις ἐν Ἀντάνδρῳ ἐστί .
For this reason the Syracusans now enjoy at Antandrus the privileges of benefactors and citizens.


1.1.26
55
Φαρνάβαζος μὲν οὖν ταῦτα διατάξας εὐθὺς εἰς Καλχηδόνα ἐβοήθει .
As for Pharnabazus, after making these arrangements he went at once to the relief of Calchedon.


1.1.27
56
ἐν δὲ τῷ χρόνῳ τούτῳ ἠγγέλθη τοῖς τῶν Συρακοσίων στρατηγοῖς οἴκοθεν ὅτι φεύγοιεν ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου .
At this time word came from home to the Syracusan generals that they had been banished by the democratic party.


1.1.27
57
συγκαλέσαντες οὖν τοὺς ἑαυτῶν στρατιώτας Ἑρμοκράτους προηγοροῦντος ἀπωλοφύροντο τὴν ἑαυτῶν συμφοράν , ὡς ἀδίκως φεύγοιεν ἅπαντες παρὰ τὸν νόμον ·
Accordingly they called together their soldiers and, through Hermocrates as spokesman, lamented their misfortune in being unjustly and illegally banished, all without exception.


1.1.27
58
παρῄνεσάν τε προθύμους εἶναι καὶ τὰ λοιπά , ὥσπερ τὰ πρότερα , καὶ ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς πρὸς τὰ ἀεὶ παραγγελλόμενα , ἑλέσθαι δὲ ἐκέλευον ἄρχοντας , μέχρι ἂν ἀφίκωνται οἱ ᾑρημένοι ἀντ’ ἐκείνων .
They urged their soldiers to continue zealous in the future, as they had been in the past, and to be true men in obeying every order; and they directed them to choose new commanders, to hold office until those who had been chosen to fill their places should arrive from Syracuse.


1.1.28
59
οἱ δ’ ἀναβοήσαντες ἐκέλευον ἐκείνους ἄρχειν , καὶ μάλιστα οἱ τριήραρχοι καὶ οἱ ἐπιβάται καὶ οἱ κυβερνῆται .
The men, however, and particularly the captains and marines and steersmen, set up a shout at this and bade the generals remain in command.


1.1.28
60
οἱ δ’ οὐκ ἔφασαν δεῖν στασιάζειν πρὸς τὴν ἑαυτῶν πόλιν ·
They replied that they ought not to indulge in partizan opposition to their own government.


1.1.28
61
εἰ δέ τις ἐπικαλοίη τι αὐτοῖς , λόγον ἔφασαν χρῆναι διδόναι , μεμνημένους Ὅσας τε ναυμαχίας αὐτοὶ καθ’ αὑτοὺς νενικήκατε καὶ ναῦς εἰλήφατε , ὅσα τε μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων ἀήττητοι γεγόνατε ἡμῶν ἡγουμένων , τάξιν ἔχοντες τὴν κρατίστην διά τε τὴν ἡμετέραν ἀρετὴν καὶ διὰ τὴν ὑμετέραν προθυμίαν καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν ὑπάρχουσαν .
But if anyone, they said, has any charge to bring against us, you should give us a hearing, remembering how many naval battles you have won and how many ships you have captured when fighting by yourselves, and how often when associated with others you have proved yourselves invincible under our leadership, occupying the most honourable post in the line of battle on account of our skill and your own zealous spirit, exhibited both on land and sea.


1.1.29
62
οὐδενὸς δὲ οὐδὲν ἐπαιτιωμένου , δεομένων ἔμειναν ἕως ἀφίκοντο οἱ ἀντ’ ἐκείνων στρατηγοί , Δήμαρχός τ’ Ἐπικύδου καὶ Μύσκων Μενεκράτους καὶ Πόταμις Γνώσιος .
But when no one brought any charge against them, at the request of the troops they remained until their successors arrived,—Demarchus, the son of Epicydes, Myskon, the son of Menecrates, and Potamis, the son of Gnosis.


1.1.29
63
τῶν δὲ τριηράρχων ὀμόσαντες οἱ πλεῖστοι κατάξειν αὐτούς , ἐπὰν εἰς Συρακούσας ἀφίκωνται , ἀπεπέμψαντο ὅποι ἐβούλοντο πάντας ἐπαινοῦντες ·
Then, after most of the captains had taken oath that, when they returned to Syracuse, they would bring their generals back from exile, they sped them on their ways, commending them all;


1.1.30
64
ἰδίᾳ δὲ οἱ πρὸς Ἑρμοκράτην προσομιλοῦντες μάλιστα ἐπόθησαν τήν τε ἐπιμέλειαν καὶ προθυμίαν καὶ κοινότητα .
but in particular those who had associated with Hermocrates felt exceedingly the loss of his care and enthusiasm and democratic spirit.


1.1.30
65
ὧν γὰρ ἐγίγνωσκε τοὺς ἐπιεικεστάτους καὶ τριηράρχων καὶ κυβερνητῶν καὶ ἐπιβατῶν , ἑκάστης ἡμέρας πρῲ καὶ πρὸς ἑσπέραν συναλίζων πρὸς τὴν σκηνὴν τὴν ἑαυτοῦ ἀνεκοινοῦτο ὅ τι ἔμελλεν ἢ λέγειν ἢ πράττειν , κ- ἐκείνους ἐδίδασκε κελεύων λέγειν τὰ μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ παραχρῆμα , τὰ δὲ βουλευσαμένους .
For the best of those whose acquaintance he made, both captains and steersmen and marines, he used to gather every day in the morning and at evening to his own tent, where he communicated to them whatever he was planning to say or to do; he instructed them also, sometimes directing them to speak ex tempore and sometimes after deliberation.


1.1.31
66
ἐκ τούτων Ἑρμοκράτης τὰ πολλὰ ἐν τῷ συνεδρίῳ ηὐδόξει , λέγειν τε δοκῶν καὶ βουλεύειν τὰ κράτιστα .
As a result of this Hermocrates enjoyed the greatest reputation in the general council, and was thought superior to all others as speaker and adviser.


1.1.31
67
κατηγορήσας δὲ Τισσαφέρνους ἐν Λακεδαίμονι Ἑρμοκράτης , μαρτυροῦντος καὶ Ἀστυόχου , καὶ δόξας τὰ ὄντα λέγειν , ἀφικόμενος παρὰ Φαρνάβαζον , πρὶν αἰτῆσαι χρήματα λαβών , παρεσκευάζετο πρὸς τὴν εἰς Συρακούσας κάθοδον ξένους τε καὶ τριήρεις .
He now went to visit Pharnabazus; and since he had once brought an accusation against Tissaphernes at Lacedaemon, in which Astyochus supported him as witness, and had been adjudged to speak the truth, he received money from Pharnabazus before he asked for it, and busied himself with collecting mercenaries and triremes with a view to his restoration to Syracuse.


1.1.31
68
ἐν τούτῳ δὲ ἧκον οἱ διάδοχοι τῶν Συρακοσίων εἰς Μίλητον καὶ παρέλαβον τὰς ναῦς καὶ τὸ στράτευμα .
Meanwhile the Syracusans who succeeded the banished generals arrived at Miletus and took over the ships and the troops.


1.1.32
69
ἐν Θάσῳ δὲ κατὰ τὸν καιρὸν τοῦτον στάσεως γενομένης ἐκπίπτουσιν οἱ λακωνισταὶ καὶ ὁ Λάκων ἁρμοστὴς Ἐτεόνικος .
At about this time a revolution took place in Thasos, and the partisans of Lacedaemon and the Laconian governor Eteonicus were driven out of the island.


1.1.32
70
καταιτιαθεὶς δὲ ταῦτα πρᾶξαι σὺν Τισσαφέρνει Πασιππίδας ὁ Λάκων ἔφυγεν ἐκ Σπάρτης ·
And Pasippidas the Laconian, who was accused of having managed this intrigue, in collusion with Tissaphernes, was banished from Sparta,


1.1.32
71
ἐπὶ δὲ τὸ ναυτικόν , ὃ ἐκεῖνος ἡθροίκει ἀπὸ τῶν συμμάχων , ἐξεπέμφθη Κρατησιππίδας , καὶ παρέλαβεν ἐν Χίῳ .
while Cratesippidas was sent out to the fleet which Pasippidas had collected from the allies, and assumed command of it at Chios.


1.1.33
72
περὶ δὲ τούτους τοὺς χρόνους Θρασύλλου ἐν Ἀθήναις ὄντος Ἆγις ἐκ τῆς Δεκελείας προνομὴν ποιούμενος πρὸς αὐτὰ τὰ τείχη ἦλθε τῶν Ἀθηναίων ·
During these days also, and while Thrasyllus was in Athens, Agis made a raid from Decelea up to the very walls of the city;


1.1.33
73
Θράσυλλος δὲ ἐξαγαγὼν Ἀθηναίους καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς ἐν τῇ πόλει ὄντας ἅπαντας παρέταξε παρὰ τὸ Λύκειον γυμνάσιον , ὡς μαχούμενος , ἂν προσίωσιν .
and Thrasyllus led forth the Athenians and all others who were in the city and marshalled them beside the Lyceum, with the intention of engaging the enemy if they approached.


1.1.34
74
ἰδὼν δὲ ταῦτα Ἆγις ἀπήγαγε ταχέως , καί τινες αὐτῶν ὀλίγοι τῶν ἐπὶ πᾶσιν ὑπὸ τῶν ψιλῶν ἀπέθανον .
When Agis saw this, he withdrew in haste, and some few of his rear line were killed by the Athenian light troops.


1.1.34
75
οἱ οὖν Ἀθηναῖοι τῷ Θρασύλλῳ διὰ ταῦτα ἔτι προθυμότεροι ἦσαν ἐφ’ ἃ ἧκε , καὶ ἐψηφίσαντο ὁπλίτας τε αὐτὸν καταλέξασθαι χιλίους , ἱππέας δὲ ἑκατόν , τριήρεις δὲ πεντήκοντα .
In consequence of this occurrence the Athenians were still more ready to give Thrasyllus the help for which he had come, and they voted that he might choose out for service a thousand hoplites, a hundred horsemen, and fifty triremes.


1.1.35
76
Ἆγις δὲ ἐκ τῆς Δεκελείας ἰδὼν πλοῖα πολλὰ σίτου εἰς Πειραιᾶ καταθέοντα , οὐδὲν ὄφελος ἔφη εἶναι τοὺς μετ’ αὐτοῦ πολὺν ἤδη χρόνον Ἀθηναίους εἴργειν τῆς γῆς , εἰ μή τις σχήσοι καὶ ὅθεν ὁ κατὰ θάλατταν σῖτος φοιτᾷ ·
Meanwhile Agis, who could see from Decelea great numbers of grain-ships sailing in to Piraeus, said that it was useless for his troops to be trying all this long time to shut off the Athenians from access to their land, unless one should occupy also the country from which the grain was coming in by sea;


1.1.35
77
κράτιστόν τε εἶναι καὶ Κλέαρχον τὸν Ῥαμφίου πρόξενον ὄντα Βυζαντίων πέμψαι εἰς Καλχηδόνα τε καὶ Βυζάντιον .
and that it was best to send to Calchedon and Byzantium Clearchus, the son of Rhamphias, who was diplomatic agent for the Byzantines at Sparta.


1.1.36
78
δόξαντος δὲ τούτου , πληρωθεισῶν νεῶν ἔκ τε Μεγάρων καὶ παρὰ τῶν ἄλλων συμμάχων πεντεκαίδεκα στρατιωτίδων μᾶλλον ἢ ταχειῶν ᾤχετο .
When this was resolved upon, fifteen ships were manned by the Megarians and the other allies, more properly transports than warships, and Clearchus set out with them.


1.1.36
79
καὶ αὐτοῦ τῶν νεῶν τρεῖς ἀπόλλυνται ἐν τῷ Ἑλλησπόντῳ ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀττικῶν ἐννέα νεῶν , αἳ ἀεὶ ἐνταῦθα τὰ πλοῖα διεφύλαττον , αἱ δ’ ἄλλαι ἔφυγον εἰς Σηστόν , ἐκεῖθεν δὲ εἰς Βυζάντιον ἐσώθησαν .
Three of his ships were destroyed in the Hellespont by the nine Attic ships which were continually on duty there to protect the Athenian merchantmen, but the rest escaped to Sestus and from there made their way safely to Byzantium.


1.1.37
80
καὶ ὁ ἐνιαυτὸς ἔληγεν , ἐν ᾧ Καρχηδόνιοι Ἀννίβα ἡγουμένου στρατεύσαντες ἐπὶ Σικελίαν δέκα μυριάσι στρατιᾶς αἱροῦσιν ἐν τρισὶ μησὶ δύο πόλεις Ἑλληνίδας Σελινοῦντα καὶ Ἱμέραν .
So the year ended, being the year in								which the Carthaginians, under the leadership of Hannibal, made an								expedition against Sicily, with an army of one hundred thousand men,								and in the course of three months captured two Greek cities, Selinus								and Himera.


1.2.1
81
τῷ δὲ ἄλλῳ ἔτει ᾧ ἦν Ὀλυμπιὰς τρίτη καὶ ἐνενηκοστή , ᾗ προστεθεῖσα ξυνωρὶς ἐνίκα Εὐαγόρου Ἠλείου , τὸ δὲ στάδιον Εὐβώτας Κυρηναῖος , ἐπὶ ἐφόρου μὲν ὄντος ἐν Σπάρτῃ Εὐαρχίππου , ἄρχοντος δ’ ἐν Ἀθήναις Εὐκτήμονος , Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν Θορικὸν ἐτείχισαν , Θράσυλλος δὲ τά τε ψηφισθέντα πλοῖα λαβὼν καὶ πεντακισχιλίους τῶν ναυτῶν πελταστὰς ποιησάμενος , ὡς ἅμα καὶ πελτασταῖς ἐσομένοις , ἐξέπλευσεν ἀρχομένου τοῦ θέρους εἰς Σάμον .
In the next year—in which was									celebrated the ninety-third								Olympiad, when the newly added two-horse race was won by Euagoras of								Elis and the stadium by Eubotas of Cyrene, Euarchippus being now								ephor at Sparta and Euctemon archon at Athens —the Athenians								fortified Thoricus; and Thrasyllus took the ships which had been								voted him, equipped five thousand of his sailors so that he might								employ them as peltasts also, and set sail at the beginning of the								summer for Samos.


1.2.2
82
ἐκεῖ δὲ μείνας τρεῖς ἡμέρας ἔπλευσεν εἰς Πύγελα ·
After remaining there for three days he sailed to Pygela;


1.2.2
83
καὶ ἐνταῦθα τήν τε χώραν ἐδῄου καὶ προσέβαλλε τῷ τείχει .
and there he laid waste the country and attacked the wall of the town.


1.2.2
84
ἐκ δὲ τῆς Μιλήτου βοηθήσαντές τινες τοῖς Πυγελεῦσι διεσπαρμένους τῶν Ἀθηναίων ὄντας τοὺς ψιλοὺς ἐδίωκον .
A force from Miletus, however, came to the aid of the Pygelans, and finding the Athenian light troops scattered, pursued them.


1.2.3
85
οἱ δὲ πελτασταὶ καὶ τῶν ὁπλιτῶν δύο λόχοι βοηθήσαντες πρὸς τοὺς αὑτῶν ψιλοὺς ἀπέκτειναν ἅπαντας τοὺς ἐκ Μιλήτου ἐκτὸς ὀλίγων , καὶ ἀσπίδας ἔλαβον ὡς διακοσίας , καὶ τροπαῖον ἔστησαν .
Thereupon the peltasts and two companies of the hoplites came to the								aid of their light troops and killed all but a few of the men from								Miletus; they also captured about two hundred shields and set up a								trophy.


1.2.4
86
τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίᾳ ἔπλευσαν εἰς Νότιον , καὶ ἐντεῦθεν παρασκευασάμενοι ἐπορεύοντο εἰς Κολοφῶνα .
On the next day they sailed to Notium and from there, after making the necessary preparations, marched to Colophon;


1.2.4
87
Κολοφώνιοι δὲ προσεχώρησαν .
and the Colophonians gave them their allegiance.


1.2.4
88
καὶ τῆς ἐπιούσης νυκτὸς ἐνέβαλον εἰς τὴν Λυδίαν ἀκμάζοντος τοῦ σίτου , καὶ κώμας τε πολλὰς ἐνέπρησαν καὶ χρήματα ἔλαβον καὶ ἀνδράποδα καὶ ἄλλην λείαν πολλήν .
It was now the time when the grain was ripening, and during the following night they made a raid into Lydia, burned many villages, and seized money, slaves, and other booty in great quantities.


1.2.5
89
Στάγης δὲ ὁ Πέρσης περὶ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία ὤν , ἐπεὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου διεσκεδασμένοι ἦσαν κατὰ τὰς ἰδίας λείας , βοηθησάντων τῶν ἱππέων ἕνα μὲν ζωὸν ἔλαβεν , ἑπτὰ δὲ ἀπέκτεινε .
Stages, the Persian, however, was in this region, and when the								Athenians had scattered from their camp for private plunder, he								captured one of them and killed seven others, despite the fact that								their cavalry came to the rescue.


1.2.6
90
Θράσυλλος δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα ἀπήγαγεν ἐπὶ θάλατταν τὴν στρατιάν , ὡς εἰς Ἔφεσον πλευσούμενος .
After this Thrasyllus led his army back to the coast, with the intention of sailing to Ephesus.


1.2.6
91
Τισσαφέρνης δὲ αἰσθόμενος τοῦτο τὸ ἐπιχείρημα , στρατιάν τε συνέλεγε πολλὴν καὶ ἱππέας ἀπέστελλε παραγγέλλων πᾶσιν εἰς Ἔφεσον βοηθεῖν τῇ Ἀρτέμιδι .
But when Tissaphernes learned of this plan, he gathered together a large army and sent out horsemen to carry word to everybody to rally at Ephesus for the protection of Artemis.


1.2.7
92
Θράσυλλος δὲ ἑβδόμῃ καὶ δεκάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ μετὰ τὴν εἰσβολὴν εἰς Ἔφεσον ἀπέπλευσε , καὶ τοὺς μὲν ὁπλίτας πρὸς τὸν Κορησσὸν ἀποβιβάσας , τοὺς δὲ ἱππέας καὶ πελταστὰς καὶ ἐπιβάτας καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους πάντας πρὸς τὸ ἕλος ἐπὶ τὰ ἕτερα τῆς πόλεως , ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ προσῆγε δύο στρατόπεδα .
And now, on the seventeenth day after his raid, Thrasyllus sailed to								Ephesus; and having disembarked the hoplites at the foot of Mount								Coressus, and the cavalry, peltasts, marines, and all the rest near								the marsh on the opposite side of the city, he led forward the two								divisions at daybreak.


1.2.8
93
οἱ δ’ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐβοήθησαν σφίσιν οἵ τε σύμμαχοι οὓς Τισσαφέρνης ἤγαγε , καὶ Συρακόσιοι οἵ τ’ ἀπὸ τῶν προτέρων εἴκοσι νεῶν καὶ ἀπὸ ἑτέρων πέντε , αἳ ἔτυχον τότε παραγενόμεναι , νεωστὶ ἥκουσαι μετὰ Εὐκλέους τε τοῦ Ἵππωνος καὶ Ἡρακλείδου τοῦ Ἀριστογένους στρατηγῶν , καὶ Σελινούσιαι δύο .
The defenders of the city sallied forth to meet the attack,—the								Ephesians, the allies whom Tissaphernes had brought them, the crews								of the original twenty Syracusan ships and of five others which								chanced to have arrived there at the time, newly come from Syracuse								under the command of Eucles, the son of Hippon, and Heracleides, the								son of Aristogenes, and finally, the crews of two Selinuntine								ships.


1.2.9
94
οὗτοι δὲ πάντες πρῶτον μὲν πρὸς τοὺς ὁπλίτας τοὺς ἐν Κορησσῷ ἐβοήθησαν ·
All these contingents directed their first attack upon the hoplites at Coressus;


1.2.9
95
τούτους δὲ τρεψάμενοι καὶ ἀποκτείναντες ἐξ αὐτῶν ὡσεὶ ἑκατὸν καὶ εἰς τὴν θάλατταν καταδιώξαντες πρὸς τοὺς παρὰ τὸ ἕλος ἐτράποντο .
and after routing them, killing about a hundred of them, and pursuing the rest down to the shore, they turned their attention to those by the marsh;


1.2.9
96
ἔφυγον δὲ κ- ἐκεῖ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , καὶ ἀπώλοντο αὐτῶν ὡς τριακόσιοι .
and there also the Athenians were put to flight, and about three hundred of them were killed.


1.2.10
97
οἱ δὲ Ἐφέσιοι τροπαῖον ἐνταῦθα ἔστησαν καὶ ἕτερον πρὸς τῷ Κορησσῷ .
So the Ephesians set up a trophy there and a second at Coressus.


1.2.10
98
τοῖς δὲ Συρακοσίοις καὶ Σελινουσίοις κρατίστοις γενομένοις ἀριστεῖα ἔδωκαν καὶ κοινῇ καὶ ἰδίᾳ πολλοῖς , καὶ οἰκεῖν ἀτέλειαν ἔδοσαν τῷ βουλομένῳ ἀεί ·
They also gave to the Syracusans and Selinuntines, who had especially distinguished themselves, the prizes for valour, not only general prizes, but many to particular individuals among them, while upon any one of them who at any time might desire it they conferred the privilege of dwelling in Ephesus tax free;


1.2.10
99
Σελινουσίοις δέ , ἐπεὶ ἡ πόλις ἀπωλώλει , καὶ πολιτείαν ἔδοσαν .
and to the Selinuntines, after Selinus had been destroyed, they gave the rights of Ephesian citizenship as well.


1.2.11
100
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι τοὺς νεκροὺς ὑποσπόνδους ἀπολαβόντες ἀπέπλευσαν εἰς Νότιον , κ- ἐκεῖ θάψαντες αὐτοὺς ἔπλεον εὐθὺ Λέσβου καὶ Ἑλλησπόντου .
As for the Athenians, after obtaining								a truce and so recovering the bodies of their dead, they sailed back								to Notium, buried the dead there, and sailed on towards Lesbos and								the Hellespont.


1.2.12
101
ὁρμοῦντες δὲ ἐν Μηθύμνῃ τῆς Λέσβου εἶδον παραπλεούσας ἐξ Ἐφέσου τὰς Συρακοσίας ναῦς πέντε καὶ εἴκοσι ·
While they were at anchor in the harbour of Methymna, in Lesbos, they saw sailing past them from Ephesus the twenty-five Syracusan ships;


1.2.12
102
καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτὰς ἀναχθέντες τέτταρας μὲν ἔλαβον αὐτοῖς ἀνδράσι , τὰς δ’ ἄλλας κατεδίωξαν εἰς Ἔφεσον .
and putting out to the attack they captured four of them, men and all, and chased the rest back to Ephesus.


1.2.13
103
καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους αἰχμαλώτους Θράσυλλος εἰς Ἀθήνας ἀπέπεμψε πάντας , Ἀλκιβιάδην δὲ Ἀθηναῖον , Ἀλκιβιάδου ὄντα ἀνεψιὸν καὶ συμφυγάδα , κατέλευσεν .
And Thrasyllus sent home to Athens all the prisoners with the exception of Alcibiades; this Alcibiades, who was an Athenian and a cousin and fellow-exile of Alcibiades the general, he caused to be stoned to death.


1.2.13
104
ἐντεῦθεν δὲ ἔπλευσεν εἰς τὴν Σηστὸν πρὸς τὸ ἄλλο στράτευμα .
Then he set sail to Sestus to join the rest of the army.


1.2.14
105
ἐκεῖθεν δὲ ἅπασα ἡ στρατιὰ διέβη εἰς Λάμψακον .
From Sestus the entire force crossed over to Lampsacus.


1.2.14
106
καὶ χειμὼν ἐπῄει , ἐν ᾧ οἱ αἰχμάλωτοι Συρακόσιοι , εἰργμένοι τοῦ Πειραιῶς ἐν λιθοτομίαις , διορύξαντες τὴν πέτραν , ἀποδράντες νυκτὸς ᾤχοντο εἰς Δεκέλειαν , οἱ δ’ εἰς Μέγαρα .
And now the winter came on. During the course of it the Syracusan prisoners, who were immured in stone quarries in Piraeus, dug through the rock and made their escape by night, most of them to Decelea and the rest to Megara.


1.2.15
107
ἐν δὲ τῇ Λαμψάκῳ συντάττοντος Ἀλκιβιάδου τὸ στράτευμα πᾶν οἱ πρότεροι στρατιῶται οὐκ ἐβούλοντο τοῖς μετὰ Θρασύλλου συντάττεσθαι , ὡς αὐτοὶ μὲν ὄντες ἀήττητοι , ἐκεῖνοι δὲ ἡττημένοι ἥκοιεν .
Meanwhile at Lampsacus Alcibiades endeavoured to marshal his entire army as a unit, but the old soldiers were unwilling to be marshalled with the troops of Thrasyllus; for they said that they had never known defeat, while the others had just come from a defeat.


1.2.15
108
ἐνταῦθα δὴ ἐχείμαζον ἅπαντες Λάμψακον τειχίζοντες .
Both contingents, however, wintered there together, occupying themselves in fortifying Lampsacus.


1.2.16
109
καὶ ἐστράτευσαν πρὸς Ἄβυδον ·
They also made an expedition against Abydus;


1.2.16
110
Φαρνάβαζος δ’ ἐβοήθησεν ἵπποις πολλοῖς , καὶ μάχῃ ἡττηθεὶς ἔφυγεν .
and Pharnabazus, who came to its aid with a large force of cavalry, was defeated in battle and put to flight.


1.2.16
111
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ ἐδίωκεν ἔχων τούς τε ἱππέας καὶ τῶν ὁπλιτῶν εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατόν , ὧν ἦρχε Μένανδρος , μέχρι σκότος ἀφείλετο .
And Alcibiades pursued him with the Athenian cavalry and one hundred and twenty of the hoplites, under the command of Menander, until darkness covered the retreat.


1.2.17
112
ἐκ δὲ τῆς μάχης ταύτης συνέβησαν οἱ στρατιῶται αὐτοὶ αὑτοῖς καὶ ἠσπάζοντο τοὺς μετὰ Θρασύλλου .
As a result of this battle the soldiers came together of their own accord and the old troops fraternised with those under Thrasyllus.


1.2.17
113
ἐξῆλθον δέ τινας καὶ ἄλλας ἐξόδους τοῦ χειμῶνος εἰς τὴν ἤπειρον καὶ ἐπόρθουν τὴν βασιλέως χώραν .
The Athenians also made some other expeditions during the winter into the interior and laid waste the King’s territory.


1.2.18
114
τῷ δ’ αὐτῷ χρόνῳ καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τοὺς εἰς τὸ Κορυφάσιον τῶν Εἱλώτων ἀφεστῶτας ἐκ Μαλέας ὑποσπόνδους ἀφῆκαν .
At the same period the Lacedaemonians granted terms to the Helots who had revolted and fled from Malea to Coryphasium, allowing them to evacuate Coryphasium unmolested.


1.2.18
115
κατὰ δὲ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρὸν καὶ ἐν Ἡρακλείᾳ τῇ Τραχινίᾳ Ἀχαιοὶ τοὺς ἐποίκους , ἀντιτεταγμένων πάντων πρὸς Οἰταίους πολεμίους ὄντας , προέδοσαν , ὥστε ἀπολέσθαι αὐτῶν πρὸς ἑπτακοσίους σὺν τῷ ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος ἁρμοστῇ Λαβώτῃ .
At about the same time, also, the colonists of Heracleia, in Trachis, were betrayed by the Achaeans in a battle where both peoples were drawn up against their enemies, the Oetaeans, and as a result about seven hundred of the Heracleots perished, together with the Lacedaemonian governor, Labotas.


1.2.19
116
καὶ ὁ ἐνιαυτὸς ἔληγεν οὗτος , ἐν ᾧ καὶ Μῆδοι ἀπὸ Δαρείου τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλέως ἀποστάντες πάλιν προσεχώρησαν αὐτῷ .
So this year ended, being the year in								which the Medes, who had revolted from Darius, king of the Persians,								were again reduced to subjection.


1.3.1
117
τοῦ δ’ ἐπιόντος ἔτους ὁ ἐν Φωκαίᾳ νεὼς τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς ἐνεπρήσθη πρηστῆρος ἐμπεσόντος .
During the ensuing year the temple of Athena at Phocaea was struck by lightning and set on fire.


1.3.1
118
ἐπεὶ δ’ ὁ χειμὼν ἔληγε , Παντακλέους μὲν ἐφορεύοντος , ἄρχοντος δ’ Ἀντιγένους , ἔαρος ἀρχομένου , δυοῖν καὶ εἴκοσιν ἐτῶν τῷ πολέμῳ παρεληλυθότων , οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἔπλευσαν εἰς Προκόννησον παντὶ τῷ στρατοπέδῳ .
When the winter ended and spring began,—Pantacles being now ephor and Antigenes archon, and the war having continued for twenty-two years—the Athenians sailed with their entire force to Proconnesus.


1.3.2
119
ἐκεῖθεν δ’ ἐπὶ Καλχηδόνα καὶ Βυζάντιον ὁρμήσαντες ἐστρατοπεδεύσαντο πρὸς Καλχηδόνι .
From there they set out against Calchedon and Byzantium, and went into camp near Calchedon.


1.3.2
120
οἱ δὲ Καλχηδόνιοι προσιόντας αἰσθόμενοι τοὺς Ἀθηναίους , τὴν λείαν ἅπασαν κατέθεντο εἰς τοὺς Βιθυνοὺς Θρᾷκας , ἀστυγείτονας ὄντας .
Now the Calchedonians, when they learned that the Athenians were approaching, had put all their portable property in the keeping of the Bithynian Thracians, their neighbours.


1.3.3
121
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ λαβὼν τῶν τε ὁπλιτῶν ὀλίγους καὶ τοὺς ἱππέας , καὶ τὰς ναῦς παραπλεῖν κελεύσας , ἐλθὼν εἰς τοὺς Βιθυνοὺς ἀπῄτει τὰ τῶν Καλχηδονίων χρήματα ·
Alcibiades, however, taking a few of the hoplites and the cavalry, and giving orders that the ships should sail along the coast, went to the Bithynians and demanded the property of the Calchedonians,


1.3.3
122
εἰ δὲ μή , πολεμήσειν ἔφη αὐτοῖς .
saying that if they did not give it to him, he would make war upon them;


1.3.3
123
οἱ δὲ ἀπέδοσαν .
so they gave it over.


1.3.4
124
Ἀλκιβιάδης δ’ ἐπεὶ ἧκεν εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον τήν τε λείαν ἔχων καὶ πίστεις πεποιημένος , ἀπετείχιζε τὴν Καλχηδόνα παντὶ τῷ στρατοπέδῳ ἀπὸ θαλάττης εἰς θάλατταν καὶ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ὅσον οἷόν τ’ ἦν ξυλίνῳ τείχει .
And when Alcibiades returned to his camp with the booty, after having								concluded a treaty with the Bithynians, he proceeded with his whole								army to invest Calchedon by building a wooden stockade which								extended from sea to sea, taking in the river also in so far as this								was practicable.


1.3.5
125
ἐνταῦθα Ἱπποκράτης μὲν ὁ Λακεδαιμόνιος ἁρμοστὴς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐξήγαγε τοὺς στρατιώτας , ὡς μαχούμενος ·
Thereupon Hippocrates, the Lacedaemonian governor, led forth his troops from the city to do battle;


1.3.5
126
οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι ἀντιπαρετάξαντο αὐτῷ , Φαρνάβαζος δὲ ἔξωθεν τῶν περιτειχισμάτων ἐβοήθει στρατιᾷ τε καὶ ἵπποις πολλοῖς .
and the Athenians marshalled themselves against him, while Pharnabazus, outside the stockade, with infantry and horsemen in great numbers, tried to aid Hippocrates.


1.3.6
127
Ἱπποκράτης μὲν οὖν καὶ Θράσυλλος ἐμάχοντο ἑκάτερος τοῖς ὁπλίταις χρόνον πολύν , μέχρι Ἀλκιβιάδης ἔχων ὁπλίτας τέ τινας καὶ τοὺς ἱππέας ἐβοήθησε .
Now for a long time Hippocrates and Thrasyllus fought, each with his hoplites, until Alcibiades came to the rescue with a few hoplites and the cavalry.


1.3.6
128
καὶ Ἱπποκράτης μὲν ἀπέθανεν , οἱ δὲ μετ’ αὐτοῦ ὄντες ἔφυγον εἰς τὴν πόλιν .
Then Hippocrates was killed, and those who were with him fled back into the city.


1.3.7
129
ἅμα δὲ καὶ Φαρνάβαζος , οὐ δυνάμενος συμμεῖξαι πρὸς τὸν Ἱπποκράτην διὰ τὴν στενοπορίαν , τοῦ ποταμοῦ καὶ τῶν ἀποτειχισμάτων ἐγγὺς ὄντων , ἀπεχώρησεν εἰς τὸ Ἡράκλειον τὸ τῶν Καλχηδονίων , οὗ ἦν αὐτῷ τὸ στρατόπεδον .
At the same time Pharnabazus, unable to effect a junction with								Hippocrates owing to the narrowness of the space, since the stockade								came down close to the river, retired to the Heracleium in the								Calchedonian territory, where he had his camp.


1.3.8
130
ἐκ τούτου δὲ Ἀλκιβιάδης μὲν ᾤχετο εἰς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον καὶ εἰς Χερρόνησον χρήματα πράξων ·
After this Alcibiades went off to the Hellespont and the Chersonese to collect money;


1.3.8
131
οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ στρατηγοὶ συνεχώρησαν πρὸς Φαρνάβαζον ὑπὲρ Καλχηδόνος εἴκοσι τάλαντα δοῦναι Ἀθηναίοις Φαρνάβαζον καὶ ὡς βασιλέα πρέσβεις Ἀθηναίων ἀναγαγεῖν , καὶ ὅρκους ἔδοσαν καὶ ἔλαβον παρὰ Φαρναβάζου ὑποτελεῖν τὸν φόρον Καλχηδονίους Ἀθηναίοις ὅσονπερ εἰώθεσαν καὶ τὰ ὀφειλόμενα χρήματα ἀποδοῦναι , Ἀθηναίους δὲ μὴ πολεμεῖν Καλχηδονίοις , ἕως ἂν οἱ παρὰ βασιλέως πρέσβεις ἔλθωσιν .
and the rest of the generals concluded a compact with Pharnabazus which provided that, in consideration of their sparing Calchedon, Pharnabazus should give the Athenians twenty talents and should conduct Athenian ambassadors to the King;


1.3.10
132
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ τοῖς ὅρκοις οὐκ ἐτύγχανε παρών , ἀλλὰ περὶ Σηλυμβρίαν ἦν ·
Alcibiades was not present at the exchange of these oaths, but was in the neighbourhood of Selymbria;


1.3.10
133
ἐκείνην δ’ ἑλὼν πρὸς τὸ Βυζάντιον ἧκεν , ἔχων Χερρονησίτας τε πανδημεὶ καὶ ἀπὸ Θρᾴκης στρατιώτας καὶ ἱππέας πλείους τριακοσίων .
and when he had captured that city, he came to Byzantium, bringing with him all the forces of the Chersonesians and soldiers from Thrace and more than three hundred horsemen.


1.3.11
134
Φαρνάβαζος δὲ ἀξιῶν δεῖν κ- ἐκεῖνον ὀμνύναι , περιέμενεν ἐν Καλχηδόνι , μέχρι ἔλθοι ἐκ τοῦ Βυζαντίου ·
Now Pharnabazus thought that Alcibiades also ought to give his oath, and so waited at Calchedon until he should come from Byzantium;


1.3.11
135
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἧκεν , οὐκ ἔφη ὀμεῖσθαι , εἰ μὴ κ- ἐκεῖνος αὐτῷ ὀμεῖται .
but when he came, he said that he would not make oath unless Pharnabazus also should do the like to him.


1.3.12
136
μετὰ ταῦτα ὤμοσεν ὁ μὲν ἐν Χρυσοπόλει οἷς Φαρνάβαζος ἔπεμψε Μιτροβάτει καὶ Ἀρνάπει , ὁ δ’ ἐν Καλχηδόνι τοῖς παρ’ Ἀλκιβιάδου Εὐρυπτολέμῳ καὶ Διοτίμῳ τόν τε κοινὸν ὅρκον καὶ ἰδίᾳ ἀλλήλοις πίστεις ἐποιήσαντο .
In the end, Alcibiades made oath at Chrysopolis to the								representatives of Pharnabazus, Mitrobates and Arnapes, and								Pharnabazus at Calchedon to the representatives of Alcibiades,								Euryptolemus and Diotimus, both parties not only giving the official								oath but also making personal pledges to one another.


1.3.13
137
Φαρνάβαζος μὲν οὖν εὐθὺς ἀπῄει , καὶ τοὺς παρὰ βασιλέα πορευομένους πρέσβεις ἀπαντᾶν ἐκέλευσεν εἰς Κύζικον .
Immediately after this Pharnabazus went away, leaving word that the ambassadors who were going to the King should meet him at Cyzicus.


1.3.13
138
ἐπέμφθησαν δὲ Ἀθηναίων μὲν Δωρόθεος , Φιλοκύδης , Θεογένης , Εὐρυπτόλεμος , Μαντίθεος , σὺν δὲ τούτοις Ἀργεῖοι Κλεόστρατος , Πυρρόλοχος ·
The Athenians who were sent were Dorotheus, Philocydes, Theogenes, Euryptolemus, and Mantitheus, and with them two Argives, Cleostratus and Pyrrolochus;


1.3.13
139
ἐπορεύοντο δὲ καὶ Λακεδαιμονίων πρέσβεις Πασιππίδας καὶ ἕτεροι , μετὰ δὲ τούτων καὶ Ἑρμοκράτης , ἤδη φεύγων ἐκ Συρακουσῶν , καὶ ὁ ἀδελφὸς αὐτοῦ Πρόξενος .
ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians also went along, Pasippidas and others, and with them Hermocrates, who was already an exile from Syracuse, and his brother Proxenus.


1.3.14
140
καὶ Φαρνάβαζος μὲν τούτους ἦγεν ·
While Pharnabazus was conducting this party,


1.3.14
141
οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι τὸ Βυζάντιον ἐπολιόρκουν περιτειχίσαντες , καὶ πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος ἀκροβολισμοὺς καὶ προσβολὰς ἐποιοῦντο .
the Athenians were besieging Byzantium; they had built a stockade around the city, and were attacking its wall with missiles from a distance and by close assault.


1.3.15
142
ἐν δὲ τῷ Βυζαντίῳ ἦν Κλέαρχος Λακεδαιμόνιος ἁρμοστὴς καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ τῶν περιοίκων τινὲς καὶ τῶν νεοδαμώδων οὐ πολλοὶ καὶ Μεγαρεῖς καὶ ἄρχων αὐτῶν Ἕλιξος Μεγαρεὺς καὶ Βοιωτοὶ καὶ τούτων ἄρχων Κοιρατάδας .
Within Byzantium was Clearchus the Lacedaemonian, its governor, and								with him some Laconian Perioeci, a few emancipated Helots, a								contingent of Megarians, under the command of Helixus the Megarian,								and one of Boeotians, under the command of Coeratadas.


1.3.16
143
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι ὡς οὐδὲν ἐδύναντο διαπράξασθαι κατ’ ἰσχύν , ἔπεισάν τινας τῶν Βυζαντίων προδοῦναι τὴν πόλιν .
Now the Athenians, finding that they were unable to accomplish								anything by force, persuaded some of the Byzantines to betray the								city.


1.3.17
144
Κλέαρχος δὲ ὁ ἁρμοστὴς οἰόμενος οὐδένα ἂν τοῦτο ποιῆσαι , καταστήσας δὲ ἅπαντα ὡς ἐδύνατο κάλλιστα καὶ ἐπιτρέψας τὰ ἐν τῇ πόλει Κοιρατάδᾳ καὶ Ἑλίξῳ , διέβη παρὰ τὸν Φαρνάβαζον εἰς τὸ πέραν , μισθόν τε τοῖς στρατιώταις παρ’ αὐτοῦ ληψόμενος καὶ ναῦς συλλέξων , αἳ ἦσαν ἐν τῷ Ἑλλησπόντῳ ἄλλαι καταλελειμμέναι φρουρίδες ὑπὸ Πασιππίδου καὶ ἐν Ἀντάνδρῳ καὶ ἃς Ἀγησανδρίδας εἶχεν ἐπὶ Θρᾴκης , ἐπιβάτης ὢν Μινδάρου , καὶ ὅπως ἄλλαι ναυπηγηθείησαν , ἁθρόαι δὲ γενόμεναι πᾶσαι κακῶς τοὺς συμμάχους τῶν Ἀθηναίων ποιοῦσαι ἀποσπάσειαν τὸ στρατόπεδον ἀπὸ τοῦ Βυζαντίου .
Meanwhile Clearchus, the governor, supposing that no one would do								that, arranged everything as well as he could, turned over the								charge of the city to Coeratadas and Helixus, and crossed to the								opposite shore to meet Pharnabazus, in order to get from him pay for								the soldiers and also to collect ships. His plan was to assemble								those which had been left behind by Pasippidas as guardships and								were now in the Hellespont, those at Antandrus, and those which								Agesandridas, a lieutenant of Mindarus, had under his command on the								Thracian coast, and finally, to have other ships built; then, after								gathering them all together, he thought to harry the allies of the								Athenians and so draw off their army from Byzantium.


1.3.18
145
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐξέπλευσεν ὁ Κλέαρχος , οἱ προδιδόντες τὴν πόλιν τῶν Βυζαντίων , Κύδων καὶ Ἀρίστων καὶ Ἀναξικράτης καὶ Λυκοῦργος καὶ Ἀναξίλαος ( ὃς ἐπαγόμενος θανάτου ὕστερον ἐν Λακεδαίμονι διὰ τὴν προδοσίαν ἀπέφυγεν , ἀπολογούμενος ὅτι οὐ προδιδοίη τὴν πόλιν , ἀλλὰ σώσαι , παῖδας ὁρῶν καὶ γυναῖκας λιμῷ ἀπολλυμένους , Βυζάντιος ὢν καὶ οὐ Λακεδαιμόνιος ·
But when Clearchus had sailed away, those who wanted to betray the								city of the Byzantines set about their work,—Cydon, Ariston,								Anaxicrates, Lycurgus, and Anaxilaus.


1.3.19
146
τὸν γὰρ ἐνόντα σῖτον Κλέαρχον τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίων στρατιώταις διδόναι ·
This Anaxilaus was afterwards tried for his life at Lacedaemon because of this betrayal, but was acquitted, on the plea that he did not betray the city, but rather saved it;


1.3.19
147
διὰ ταῦτ’ οὖν τοὺς πολεμίους ἔφη εἰσέσθαι , οὐκ ἀργυρίου ἕνεκα οὐδὲ διὰ τὸ μισεῖν Λακεδαιμονίους ) ·
he was a Byzantine, he said, not a Lacedaemonian, and when he saw children and women perishing of starvation,—for Clearchus, he said, gave whatever provisions the city contained to the soldiers of the Lacedaemonians,—he had for this reason admitted the enemy, not for the sake of money nor out of hatred to the Lacedaemonians.


1.3.20
148
ἐπεὶ δὲ αὐτοῖς παρεσκεύαστο , νυκτὸς ἀνοίξαντες τὰς πύλας τὰς ἐπὶ τὸ Θρᾴκιον καλουμένας εἰσήγαγον τὸ στράτευμα καὶ τὸν Ἀλκιβιάδην .
As has been said, however, these betrayers made their preparations,								and then, opening by night the gates that lead to the Thracian								Square, as it is called, let in the Athenian army and								Alcibiades.


1.3.21
149
ὁ δὲ Ἕλιξος καὶ ὁ Κοιρατάδας οὐδὲν τούτων εἰδότες ἐβοήθουν μετὰ πάντων εἰς τὴν ἀγοράν ·
Now Helixus and Coeratadas, who knew nothing of what was going on, hurried to the market-place with all their troops;


1.3.21
150
ἐπεὶ δὲ πάντῃ οἱ πολέμιοι κατεῖχον , οὐδὲν ἔχοντες ὅ τι ποιήσαιεν , παρέδοσαν σφᾶς αὐτούς .
but when they found that the enemy were masters everywhere and that they could do nothing, they surrendered themselves.


1.3.22
151
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν ἀπεπέμφθησαν εἰς Ἀθήνας , καὶ ὁ Κοιρατάδας ἐν τῷ ὄχλῳ ἀποβαινόντων ἐν Πειραιεῖ ἔλαθεν ἀποδρὰς καὶ ἀπεσώθη εἰς Δεκέλειαν .
They were all sent off to Athens, and as they were disembarking at								Piraeus, Coeratadas slipped away in the crowd and made his escape to								Decelea.


1.4.1
152
Φαρνάβαζος δὲ καὶ οἱ πρέσβεις τῆς Φρυγίας ἐν Γορδείῳ ὄντες τὸν χειμῶνα τὰ περὶ τὸ Βυζάντιον πεπραγμένα ἤκουσαν .
As for Pharnabazus and the								ambassadors, while they were spending the winter at Gordium, in								Phrygia, they heard what had happened at Byzantium.


1.4.2
153
ἀρχομένου δὲ τοῦ ἔαρος πορευομένοις αὐτοῖς παρὰ βασιλέα ἀπήντησαν καταβαίνοντες οἵ τε Λακεδαιμονίων πρέσβεις Βοιώτιος ὄνομα καὶ οἱ μετ’ αὐτοῦ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι ἄγγελοι , καὶ ἔλεγον ὅτι Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὧν δέονται πάντων πεπραγότες εἶεν παρὰ βασιλέως , καὶ Κῦρος , ἄρξων πάντων τῶν ἐπὶ θαλάττῃ καὶ συμπολεμήσων Λακεδαιμονίοις , ἐπιστολήν τε ἔφερε τοῖς κάτω πᾶσι τὸ βασίλειον σφράγισμα ἔχουσαν , ἐν ᾗ ἐνῆν καὶ τάδε ·
But as they were continuing their journey to the King, at the opening of the spring, they met								not only the Lacedaemonian ambassadors returning,—Boeotius and his								colleagues and the messengers besides, who reported that the								Lacedaemonians had obtained from the King everything they								wanted,—


1.4.3
154
καταπέμπω Κῦρον κάρανον τῶν εἰς Καστωλὸν ἁθροιζομένων .
but also Cyrus, who had come in order to be ruler of all the peoples on the coast and to support the Lacedaemonians in the war.


1.4.3
155
τὸ δὲ κάρανον ἔστι κύριον .
This Cyrus brought with him a letter, addressed to all the dwellers upon the sea and bearing the King’s seal, which contained among other things these words: "I send down Cyrus as caranus of those whose mustering-place is Castolus."


1.4.4
156
ταῦτ’ οὖν ἀκούοντες οἱ τῶν Ἀθημαίων πρέσβεις , καὶ ἐπειδὴ Κῦρον εἶδον , ἐβούλοντο μὲν μάλιστα παρὰ βασιλέα ἀναβῆναι , εἰ δὲ μή , οἴκαδε ἀπελθεῖν .
When the Athenian ambassadors heard								all this and saw Cyrus, they wished, if it were possible, to make								their journey to the King, but otherwise to return home.


1.4.5
157
Κῦρος δὲ Φαρναβάζῳ εἶπεν ἢ παραδοῦναι τοὺς πρέσβεις ἑαυτῷ ἢ μὴ οἴκαδέ πω ἀποπέμψαι , βουλόμενος τοὺς Ἀθηναίους μὴ εἰδέναι τὰ πραττόμενα .
Cyrus, however, directed Pharnabazus either to give the ambassadors								into his charge, or at any rate not to let them go home as yet, for								he wished the Athenians not to know of what was going on.


1.4.6
158
Φαρνάβαζος δὲ τέως μὲν κατεῖχε τοὺς πρέσβεις , φάσκων τοτὲ μὲν ἀνάξειν αὐτοὺς παρὰ βασιλέα , τοτὲ δὲ οἴκαδε ἀποπέμψειν , ὡς μηδὲν μέμψησθε ·
Pharnabazus, accordingly, in order that Cyrus might not censure him,								detained the ambassadors for a time, now saying that he would								conduct them to the King, and again, that he would let them go								home;


1.4.7
159
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἐνιαυτοὶ ἦσαν τρεῖς , ἐδεήθη τοῦ Κύρου ἀφεῖναι αὐτούς , φάσκων ὀμωμοκέναι καὶ ἀπάξειν ἐπὶ θάλατταν , ἐπειδὴ οὐ παρὰ βασιλέα .
but when three years had passed, he requested Cyrus to release them, on the plea that he had given his oath to conduct them back to the coast, since he could not take them to the King.


1.4.7
160
πέμψαντες δὲ Ἀριοβαρζάνει παρακομίσαι αὐτοὺς ἐκέλευον ·
So they sent the ambassadors to Ariobarzanes and directed him to escort them on;


1.4.7
161
ὁ δὲ ἀπήγαγεν εἰς Κίον τῆς Μυσίας , ὅθεν πρὸς τὸ ἄλλο στρατόπεδον ἀπέπλευσαν .
and he conducted them to Cius, in Mysia, whence they set sail to join the Athenian army.


1.4.8
162
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ βουλόμενος μετὰ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀποπλεῖν οἴκαδε , ἀνήχθη εὐθὺς ἐπὶ Σάμου ·
Meanwhile Alcibiades, wishing to sail home with his troops, made straight for Samos;


1.4.8
163
ἐκεῖθεν δὲ λαβὼν τῶν νεῶν εἴκοσιν ἔπλευσε τῆς Καρίας εἰς τὸν Κεραμικὸν κόλπον .
from there he sailed, with twenty of the ships, to the Ceramic Gulf, in Caria;


1.4.9
164
ἐκεῖθεν δὲ συλλέξας ἑκατὸν τάλαντα ἧκεν εἰς τὴν Σάμον .
and after collecting there a hundred talents, he returned to Samos.


1.4.9
165
Θρασύβουλος δὲ σὺν τριάκοντα ναυσὶν ἐπὶ Θρᾴκης ᾤχετο , ἐκεῖ δὲ τά τε ἄλλα χωρία τὰ πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους μεθεστηκότα κατεστρέψατο καὶ Θάσον , ἔχουσαν κακῶς ὑπό τε τῶν πολέμων καὶ στάσεων καὶ λιμοῦ .
Thrasybulus, however, with thirty ships, went off to the Thracian coast, where he reduced all the places which had revolted to the Lacedaemonians, and especially Thasos, which was in a bad state on account of wars and revolutions and famine.


1.4.10
166
Θράσυλλος δὲ σὺν τῇ ἄλλῃ στρατιᾷ εἰς Ἀθήνας κατέπλευσε ·
Thrasyllus finally, with the rest of the fleet, sailed home to Athens;


1.4.10
167
πρὶν δὲ ἥκειν αὐτὸν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι στρατηγοὺς εἴλοντο Ἀλκιβιάδην μὲν φεύγοντα καὶ Θρασύβουλον ἀπόντα , Κόνωνα δὲ τρίτον ἐκ τῶν οἴκοθεν .
but before he arrived, the Athenians had chosen as generals Alcibiades, who was still in exile, Thrasybulus, who was absent, and as a third, from among those at home, Conon.


1.4.11
168
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ ἐκ τῆς Σάμου ἔχων τὰ χρήματα κατέπλευσεν εἰς Πάρον ναυσὶν εἴκοσιν , ἐκεῖθεν δ’ ἀνήχθη εὐθὺ Γυθείου ἐπὶ κατασκοπὴν τῶν τριήρων , ἃς ἐπυνθάνετο Λακεδαιμονίους αὐτόθι παρασκευάζειν τριάκοντα , καὶ τοῦ οἴκαδε κατάπλου ὅπως ἡ πόλις πρὸς αὐτὸν ἔχοι .
And now Alcibiades sailed from Samos with his twenty ships and his								money to Paros, and from there directed his course straight to								Gytheium, in order to take a look at the thirty triremes which he								heard the Lacedaemonians were making ready there and to see how his								city felt toward him, with reference to his homecoming.


1.4.12
169
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἑώρα ἑαυτῷ εὔνουν οὖσαν καὶ στρατηγὸν αὑτὸν ᾑρημένον καὶ ἰδίᾳ μεταπεμπομένους τοὺς ἐπιτηδείους , κατέπλευσεν εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ ἡμέρᾳ ᾗ Πλυντήρια ἦγεν ἡ πόλις , τοῦ ἕδους κατακεκαλυμμένου τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς , ὅ τινες οἰωνίζοντο ἀνεπιτήδειον εἶναι καὶ αὐτῷ καὶ τῇ πόλει .
And when he found that the temper of the Athenians was kindly, that they had chosen him general, and that his friends were urging him by personal messages to return, he sailed in to Piraeus, arriving on the day when the city was celebrating the Plynteria and the statue of Athena was veiled from sight,—a circumstance which some people imagined was of ill omen, both for him and for the state;


1.4.12
170
Ἀθηναίων γὰρ οὐδεὶς ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ οὐδενὸς σπουδαίου ἔργου τολμήσαι ἂν ἅψασθαι .
for on that day no Athenian would venture to engage in any serious business.


1.4.13
171
καταπλέοντος δ’ αὐτοῦ ὅ τε ἐκ τοῦ Πειραιῶς καὶ ὁ ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεως ὄχλος ἡθροίσθη πρὸς τὰς ναῦς , θαυμάζοντες καὶ ἰδεῖν βουλόμενοι τὸν Ἀλκιβιάδην , λέγοντες ὅτι οἱ μὲν ὡς κράτιστος εἴη τῶν πολιτῶν καὶ μόνος ἀπελογήθη ὡς οὐ δικαίως φύγοι , ἐπιβουλευθεὶς δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν ἔλαττον ἐκείνου δυναμένων μοχθηρότερά τε λεγόντων καὶ πρὸς τὸ αὑτῶν ἴδιον κέρδος πολιτευόντων , ἐκείνου ἀεὶ τὸ κοινὸν αὔξοντος καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν αὑτοῦ καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ τῆς πόλεως δυνατοῦ ·
When he sailed in, the common crowd of								Piraeus and of the city gathered to his ships, filled with wonder								and desiring to see the famous Alcibiades. Some of them said that he								was the best of the citizens; that he alone was banished without								just cause, but rather because he was plotted against by those who								had less power than he and spoke less well and ordered their								political doings with a view to their own private gain, whereas he								was always advancing the common								weal, both by his own means and by the power of the state.


1.4.14
172
ἐθέλοντος δὲ τότε κρίνεσθαι παραχρῆμα τῆς αἰτίας ἄρτι γεγενημένης ὡς ἠσεβηκότος εἰς τὰ μυστήρια , ὑπερβαλλόμενοι οἱ ἐχθροὶ τὰ δοκοῦντα δίκαια εἶναι ἀπόντα αὐτὸν ἐστέρησαν τῆς πατρίδος ·
At the time in question, they said, he								was willing to be brought to trial at once, when the charge had just								been made that he had committed sacrilege against the Eleusinian								Mysteries; his enemies, however, postponed the trial, which was								obviously his right, and then, when he was absent, robbed him of his								fatherland;


1.4.15
173
ἐν ᾧ χρόνῳ ὑπὸ ἀμηχανίας δουλεύων ἠναγκάσθη μὲν θεραπεύειν τοὺς ἐχθίστους , κινδυνεύων ἀεὶ παρ’ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν ἀπολέσθαι ·
thereafter, in his exile, helpless as a slave and in danger of his life every day, he was forced to pay court to those whom he hated most;


1.4.15
174
τοὺς δὲ οἰκειοτάτους πολίτας τε καὶ συγγενεῖς καὶ τὴν πόλιν ἅπασαν ὁρῶν ἐξαμαρτάνουσαν , οὐκ εἶχεν ὅπως ὠφελοίη φυγῇ ἀπειργόμενος ·
and though he saw those who were dearest to him, his fellow-citizens and kinsmen and all Athens, making mistakes, he was debarred by his banishment from the opportunity of helping them.


1.4.16
175
οὐκ ἔφασαν δὲ τῶν οἵωνπερ αὐτὸς ὄντων εἶναι καινῶν δεῖσθαι πραγμάτων οὐδὲ μεταστάσεως ·
It was not the way, they said, of men such as he to desire revolution or a change in government;


1.4.16
176
ὑπάρχειν γὰρ ἐκ τοῦ δήμου αὐτῷ μὲν τῶν τε ἡλικιωτῶν πλέον ἔχειν τῶν τε πρεσβυτέρων μὴ ἐλαττοῦσθαι , τοῖς δ’ αὐτοῦ ἐχθροῖς τοιούτοις δοκεῖν εἶναι οἵοισπερ πρότερον , ὕστερον δὲ δυνασθεῖσιν ἀπολλύναι τοὺς βελτίστους , αὐτοὺς δὲ μόνους λειφθέντας δι’ αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἀγαπᾶσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν πολιτῶν ὅτι ἑτέροις βελτίοσιν οὐκ εἶχον χρῆσθαι ·
for under the democracy it had been his fortune to be not only superior to his contemporaries but also not inferior to his elders, while his enemies, on the other hand, were held in precisely the same low estimation after his banishment as before; later, however, when they had gained power, they had slain the best men, and since they alone were left, they were accepted by the citizens merely for the reason that better men were not available.


1.4.17
177
οἱ δέ , ὅτι τῶν παροιχομένων αὐτοῖς κακῶν μόνος αἴτιος εἴη , τῶν τε φοβερῶν ὄντων τῇ πόλει γενέσθαι μόνος κινδυνεύσαι ἡγεμὼν καταστῆναι .
Others, however, said that Alcibiades								alone was responsible for their past troubles, and as for the ills								which threatened to befall the state, he alone would probably prove								to be the prime cause of them.


1.4.18
178
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ πρὸς τὴν γῆν ὁρμισθεὶς ἀπέβαινε μὲν οὐκ εὐθύς , φοβούμενος τοὺς ἐχθρούς ·
Meanwhile Alcibiades, who had come to anchor close to the shore, did not at once disembark, through fear of his enemies;


1.4.18
179
ἐπαναστὰς δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ καταστρώματος ἐσκόπει τοὺς αὑτοῦ ἐπιτηδείους , εἰ παρείησαν .
but mounting upon the deck of his ship, he looked to see whether his friends were present.


1.4.19
180
κατιδὼν δὲ Εὐρυπτόλεμον τὸν Πεισιάνακτος , αὑτοῦ δὲ ἀνεψιόν , καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους οἰκείους καὶ τοὺς φίλους μετ’ αὐτῶν , τότε ἀποβὰς ἀναβαίνει εἰς τὴν πόλιν μετὰ τῶν παρεσκευασμένων , εἴ τις ἅπτοιτο , μὴ ἐπιτρέπειν .
But when he sighted his cousin Euryptolemus, the son of Peisianax,								and his other relatives and with them his friends, then he								disembarked and went up to the city, accompanied by a party who were								prepared to quell any attack that anyone might make upon him.


1.4.20
181
ἐν δὲ τῇ βουλῇ καὶ τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ ἀπολογησάμενος ὡς οὐκ ἠσεβήκει , εἰπὼν δὲ ὡς ἠδίκηται , λεχθέντων δὲ καὶ ἄλλων τοιούτων καὶ οὐδενὸς ἀντειπόντος διὰ τὸ μὴ ἀνασχέσθαι ἂν τὴν ἐκκλησίαν , ἀναρρηθεὶς ἁπάντων ἡγεμὼν αὐτοκράτωρ , ὡς οἷός τε ὢν σῶσαι τὴν προτέραν τῆς πόλεως δύναμιν , πρότερον μὲν τὰ μυστήρια τῶν Ἀθηναίων κατὰ θάλατταν ἀγόντων διὰ τὸν πόλεμον , κατὰ γῆν ἐποίησεν ἐξαγαγὼν τοὺς στρατιώτας ἅπαντας ·
And after he had spoken in his own defence before the Senate and the								Assembly, saying that he had not committed sacrilege and that he had								been unjustly treated, and after more of the same sort had been								said, with no one speaking in opposition because the Assembly would								not have tolerated it, he was proclaimed general-in-chief with								absolute authority, the people thinking that he was the man to								recover for the state its former power; then, as his first act, he								led out all his troops and conducted by land the procession of the Eleusinian Mysteries, which the								Athenians had been conducting by sea on account of the war;


1.4.21
182
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα κατελέξατο στρατιάν , ὁπλίτας μὲν πεντακοσίους καὶ χιλίους , ἱππέας δὲ πεντήκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν , ναῦς δ’ ἑκατόν .
and after this he collected an armament of fifteen hundred hoplites, one hundred and fifty horsemen, and one hundred ships.


1.4.21
183
καὶ μετὰ τὸν κατάπλουν τρίτῳ μηνὶ ἀνήχθη ἐπ’ Ἄνδρον ἀφεστηκυῖαν τῶν Ἀθηναίων , καὶ μετ’ αὐτοῦ Ἀριστοκράτης καὶ Ἀδείμαντος ὁ Λευκολοφίδου συνεπέμφθησαν ᾑρημένοι κατὰ γῆν στρατηγοί .
Then, in the fourth month after his return to Athens, he set sail for Andros, which had revolted from the Athenians; and with him were sent Aristocrates and Adeimantus, the son of Leucolophides, the generals who had been chosen for service by land.


1.4.22
184
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ τὸ στράτευμα ἀπεβίβασε τῆς Ἀνδρίας χώρας εἰς Γαύριον ·
Alcibiades disembarked his army at Gaurium, in the territory of Andros;


1.4.22
185
ἐκβοηθήσαντας δὲ τοὺς Ἀνδρίους ἐτρέψαντο καὶ κατέκλεισαν εἰς τὴν πόλιν καί τινας ἀπέκτειναν οὐ πολλούς , καὶ τοὺς Λάκωνας οἳ αὐτόθι ἦσαν .
and when the men of Andros and the Laconians who were there came forth to meet him, the Athenians routed them, shut them up in their city, and killed some few of them.


1.4.23
186
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ τροπαῖόν τε ἔστησε καὶ μείνας αὐτοῦ ὀλίγας ἡμέρας ἔπλευσεν εἰς Σάμον , κ- ἐκεῖθεν ὁρμώμενος ἐπολέμει .
Accordingly Alcibiades set up a trophy, and after remaining there a								few days, sailed to Samos, and from Samos								as a base prosecuted the war.


1.5.1
187
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι πρότερον τούτων οὐ πολλῷ χρόνῳ Κρατησιππίδᾳ τῆς ναυαρχίας παρεληλυθυίας Λύσανδρον ἐξέπεμψαν ναύαρχον .
Not long before this the Lacedaemonians had sent out Lysander as admiral, since Cratesippidas’ term of office had expired.


1.5.1
188
ὁ δὲ ἀφικόμενος εἰς Ῥόδον καὶ ναῦς ἐκεῖθεν λαβών , εἰς Κῶ καὶ Μίλητον ἔπλευσεν , ἐκεῖθεν δ’ εἰς Ἔφεσον , καὶ ἐκεῖ ἔμεινε ναῦς ἔχων ἑβδομήκοντα μέχρι οὗ Κῦρος εἰς Σάρδεις ἀφίκετο .
And after Lysander had arrived at Rhodes and secured some ships there, he sailed to Cos and Miletus, and from there to Ephesus, where he remained with seventy ships until Cyrus arrived at Sardis.


1.5.2
189
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἧκεν , ἀνέβη πρὸς αὐτὸν σὺν τοῖς ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος πρέσβεσιν .
Then and there they told Cyrus of the deeds of which Tissaphernes had been guilty,


1.5.2
190
ἐνταῦθα δὴ κατά τε τοῦ Τισσαφέρνους ἔλεγον ἃ πεποιηκὼς εἴη , αὐτοῦ τε Κύρου ἐδέοντο ὡς προθυμοτάτου πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον γενέσθαι .
and begged him to show the utmost zeal in the war.


1.5.3
191
Κῦρος δὲ τόν τε πατέρα ἔφη ταῦτα ἐπεσταλκέναι καὶ αὐτὸς οὐκ ἄλλ’ ἐγνωκέναι , ἀλλὰ πάντα ποιήσειν ·
Cyrus replied that this was what his father had instructed him to do, and that he had no other intention himself, but would do everything possible;


1.5.3
192
ἔχων δὲ ἥκειν τάλαντα πεντακόσια ·
he had brought with him, he said, five hundred talents;


1.5.3
193
ἐὰν δὲ ταῦτα ἐπιλίπῃ , τοῖς ἰδίοις χρήσεσθαι ἔφη , ἃ ὁ πατὴρ αὐτῷ ἔδωκεν ·
if this amount should prove insufficient, he would use his own money, which his father had given him;


1.5.3
194
ἐὰν δὲ καὶ ταῦτα , καὶ τὸν θρόνον κατακόψειν ἐφ’ οὗ ἐκάθητο , ὄντα ἀργυροῦν καὶ χρυσοῦν .
and if this too should prove inadequate, he would go so far as to break up the throne whereon he sat, which was of silver and gold.


1.5.4
195
οἱ δὲ ταῦτά τε ἐπῄνουν καὶ ἐκέλευον αὐτὸν τάξαι τῷ ναύτῃ δραχμὴν Ἀττικήν , διδάσκοντες ὅτι , ἂν οὗτος ὁ μισθὸς γένηται , οἱ τῶν Ἀθηναίων ναῦται ἀπολείψουσι τὰς ναῦς , καὶ μείω χρήματα ἀναλώσει .
The ambassadors thanked him, and urged him to make the wage of each								sailor an Attic drachma a day, explaining that if this								were made the rate, the sailors of the Athenian fleet would desert								their ships, and hence he would spend less money.


1.5.5
196
ὁ δὲ καλῶς μὲν ἔφη αὐτοὺς λέγειν , οὐ δυνατὸν δ’ εἶναι παρ’ ἃ βασιλεὺς ἐπέστειλεν αὐτῷ ἄλλα ποιεῖν .
He replied that their plan was a good one, but that it was not possible for him to act contrary to the King’s instructions;


1.5.5
197
εἶναι δὲ καὶ τὰς συνθήκας οὕτως ἐχούσας , τριάκοντα μνᾶς ἑκάστῃ νηὶ τοῦ μηνὸς διδόναι , ὁπόσας ἂν βούλωνται τρέφειν Λακεδαιμόνιοι .
besides, the original compact ran in this way, that the King should give thirty minae per month to each ship, whatever number of ships the Lacedaemonians might wish to maintain.


1.5.6
198
ὁ δὲ Λύσανδρος τότε μὲν ἐσιώπησε ·
Lysander accordingly dropped the matter for the moment;


1.5.6
199
μετὰ δὲ τὸ δεῖπνον , ἐπεὶ αὐτῷ προπιὼν ὁ Κῦρος ἤρετο τί ἂν μάλιστα χαρίζοιτο ποιῶν , εἶπεν ὅτι Εἰ πρὸς τὸν μισθὸν ἑκάστῳ ναύτῃ ὀβολὸν προσθείης .
but after dinner, when Cyrus drank his health and asked him by what act he could gratify him most, Lysander replied: "By adding an obol to the pay of each sailor."


1.5.7
200
ἐκ δὲ τούτου τέτταρες ὀβολοὶ ἦν ὁ μισθός , πρότερον δὲ τριώβολον .
And from this time forth the wage was four obols, whereas it had previously been three.


1.5.7
201
καὶ τόν τε προοφειλόμενον ἀπέδωκε καὶ ἔτι μηνὸς προέδωκεν , ὥστε τὸ στράτευμα πολὺ προθυμότερον εἶναι .
Cyrus also settled the arrears of pay and gave them a month’s wage in advance besides, so that the men of the fleet were much more zealous.


1.5.8
202
οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι ἀκούοντες ταῦτα ἀθύμως μὲν εἶχον , ἔπεμπον δὲ πρὸς τὸν Κῦρον πρέσβεις διὰ Τισσαφέρνους .
Now when the Athenians heard of this, they were despondent, and sent								ambassadors to Cyrus through Tissaphernes.


1.5.9
203
ὁ δὲ οὐ προσεδέχετο , δεομένου Τισσαφέρνους καὶ λέγοντος , ἅπερ αὐτὸς ἐποίει πεισθεὶς ὑπ’ Ἀλκιβιάδου , σκοπεῖν ὅπως τῶν Ἑλλήνων μηδὲ οἵτινες ἰσχυροὶ ὦσιν , ἀλλὰ πάντες ἀσθενεῖς , αὐτοὶ ἐν αὑτοῖς στασιάζοντες .
Cyrus, however, would not receive them, although Tissaphernes urged								him to do so and advised him to see to it that no single Greek state								should become strong, but that all be kept weak through constant								quarrelling among themselves,—the policy he himself had followed on								the advice of Alcibiades.


1.5.10
204
καὶ ὁ μὲν Λύσανδρος , ἐπεὶ αὐτῷ τὸ ναυτικὸν συνετέτακτο , ἀνελκύσας τὰς ἐν τῇ Ἐφέσῳ οὔσας ναῦς ἐνενήκοντα ἡσυχίαν ἦγεν , ἐπισκευάζων καὶ ἀναψύχων αὐτάς .
As for Lysander, when he had finished								organising his fleet, he hauled ashore the ships which were at								Ephesus, now ninety in number, and kept quiet, while the ships were								being dried out and repaired.


1.5.11
205
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ ἀκούσας Θρασύβουλον ἔξω Ἑλλησπόντου ἥκοντα τειχίζειν Φώκαιαν διέπλευσε πρὸς αὐτόν , καταλιπὼν ἐπὶ ταῖς ναυσὶν Ἀντίοχον τὸν αὑτοῦ κυβερνήτην , ἐπιστείλας μὴ ἐπιπλεῖν ἐπὶ τὰς Λυσάνδρου ναῦς .
Meantime Alcibiades, hearing that Thrasybulus had come out from the								Hellespont and was investing Phocaea, sailed across to see him,								leaving in command of the fleet Antiochus, the pilot of his own								ship, with orders not to attack Lysander’s ships.


1.5.12
206
ὁ δὲ Ἀντίοχος τῇ τε αὑτοῦ νηὶ καὶ ἄλλῃ ἐκ Νοτίου εἰς τὸν λιμένα τῶν Ἐφεσίων εἰσπλεύσας παρ’ αὐτὰς τὰς πρῴρας τῶν Λυσάνδρου νεῶν παρέπλει .
Antiochus, however, with his own ship and one other sailed from								Notium into the harbour of Ephesus and coasted along past the very								prows of Lysander’s ships.


1.5.13
207
ὁ δὲ Λύσανδρος τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὀλίγας τῶν νεῶν καθελκύσας ἐδίωκεν αὐτόν , ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι τῷ Ἀντιόχῳ ἐβοήθουν πλείοσι ναυσί , τότε δὴ καὶ πάσας συντάξας ἐπέπλει .
Lysander at first launched a few ships and pursued him,


1.5.13
208
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐκ τοῦ Νοτίου καθελκύσαντες τὰς λοιπὰς τριήρεις ἀνήχθησαν , ὡς ἕκαστος ἤνοιξεν .
but when the Athenians came to the aid of Antiochus with more ships, he then formed into line of battle every ship he had and sailed against them.


1.5.14
209
ἐκ τούτου δ’ ἐναυμάχησαν οἱ μὲν ἐν τάξει , οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι διεσπαρμέναις ταῖς ναυσί , μέχρι οὗ ἔφυγον ἀπολέσαντες πεντεκαίδεκα τριήρεις .
From that moment they fell to fighting, the one side in good order, but the Athenians with their ships scattered, and fought until the Athenians took to flight, after losing fifteen triremes.


1.5.14
210
τῶν δὲ ἀνδρῶν οἱ μὲν πλεῖστοι ἐξέφυγον , οἱ δ’ ἐζωγρήθησαν .
As for the men upon them, the greater part escaped, but some were taken prisoners.


1.5.14
211
Λύσανδρος δὲ τάς τε ναῦς ἀναλαβὼν καὶ τροπαῖον στήσας ἐπὶ τοῦ Νοτίου διέπλευσεν εἰς Ἔφεσον , οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι εἰς Σάμον .
Then Lysander, after taking possession of his prizes and setting up a trophy at Notium, sailed across to Ephesus, while the Athenians went to Samos.


1.5.15
212
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Ἀλκιβιάδης ἐλθὼν εἰς Σάμον ἀνήχθη ταῖς ναυσὶν ἁπάσαις ἐπὶ τὸν λιμένα τῶν Ἐφεσίων , καὶ πρὸ τοῦ στόματος παρέταξεν , εἴ τις βούλοιτο ναυμαχεῖν .
After this Alcibiades came to Samos, set sail with all his ships to the harbour of Ephesus, and formed the fleet in line at the mouth of the harbour as a challenge to battle, in case anyone cared to fight.


1.5.15
213
ἐπειδὴ δὲ Λύσανδρος οὐκ ἀντανήγαγε διὰ τὸ πολλαῖς ναυσὶν ἐλαττοῦσθαι , ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Σάμον .
But when Lysander did not sail out against him, because his fleet was considerably inferior in numbers, Alcibiades sailed back to Samos.


1.5.15
214
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ ὀλίγῳ ὕστερον αἱροῦσι Δελφίνιον καὶ Ἠιόνα .
And a little later the Lacedaemonians captured Delphinium and Eion.


1.5.16
215
οἱ δὲ ἐν οἴκῳ Ἀθηναῖοι , ἐπειδὴ ἠγγέλθη ἡ ναυμαχία , χαλεπῶς εἶχον τῷ Ἀλκιβιάδῃ , οἰόμενοι δι’ ἀμέλειάν τε καὶ ἀκράτειαν ἀπολωλεκέναι τὰς ναῦς , καὶ στρατηγοὺς εἵλοντο ἄλλους δέκα , Κόνωνα , Διομέδοντα , Λέοντα , Περικλέα , Ἐρασινίδην , Ἀριστοκράτην , Ἀρχέστρατον , Πρωτόμαχον , Θράσυλλον , Ἀριστογένην .
When the Athenians at home got the								news of the battle at Notium, they were angry with Alcibiades,								thinking that he had lost the ships through neglect of duty and								dissolute conduct, and they chose ten new generals, Conon, Diomedon,								Leon, Pericles, Erasinides, Aristocrates, Archestratus, Protomachus,								Thrasyllus, and Aristogenes.


1.5.17
216
Ἀλκιβιάδης μὲν οὖν πονηρῶς καὶ ἐν τῇ στρατιᾷ φερόμενος , λαβὼν τριήρη μίαν ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Χερρόνησον εἰς τὰ ἑαυτοῦ τείχη .
So Alcibiades, who was in disfavour with the army as well, took a								trireme and sailed away to his castle in the Chersonese.


1.5.18
217
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Κόνων ἐκ τῆς Ἄνδρου σὺν αἷς εἶχε ναυσὶν εἴκοσιν ψηφισαμένων Ἀθηναίων εἰς Σάμον ἔπλευσεν ἐπὶ τὸ ναυτικόν .
After this Conon set sail from Andros, with the twenty ships which he had, to Samos, there to assume command of the fleet in accordance with the vote which the Athenians had passed.


1.5.18
218
ἀντὶ δὲ Κόνωνος εἰς Ἄνδρον ἔπεμψαν Φανοσθένην , τέτταρας ναῦς ἔχοντα .
They also sent Phanosthenes to Andros, with four ships, to replace Conon.


1.5.19
219
οὗτος περιτυχὼν δυοῖν τριήροιν Θουρίαιν ἔλαβεν αὐτοῖς ἀνδράσι ·
On the way Phanosthenes fell in with two Thurian triremes and captured them, crews and all;


1.5.19
220
καὶ τοὺς μὲν αἰχμαλώτους ἅπαντας ἔδησαν Ἀθηναῖοι , τὸν δὲ ἄρχοντα αὐτῶν Δωριέα , ὄντα μὲν Ῥόδιον , πάλαι δὲ φυγάδα ἐξ Ἀθηνῶν καὶ Ῥόδου ὑπὸ Ἀθηναίων κατεψηφισμένων αὐτοῦ θάνατον καὶ τῶν ἐκείνου συγγενῶν , πολιτεύοντα παρ’ αὐτοῖς , ἐλεήσαντες ἀφεῖσαν οὐδὲ χρήματα πραξάμενοι .
and the men who were thus taken were all imprisoned by the Athenians, but their commander, Dorieus, a Rhodian by birth, but some time before exiled from both Athens and Rhodes by the Athenians, who had condemned him and his kinsmen to death, and now a citizen of Thurii, they set free without even exacting a ransom, taking pity upon him.


1.5.20
221
Κόνων δ’ ἐπεὶ εἰς τὴν Σάμον ἀφίκετο καὶ τὸ ναυτικὸν κατέλαβεν ἀθύμως ἔχον , συμπληρώσας τριήρεις ἑβδομήκοντα ἀντὶ τῶν προτέρων , οὐσῶν πλέον ἢ ἑκατόν , καὶ ταύταις ἀναγαγόμενος μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων στρατηγῶν , ἄλλοτε ἄλλῃ ἀποβαίνων τῆς τῶν πολεμίων χώρας ἐλῄζετο .
When, meanwhile, Conon had arrived at Samos, where he found the								Athenian fleet in a state of despondency, he manned with full								complements seventy triremes instead of the former number, which was								more than a hundred, and setting out with this fleet, in company								with the other generals, landed here and there in the enemy’s								territory and plundered it.


1.5.21
222
καὶ ὁ ἐνιαυτὸς ἔληγεν , ἐν ᾧ Καρχηδόνιοι εἰς Σικελίαν στρατεύσαντες εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατὸν τριήρεσι καὶ πεζῆς στρατιᾶς δώδεκα μυριάσιν εἷλον Ἀκράγαντα λιμῷ , μάχῃ μὲν ἡττηθέντες , προσκαθεζόμενοι δὲ ἑπτὰ μῆνας .
So the year ended, being the year in								which the Carthaginians made an expedition to Sicily with one								hundred and twenty triremes and an army of one hundred and twenty								thousand men, and although defeated in battle, starved Acragas into								submission after besieging it for seven months.


1.6.1
223
τῷ δ’ ἐπιόντι ἔτει , ᾧ ἥ τε σελήνη ἐξέλιπεν ἑσπέρας καὶ ὁ παλαιὸς τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς νεὼς ἐν Ἀθήναις ἐνεπρήσθη , Πιτύα μὲν ἐφορεύοντος , ἄρχοντος δὲ Καλλίου Ἀθήνησιν , οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τῷ Λυσάνδρῳ παρεληλυθότος ἤδη τοῦ χρόνου καὶ τῷ πολέμῳ τεττάρων καὶ εἴκοσιν ἐτῶν ἔπεμψαν ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς Καλλικρατίδαν .
In the ensuing year—the year in which									there was an eclipse of the								moon one evening, and the old temple of								Athena at Athens was burned, Pityas being now ephor at Sparta and								Callias archon at Athens—the Lacedaemonians sent Callicratidas to								take command of the fleet, since								Lysander’s term of office had ended (and with it the twenty-fourth								year of the war).


1.6.2
224
ὅτε δὲ παρεδίδου ὁ Λύσανδρος τὰς ναῦς , ἔλεγε τῷ Καλλικρατίδᾳ ὅτι θαλαττοκράτωρ τε παραδιδοίη καὶ ναυμαχίᾳ νενικηκώς .
And when Lysander delivered over the ships, he told Callicratidas that he did so as master of the sea and victor in battle.


1.6.2
225
ὁ δὲ αὐτὸν ἐκέλευσεν ἐξ Ἐφέσου ἐν ἀριστερᾷ Σάμου παραπλεύσαντα , οὗ ἦσαν αἱ τῶν Ἀθηναίων νῆες , ἐν Μιλήτῳ τὰς ναῦς παραδοῦναι , καὶ ὁμολογήσειν θαλαττοκρατεῖν .
Callicratidas, however, bade him coast along from Ephesus on the left of Samos, where the Athenian ships were, and deliver over the fleet at Miletus; then, he said, he would grant him that he was master of the sea.


1.6.3
226
οὐ φαμένου δὲ τοῦ Λυσάνδρου πολυπραγμονεῖν ἄλλου ἄρχοντος , αὐτὸς ὁ Καλλικρατίδας πρὸς αἷς παρὰ Λυσάνδρου ἔλαβε ναυσὶ προσεπλήρωσεν ἐκ Χίου καὶ Ῥόδου καὶ ἄλλοθεν ἀπὸ τῶν συμμάχων πεντήκοντα ναῦς .
But when Lysander replied that he would not meddle when another was commander,


1.6.3
227
ταύτας δὲ πάσας ἁθροίσας , οὔσας τετταράκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν , παρεσκευάζετο ὡς ἀπαντησόμενος τοῖς πολεμίοις .
Callicratidas, left to himself, manned with sailors from Chios and Rhodes and other allied states fifty ships in addition to those which he had received from Lysander. And after assembling the entire fleet, a total of one hundred and forty ships, he prepared to meet the enemy.


1.6.4
228
καταμαθὼν δ’ ὑπὸ τῶν Λυσάνδρου φίλων καταστασιαζόμενος , οὐ μόνον ἀπροθύμως ὑπηρετούντων , ἀλλὰ καὶ διαθροούντων ἐν ταῖς πόλεσιν ὅτι Λακεδαιμόνιοι μέγιστα παραπίπτοιεν ἐν τῷ διαλλάττειν τοὺς ναυάρχους , πολλάκις ἀνεπιτηδείων γιγνομένων καὶ ἄρτι συνιέντων τὰ ναυτικὰ καὶ ἀνθρώποις ὡς χρηστέον οὐ γιγνωσκόντων ἀπείρους θαλάττης πέμποντες καὶ ἀγνῶτας τοῖς ἐκεῖ , κινδυνεύοιέν τι παθεῖν διὰ τοῦτο , ἐκ τούτου δὲ ὁ Καλλικρατίδας συγκαλέσας τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίων ἐκεῖ παρόντας ἔλεγεν αὐτοῖς τοιάδε .
But when he found out that Lysander’s friends were intriguing against								him,—they not only rendered half-hearted service, but also spread								the report in the cities that the Lacedaemonians made a serious								mistake in changing their admirals; for in place of men who were								proving themselves fit and were just coming to understand naval								matters and knew well how to deal with men, they frequently sent out								men who were unacquainted with the sea and unknown to the people								near the seat of war; and there was danger, they said, of their								meeting with disaster on this account,—after hearing of all this								Callicratidas called together the Lacedaemonians who were there and								addressed them as follows:


1.6.5
229
ἐμοὶ μὲν ἀρκεῖ οἴκοι μένειν , καὶ εἴτε Λύσανδρος εἴτε ἄλλος τις ἐμπειρότερος περὶ τὰ ναυτικὰ βούλεται εἶναι , οὐ κωλύω τὸ κατ’ ἐμέ ·
I, for my part, am content to stay at home, and if Lysander or anyone else professes to be more experienced in naval affairs, I will not stand in his way so far as I am concerned;


1.6.5
230
ἐγὼ δ’ ὑπὸ τῆς πόλεως ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς πεμφθεὶς οὐκ ἔχω τί ἄλλο ποιῶ ἢ τὰ κελευόμενα ὡς ἂν δύνωμαι κράτιστα .
but it is I who have been sent by the state to command the fleet, and I cannot do otherwise than obey my orders to the best of my power.


1.6.5
231
ὑμεῖς δὲ πρὸς ἃ ἐγώ τε φιλοτιμοῦμαι καὶ ἡ πόλις ἡμῶν αἰτιάζεται ( ἴστε γὰρ αὐτὰ ὥσπερ καὶ ἐγώ ) , συμβουλεύετε τὰ ἄριστα ὑμῖν δοκοῦντα εἶναι περὶ τοῦ ἐμὲ ἐνθάδε μένειν ἢ οἴκαδε ἀποπλεῖν ἐροῦντα τὰ καθεστῶτα ἐνθάδε .
As for you, in view of the ambition which I cherish and the criticisms which our state incurs,—and you know them as well as I do,—give me whatever advice seems to you best on the question of my remaining here or sailing back home to report the conditions which exist here.


1.6.6
232
οὐδενὸς δὲ τολμήσαντος ἄλλο τι εἰπεῖν ἢ τοῖς οἴκοι πείθεσθαι ποιεῖν τε ἐφ’ ἃ ἥκει , ἐλθὼν παρὰ Κῦρον ᾔτει μισθὸν τοῖς ναύταις ·
Since no one dared to propose anything else than that he should obey the authorities at home and do the work for which he had come,


1.6.6
233
ὁ δὲ αὐτῷ εἶπε δύο ἡμέρας ἐπισχεῖν .
he went to Cyrus and asked for pay for the sailors; Cyrus, however, told him to wait for two days.


1.6.7
234
Καλλικρατίδας δὲ ἀχθεσθεὶς τῇ ἀναβολῇ καὶ ταῖς ἐπὶ τὰς θύρας φοιτήσεσιν ὀργισθεὶς καὶ εἰπὼν ἀθλιωτάτους εἶναι τοὺς Ἕλληνας , ὅτι βαρβάρους κολακεύουσιν ἕνεκα ἀργυρίου , φάσκων τε , ἂν σωθῇ οἴκαδε , κατά γε τὸ αὑτοῦ δυνατὸν διαλλάξειν Ἀθηναίους καὶ Λακεδαιμονίους , ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Μίλητον ·
But Callicratidas, indignant at being thus put off and driven to								anger by having to dance attendance at his gates, declaring that the								Greeks were in a sorry plight, toadying to barbarians for the sake								of money, and saying that if he reached home in safety he would do								his best to reconcile the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians, sailed								away to Miletus;


1.6.8
235
κ- ἐκεῖθεν πέμψας τριήρεις εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἐπὶ χρήματα , ἐκκλησίαν ἁθροίσας τῶν Μιλησίων τάδε εἶπεν .
and after despatching triremes from there to Lacedaemon to get money, he gathered the Milesians in assembly and spoke as follows:


1.6.8
236
ἐμοὶ μέν , ὦ Μιλήσιοι , ἀνάγκη τοῖς οἴκοι ἄρχουσι πείθεσθαι ·
Upon me, men of Miletus, lies the necessity of obeying the authorities at home;


1.6.8
237
ὑμᾶς δὲ ἐγὼ ἀξιῶ προθυμοτάτους εἶναι εἰς τὸν πόλεμον διὰ τὸ οἰκοῦντας ἐν βαρβάροις πλεῖστα κακὰ ἤδη ὑπ’ αὐτῶν πεπονθέναι .
and as for you, I claim that you should show the utmost zeal in this war, because you dwell among barbarians and in the past have suffered very many ills at their hands.


1.6.9
238
δεῖ δ’ ὑμᾶς ἐξηγεῖσθαι τοῖς ἄλλοις συμμάχοις ὅπως ἂν τάχιστά τε καὶ μάλιστα βλάπτωμεν τοὺς πολεμίους , ἕως ἂν οἱ ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος ἥκωσιν , οὓς ἐγὼ ἔπεμψα χρήματα ἄξοντας , ἐπεὶ τὰ ἐνθάδε ὑπάρχοντα Λύσανδρος Κύρῳ ἀποδοὺς ὡς περιττὰ ὄντα οἴχεται ·
And you should as leaders show the								other allies how we may inflict the utmost harm upon the enemy in								the shortest time, until the people return from Lacedaemon whom I								have sent thither to get money;


1.6.10
239
Κῦρος δὲ ἐλθόντος ἐμοῦ ἐπ’ αὐτὸν ἀεὶ ἀνεβάλλετό μοι διαλεχθῆναι , ἐγὼ δ’ ἐπὶ τὰς ἐκείνου θύρας φοιτᾶν οὐκ ἐδυνάμην ἐμαυτὸν πεῖσαι .
for the money which Lysander had on hand he gave back to Cyrus, as								though it were unneeded surplus, and went his way; and as for Cyrus,								whenever I visited him he invariably put off giving me an audience,								and I could not bring myself to dance attendance at his gates.


1.6.11
240
ὑπισχνοῦμαι δ’ ὑμῖν ἀντὶ τῶν συμβάντων ἡμῖν ἀγαθῶν ἐν τῷ χρόνῳ ᾧ ἂν ἐκεῖνα προσδεχώμεθα χάριν ἀξίαν ἀποδώσειν .
But I promise you that for whatever good results we achieve while we are waiting for the funds from Sparta I will make you an adequate return.


1.6.11
241
ἀλλὰ σὺν τοῖς θεοῖς δείξωμεν τοῖς βαρβάροις ὅτι καὶ ἄνευ τοῦ ἐκείνους θαυμάζειν δυνάμεθα τοὺς ἐχθροὺς τιμωρεῖσθαι .
Let us then, with the help of the gods, show the barbarians that even without paying court to them we can punish our enemies.


1.6.12
242
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταῦτ’ εἶπεν , ἀνιστάμενοι πολλοὶ καὶ μάλιστα οἱ αἰτιαζόμενοι ἐναντιοῦσθαι δεδιότες εἰσηγοῦντο πόρον χρημάτων καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐπαγγελλόμενοι ἰδίᾳ .
When he had said this, many arose, particularly those who were accused of opposing him, and in alarm proposed a grant of money, offering private contributions as well.


1.6.12
243
λαβὼν δὲ ταῦτα ἐκεῖνος καὶ ἐκ Χίου πεντεδραχμίαν ἑκάστῳ τῶν ναυτῶν ἐφοδιασάμενος ἔπλευσε τῆς Λέσβου ἐπὶ Μήθυμναν πολεμίαν οὖσαν .
And taking this money and supplying from Chios a payment of five drachmae apiece for his seamen, he sailed against Methymna, in Lesbos, which was hostile.


1.6.13
244
οὐ βουλομένων δὲ τῶν Μηθυμναίων προσχωρεῖν , ἀλλ’ ἐμφρούρων ὄντων Ἀθηναίων , καὶ τῶν τὰ πράγματα ἐχόντων ἀττικιζόντων , προσβαλὼν αἱρεῖ τὴν πόλιν κατὰ κράτος .
And when the Methymnaeans refused to surrender,—for there was an								Athenian garrison in the place and those who had control of the								government were partisans of Athens, —Callicratidas attacked the								city and captured it by storm.


1.6.14
245
τὰ μὲν οὖν χρήματα πάντα διήρπασαν οἱ στρατιῶται , τὰ δὲ ἀνδράποδα πάντα συνήθροισεν ὁ Καλλικρατίδας εἰς τὴν ἀγοράν , καὶ κελευόντων τῶν συμμάχων ἀποδόσθαι καὶ τοὺς Μηθυμναίους οὐκ ἔφη ἑαυτοῦ γε ἄρχοντος οὐδέν’ ἂν Ἑλλήνων εἰς τὸ ἐκείνου δυνατὸν ἀνδραποδισθῆναι .
All the property which it contained the soldiers seized as booty, but								all the captives Callicratidas assembled in the market-place; and								when his allies urged him to sell into slavery the Methymnaeans as								well as the Athenians, he said that while he was commander no Greek								should be enslaved if he could help								it.


1.6.15
246
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ τοὺς μὲν ἐλευθέρους ἀφῆκε , τοὺς δὲ τῶν Ἀθηναίων φρουροὺς καὶ τὰ ἀνδράποδα τὰ δοῦλα πάντα ἀπέδοτο ·
Accordingly on the next day he let the Methymnaeans go free, but sold the members of the Athenian garrison and such of the captives as were slaves;


1.6.15
247
Κόνωνι δὲ εἶπεν ὅτι παύσει αὐτὸν μοιχῶντα τὴν θάλατταν .
then he sent word to Conon that he would put a stop to his playing the wanton with his bride, the sea.


1.6.15
248
κατιδὼν δὲ αὐτὸν ἀναγόμενον ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ , ἐδίωκεν ὑποτεμνόμενος τὸν εἰς Σάμον πλοῦν , ὅπως μὴ ἐκεῖσε φύγοι .
And when he caught sight of Conon putting out to sea at daybreak, he pursued him, aiming to cut off his course to Samos, so that he could not direct his flight thither.


1.6.16
249
Κόνων δ’ ἔφευγε ταῖς ναυσὶν εὖ πλεούσαις διὰ τὸ ἐκ πολλῶν πληρωμάτων εἰς ὀλίγας ἐκλελέχθαι τοὺς ἀρίστους ἐρέτας , καὶ καταφεύγει εἰς Μυτιλήνην τῆς Λέσβου καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ τῶν δέκα στρατηγῶν Λέων καὶ Ἐρασινίδης .
Conon’s ships, however, made good speed as he fled, because the best oarsmen had been picked out of a great many crews and assembled in a few;


1.6.16
250
Καλλικρατίδας δὲ συνεισέπλευσεν εἰς τὸν λιμένα , διώκων ναυσὶν ἑκατὸν καὶ ἑβδομήκοντα .
in the end he sought refuge in the harbour of Mytilene, in Lesbos, and with him two more of the ten generals, Leon and Erasinides. But Callicratidas, pursuing with one hundred and seventy ships, sailed into the harbour simultaneously.


1.6.17
251
Κόνων δὲ ὡς ἔφθη ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων κατακωλυθείς , ἠναγκάσθη ναυμαχῆσαι πρὸς τῷ λιμένι , καὶ ἀπώλεσε ναῦς τριάκοντα ·
And Conon, thwarted in his plan by the enemy’s swiftness, was forced to give battle at the mouth of the harbour and lost thirty ships;


1.6.17
252
οἱ δὲ ἄνδρες εἰς τὴν γῆν ἀπέφυγον ·
their crews, however, escaped to the land;


1.6.17
253
τὰς δὲ λοιπὰς τῶν νεῶν , τετταράκοντα οὔσας , ὑπὸ τῷ τείχει ἀνείλκυσε .
and the remainder of his ships, forty in number, he drew up on shore under the wall of the city.


1.6.18
254
Καλλικρατίδας δὲ ἐν τῷ λιμένι ὁρμισάμενος ἐπολιόρκει ἐνταῦθα , τὸν ἔκπλουν ἔχων .
Thereupon Callicratidas anchored in the harbour and blockaded him on that side, holding the outlet to the sea.


1.6.18
255
καὶ κατὰ γῆν μεταπεμψάμενος τοὺς Μηθυμναίους πανδημεὶ καὶ ἐκ τῆς Χίου τὸ στράτευμα διεβίβασε ·
As for the land side, he summoned the Methymnaeans to come to his aid with their entire force and brought over his army from Chios;


1.6.18
256
χρήματά τε παρὰ Κύρου αὐτῷ ἦλθεν .
and money came to him from Cyrus.


1.6.19
257
ὁ δὲ Κόνων ἐπεὶ ἐπολιορκεῖτο καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν , καὶ σίτων οὐδαμόθεν ἦν εὐπορῆσαι , οἱ δὲ ἄνθρωποι πολλοὶ ἐν τῇ πόλει ἦσαν καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι οὐκ ἐβοήθουν διὰ τὸ μὴ πυνθάνεσθαι ταῦτα , καθελκύσας τῶν νεῶν τὰς ἄριστα πλεούσας δύο ἐπλήρωσε πρὸ ἡμέρας , ἐξ ἁπασῶν τῶν νεῶν τοὺς ἀρίστους ἐρέτας ἐκλέξας καὶ τοὺς ἐπιβάτας εἰς κοίλην ναῦν μεταβιβάσας καὶ τὰ παραρύματα παραβαλών .
When Conon found himself blockaded								both by land and by sea, and was unable to procure provisions from								anywhere,—and the people in the city were many, and the Athenians could not come to his								aid because they had not learned of these events,—he launched two of								his fastest ships and manned them before daybreak, picking out the								best oarsmen from his whole fleet, shifting the marines to the hold								of the ships, and setting up the side screens.


1.6.20
258
τὴν μὲν οὖν ἡμέραν οὕτως ἀνεῖχον , εἰς δὲ τὴν ἑσπέραν , ἐπεὶ σκότος εἴη , ἐξεβίβαζεν , ὡς μὴ καταδήλους εἶναι τοῖς πολεμίοις ταῦτα ποιοῦντας .
They continued in this way through the day, but each evening he had them disembark when darkness came on, so that the enemy might not perceive that they were so doing.


1.6.20
259
πέμπτῃ δὲ ἡμέρᾳ εἰσθέμενοι σῖτα μέτρια , ἐπειδὴ ἤδη μέσον ἡμέρας ἦν καὶ οἱ ἐφορμοῦντες ὀλιγώρως εἶχον καὶ ἔνιοι ἀνεπαύοντο , ἐξέπλευσαν ἔξω τοῦ λιμένος , καὶ ἡ μὲν ἐπὶ Ἑλλησπόντου ὥρμησεν , ἡ δὲ εἰς τὸ πέλαγος .
On the fifth day they put on board a moderate quantity of provisions, and when it came to be midday and the blockaders were careless and some of them asleep, they rowed out of the harbour, and one of the ships set out for the Hellespont and the other to the open sea.


1.6.21
260
τῶν δ’ ἐφορμούντων ὡς ἕκαστοι ἤνοιγον , τάς τε ἀγκύρας ἀποκόπτοντες καὶ ἐγειρόμενοι ἐβοήθουν τεταραγμένοι , τυχόντες ἐν τῇ γῇ ἀριστοποιούμενοι ·
And the blockaders, as they severally got their ships clear of one another, cutting away their anchors and rousing themselves from sleep, hastened to the pursuit in confusion, for it chanced that they had been breakfasting on the shore;


1.6.21
261
εἰσβάντες δὲ ἐδίωκον τὴν εἰς τὸ πέλαγος ἀφορμήσασαν , καὶ ἅμα τῷ ἡλίῳ δύνοντι κατέλαβον , καὶ κρατήσαντες μάχῃ , ἀναδησάμενοι ἀπῆγον εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον αὐτοῖς ἀνδράσιν .
and when they had embarked, they pursued the vessel which had made for the open sea, and at sunset they overhauled her and, after capturing her in battle, took her in tow and brought her back, men and all, to their fleet.


1.6.22
262
ἡ δ’ ἐπὶ τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου φυγοῦσα ναῦς διέφυγε , καὶ ἀφικομένη εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας ἐξαγγέλλει τὴν πολιορκίαν .
But the ship which fled toward the Hellespont escaped, and on its arrival at Athens reported the blockade.


1.6.22
263
Διομέδων δὲ βοηθῶν Κόνωνι πολιορκουμένῳ δώδεκα ναυσὶν ὡρμίσατο εἰς τὸν εὔριπον τὸν τῶν Μυτιληναίων .
Meanwhile Diomedon, seeking to aid Conon, blockaded as he was, anchored with twelve ships in the strait of Mytilene.


1.6.23
264
ὁ δὲ Καλλικρατίδας ἐπιπλεύσας αὐτῷ ἐξαίφνης δέκα μὲν τῶν νεῶν ἔλαβε , Διομέδων δ’ ἔφυγε τῇ τε αὑτοῦ καὶ ἄλλῃ .
Callicratidas, however, sailed down upon him suddenly and captured								ten of his ships, Diomedon escaping with his own ship and one								other.


1.6.24
265
οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι τὰ γεγενημένα καὶ τὴν πολιορκίαν ἐπεὶ ἤκουσαν , ἐψηφίσαντο βοηθεῖν ναυσὶν ἑκατὸν καὶ δέκα , εἰσβιβάζοντες τοὺς ἐν τῇ ἡλικίᾳ ὄντας ἅπαντας καὶ δούλους καὶ ἐλευθέρους ·
When the Athenians heard of what had happened and of the blockade, they voted to go to the rescue with one hundred and ten ships, putting aboard all who were of military age, whether slave or free;


1.6.24
266
καὶ πληρώσαντες τὰς δέκα καὶ ἑκατὸν ἐν τριάκοντα ἡμέραις ἀπῆραν .
and within thirty days they manned the one hundred and ten ships and set forth.


1.6.24
267
εἰσέβησαν δὲ καὶ τῶν ἱππέων πολλοί .
Even the knights went aboard in considerable numbers.


1.6.25
268
μετὰ ταῦτα ἀνήχθησαν εἰς Σάμον , κ- ἐκεῖθεν Σαμίας ναῦς ἔλαβον δέκα ·
After this they sailed to Samos and from there got ten Samian ships;


1.6.25
269
ἥθροισαν δὲ καὶ ἄλλας πλείους ἢ τριάκοντα παρὰ τῶν ἄλλων συμμάχων , εἰσβαίνειν ἀναγκάσαντες ἅπαντας , ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ εἴ τινες αὐτοῖς ἔτυχον ἔξω οὖσαι .
they collected also more than thirty others from the rest of the allies, forcing everybody to embark, and in like manner whatever Athenian ships happened to be abroad.


1.6.25
270
ἐγένοντο δὲ αἱ πᾶσαι πλείους ἢ πεντήκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν .
And the total number of the ships came to more than one hundred and fifty.


1.6.26
271
ὁ δὲ Καλλικρατίδας ἀκούων τὴν βοήθειαν ἤδη ἐν Σάμῳ οὖσαν , αὐτοῦ μὲν κατέλιπε πεντήκοντα ναῦς καὶ ἄρχοντα Ἐτεόνικον , ταῖς δὲ εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατὸν ἀναχθεὶς ἐδειπνοποιεῖτο τῆς Λέσβου ἐπὶ τῇ Μαλέᾳ ἄκρᾳ ἀντίον τῆς Μυτιλήνης .
Now Callicratidas, when he heard that the relief expedition was								already at Samos, left behind him at Mytilene fifty ships with								Eteonicus as commander, and setting sail with the remaining one								hundred and twenty, took dinner at Cape Malea in Lesbos.


1.6.27
272
τῇ δ’ αὐτῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἔτυχον καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι δειπνοποιούμενοι ἐν ταῖς Ἀργινούσαις ·
On the same day it chanced that the Athenians took dinner on the Arginusae islands.


1.6.27
273
αὗται δ’ εἰσὶν ἀντίον τῆς Λέσβου ἐπὶ τῇ Μαλέᾳ ἄκρᾳ ἀντίον τῆς Μυτιλήνης .
These lie opposite Mytilene.


1.6.28
274
τῆς δὲ νυκτὸς ἰδὼν τὰ πυρά , καί τινων αὐτῷ ἐξαγγειλάντων ὅτι οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι εἶεν , ἀνήγετο περὶ μέσας νύκτας , ὡς ἐξαπιναίως προσπέσοι ·
And when Callicratidas saw their fires during the night and people reported to him that it was the Athenians, he proposed to put to sea at about midnight, in order to attack them unexpectedly;


1.6.28
275
ὕδωρ δ’ ἐπιγενόμενον πολὺ καὶ βρονταὶ διεκώλυσαν τὴν ἀναγωγήν .
but a heavy rain coming on, with thunder, prevented the setting out.


1.6.28
276
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀνέσχεν , ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἔπλει ἐπὶ τὰς Ἀργινούσας .
And when it ceased, he sailed at daybreak for the Arginusae.


1.6.29
277
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι ἀντανήγοντο εἰς τὸ πέλαγος τῷ εὐωνύμῳ , παρατεταγμένοι ὧδε .
The Athenians stood out to meet him, extending their left wing out to sea and arranged in the following order:


1.6.29
278
Ἀριστοκράτης μὲν τὸ εὐώνυμον ἔχων ἡγεῖτο πεντεκαίδεκα ναυσί , μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Διομέδων ἑτέραις πεντεκαίδεκα ·
Aristocrates, in command of the left wing, led the way with fifteen ships, and next in order Diomedon with fifteen more;


1.6.29
279
ἐπετέτακτο δὲ Ἀριστοκράτει μὲν Περικλῆς , Διομέδοντι δὲ Ἐρασινίδης ·
and Pericles was stationed behind Aristocrates and Erasinides behind Diomedon;


1.6.29
280
παρὰ δὲ Διομέδοντα οἱ Σάμιοι δέκα ναυσὶν ἐπὶ μιᾶς τεταγμένοι ·
and beside Diomedon were the Samians with ten ships, drawn up in single line;


1.6.29
281
ἐστρατήγει δὲ αὐτῶν Σάμιος ὀνόματι Ἱππεύς ·
and their commander was a Samian named Hippeus;


1.6.29
282
ἐχόμεναι δ’ αἱ τῶν ταξιάρχων δέκα , καὶ αὐταὶ ἐπὶ μιᾶς ·
and next to them were the ten ships of the taxiarchs, also in single line;


1.6.29
283
ἐπὶ δὲ ταύταις αἱ τῶν ναυάρχων τρεῖς , καὶ εἴ τινες ἄλλαι ἦσαν συμμαχίδες .
and behind these the three ships of the nauarchs and also some ships from the allies;


1.6.30
284
τὸ δὲ δεξιὸν κέρας Πρωτόμαχος εἶχε πεντεκαίδεκα ναυσί ·
and the right wing was under the command of Protomachus, with fifteen ships;


1.6.30
285
παρὰ δ’ αὐτὸν Θράσυλλος ἑτέραις πεντεκαίδεκα ·
and beside him was Thrasyllus with fifteen more;


1.6.30
286
ἐπετέτακτο δὲ Πρωτομάχῳ μὲν Λυσίας , ἔχων τὰς ἴσας ναῦς , Θρασύλλῳ δὲ Ἀριστογένης .
and Lysias, with the same number of ships, was stationed behind Protomachus, and Aristogenes behind Thrasyllus.


1.6.31
287
οὕτω δ’ ἐτάχθησαν , ἵνα μὴ διέκπλουν διδοῖεν ·
The ships were arranged in this way so as not to give the enemy a chance of breaking through the line;


1.6.31
288
χεῖρον γὰρ ἔπλεον .
for the Athenians were inferior in seamanship.


1.6.31
289
αἱ δὲ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἀντιτεταγμέναι ἦσαν ἅπασαι ἐπὶ μιᾶς ὡς πρὸς διέκπλουν καὶ περίπλουν παρεσκευασμέναι , διὰ τὸ βέλτιον πλεῖν .
But all the vessels of the Lacedaemonians were arranged in single line, with a view to breaking through the enemy and circling round him, inasmuch as they had superior seamen.


1.6.31
290
εἶχε δὲ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας Καλλικρατίδας .
And Callicratidas was on the right wing.


1.6.32
291
Ἕρμων δὲ Μεγαρεὺς ὁ τῷ Καλλικρατίδᾳ κυβερνῶν εἶπε πρὸς αὐτὸν ὅτι εἴη καλῶς ἔχον ἀποπλεῦσαι ·
Now Hermon the Megarian, the pilot of Callicratidas’ ship, said to him that it was well to sail away;


1.6.32
292
αἱ γὰρ τριήρεις τῶν Ἀθηναίων πολλῷ πλείους ἦσαν .
for the triremes of the Athenians were far more numerous.


1.6.32
293
Καλλικρατίδας δὲ εἶπεν ὅτι ἡ Σπάρτη οὐδὲν μὴ κάκιον οἰκεῖται αὐτοῦ ἀποθανόντος , φεύγειν δὲ αἰσχρὸν ἔφη εἶναι .
Callicratidas, however, said that Sparta would fare none the worse if he were killed, but flight, he said, would be a disgrace.


1.6.33
294
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐναυμάχησαν χρόνον πολύν , πρῶτον μὲν ἁθρόαι , ἔπειτα δὲ διεσκεδασμέναι .
After this they fell to fighting, and fought for a long time, their ships at first in close order and afterwards scattered.


1.6.33
295
ἐπεὶ δὲ Καλλικρατίδας τε ἐμβαλούσης τῆς νεὼς ἀποπεσὼν εἰς τὴν θάλατταν ἠφανίσθη Πρωτόμαχός τε καὶ οἱ μετ’ αὐτοῦ τῷ δεξιῷ τὸ εὐώνυμον ἐνίκησαν , ἐντεῦθεν φυγὴ τῶν Πελοποννησίων ἐγένετο εἰς Χίον , πλείστων δὲ καὶ εἰς Φώκαιαν ·
But when Callicratidas, as his ship rammed an enemy, fell overboard into the sea and disappeared, and Protomachus and those with him on the right wing defeated the opposing Lacedaemonian left, then began a flight of the Peloponnesians to Chios, though very many went to Phocaea;


1.6.33
296
οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι πάλιν εἰς τὰς Ἀργινούσας κατέπλευσαν .
while the Athenians sailed back to the Arginusae.


1.6.34
297
ἀπώλοντο δὲ τῶν μὲν Ἀθηναίων νῆες πέντε καὶ εἴκοσιν αὐτοῖς ἀνδράσιν ἐκτὸς ὀλίγων τῶν πρὸς τὴν γῆν προσενεχθέντων , τῶν δὲ Πελοποννησίων Λακωνικαὶ μὲν ἐννέα , πασῶν οὐσῶν δέκα , τῶν δ’ ἄλλων συμμάχων πλείους ἢ ἑξήκοντα .
The loss on the Athenian side was twenty-five ships, crews and all,								with the exception of a few men who were brought to shore, and on								the Peloponnesian side nine Laconian ships, out of a total of ten,								and more than sixty ships of the allies.


1.6.35
298
ἔδοξε δὲ καὶ τοῖς τῶν Ἀθηναίων στρατηγοῖς ἑπτὰ μὲν καὶ τετταράκοντα ναυσὶ Θηραμένην τε καὶ Θρασύβουλον τριηράρχους ὄντας καὶ τῶν ταξιάρχων τινὰς πλεῖν ἐπὶ τὰς καταδεδυκυίας ναῦς καὶ τοὺς ἐπ’ αὐτῶν ἀνθρώπους , ταῖς δὲ ἄλλαις ἐπὶ τὰς μετ’ Ἐτεονίκου τῇ Μυτιλήνῃ ἐφορμούσας .
After this victory it was resolved by the Athenian generals that Theramenes and Thrasybulus, who were ship-captains, and some of the taxiarchs, should sail with forty-seven ships to the aid of the disabled vessels and the men on board them,


1.6.35
299
ταῦτα δὲ βουλομένους ποιεῖν ἄνεμος καὶ χειμὼν διεκώλυσεν αὐτοὺς μέγας γενόμενος ·
while they themselves went with the rest of the fleet to attack the ships under Eteonicus which were blockading Mytilene.


1.6.35
300
τροπαῖον δὲ στήσαντες αὐτοῦ ηὐλίζοντο .
But despite their desire to carry out these measures, the wind and a heavy storm which came on prevented them; accordingly, after setting up a trophy, they bivouacked where they were.


1.6.36
301
τῷ δ’ Ἐτεονίκῳ ὁ ὑπηρετικὸς κέλης πάντα ἐξήγγειλε τὰ περὶ τὴν ναυμαχίαν .
As for Eteonicus, the dispatch-boat reported to him the whole story of the battle.


1.6.36
302
ὁ δὲ αὐτὸν πάλιν ἐξέπεμψεν εἰπὼν τοῖς ἐνοῦσι σιωπῇ ἐκπλεῖν καὶ μηδενὶ διαλέγεσθαι , παραχρῆμα δὲ αὖθις πλεῖν εἰς τὸ ἑαυτῶν στρατόπεδον ἐστεφανωμένους καὶ βοῶντας ὅτι Καλλικρατίδας νενίκηκε ναυμαχῶν καὶ ὅτι αἱ τῶν Ἀθηναίων νῆες ἀπολώλασιν ἅπασαι .
He, however, sent the boat out again, telling those who were in it to sail out of the harbour in silence and not talk with anyone, and then to sail back immediately to his fleet, wearing garlands and shouting that Callicratidas had been victorious in battle and that all the ships of the Athenians had been destroyed.


1.6.37
303
καὶ οἱ μὲν τοῦτ’ ἐποίουν ·
This they proceeded to do;


1.6.37
304
αὐτὸς δ’ , ἐπειδὴ ἐκεῖνοι κατέπλεον , ἔθυε τὰ εὐαγγέλια , καὶ τοῖς στρατιώταις παρήγγειλε δειπνοποιεῖσθαι , καὶ τοῖς ἐμπόροις τὰ χρήματα σιωπῇ ἐνθεμένους εἰς τὰ πλοῖα ἀποπλεῖν εἰς Χίον ( ἦν δὲ τὸ πνεῦμα οὔριον ) καὶ τὰς τριήρεις τὴν ταχίστην .
and when they were sailing in, Eteonicus began to offer sacrifices for the good news, and gave orders that the soldiers should take their dinner, that the traders should put their goods into their boats in silence and sail off to Chios (for the wind was favourable), and that the triremes also should sail thither with all speed.


1.6.38
305
αὐτὸς δὲ τὸ πεζὸν ἀπῆγεν εἰς τὴν Μήθυμναν , τὸ στρατόπεδον ἐμπρήσας .
And he himself led his land forces back to Methymna, after setting fire to their camp.


1.6.38
306
Κόνων δὲ καθελκύσας τὰς ναῦς , ἐπεὶ οἵ τε πολέμιοι ἀπεδεδράκεσαν καὶ ὁ ἄνεμος εὐδιαίτερος ἦν , ἀπαντήσας τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις ἤδη ἀνηγμένοις ἐκ τῶν Ἀργινουσῶν ἔφρασε τὰ περὶ τοῦ Ἐτεονίκου .
Conon now launched his ships, and, since the enemy had stolen away and the wind was quieter, went to meet the Athenians, who had by this time set out from the Arginusae, and told them what Eteonicus had done.


1.6.38
307
οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι κατέπλευσαν εἰς τὴν Μυτιλήνην , ἐκεῖθεν δ’ ἐπανήχθησαν εἰς τὴν Χίον , καὶ οὐδὲν διαπραξάμενοι ἀπέπλευσαν ἐπὶ Σάμου .
The Athenians put in to Mytilene, sailed thence against Chios, and, accomplishing nothing there, sailed back towards Samos.


1.7.1
308
οἱ δ’ ἐν οἴκῳ τούτους μὲν τοὺς στρατηγοὺς ἔπαυσαν πλὴν Κόνωνος ·
Now the people at home deposed the above-mentioned generals, with the exception of Conon;


1.7.1
309
πρὸς δὲ τούτῳ εἵλοντο Ἀδείμαντον καὶ τρίτον Φιλοκλέα .
and as his colleagues they chose two men, Adeimantus and Philocles.


1.7.2
310
τῶν δὲ ναυμαχησάντων στρατηγῶν Πρωτόμαχος μὲν καὶ Ἀριστογένης οὐκ ἀπῆλθον εἰς Ἀθήνας , τῶν δὲ ἓξ καταπλευσάντων , Περικλέους καὶ Διομέδοντος καὶ Λυσίου καὶ Ἀριστοκράτους καὶ Θρασύλλου καὶ Ἐρασινίδου , Ἀρχέδημος ὁ τοῦ δήμου τότε προεστηκὼς ἐν Ἀθήναις καὶ τῆς διωβελίας ἐπιμελόμενος Ἐρασινίδῃ ἐπιβολὴν ἐπιβαλὼν κατηγόρει ἐν δικαστηρίῳ , φάσκων ἐξ Ἑλλησπόντου αὐτὸν ἔχειν χρήματα ὄντα τοῦ δήμου ·
Pericles, Diomedon, Lysias, Aristocrates, Thrasyllus, and Erasinides,—Archedemus, who was at that time a leader of the popular party at Athens and had charge of the two-obol fund, brought accusation against Erasinides before a court and urged that a fine be imposed upon him, claiming that he had in his possession money from the Hellespont which belonged to the people;


1.7.2
311
κατηγόρει δὲ καὶ περὶ τῆς στρατηγίας .
he accused him, further, of misconduct as general.


1.7.2
312
καὶ ἔδοξε τῷ δικαστηρίῳ δῆσαι τὸν Ἐρασινίδην .
And the court decreed that Erasinides should be imprisoned.


1.7.3
313
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐν τῇ βουλῇ διηγοῦντο οἱ στρατηγοὶ περί τε τῆς ναυμαχίας καὶ τοῦ μεγέθους τοῦ χειμῶνος .
After this the generals made a statement before the Senate in regard to the battle and the violence of the storm;


1.7.3
314
Τιμοκράτους δ’ εἰπόντος ὅτι καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους χρὴ δεθέντας εἰς τὸν δῆμον παραδοθῆναι , ἡ βουλὴ ἔδησε .
and upon motion of Timocrates, that the others also should be imprisoned and turned over to the Assembly for trial, the Senate imprisoned them.


1.7.4
315
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐκκλησία ἐγένετο , ἐν ᾗ τῶν στρατηγῶν κατηγόρουν ἄλλοι τε καὶ Θηραμένης μάλιστα , δικαίους εἶναι λόγον ὑποσχεῖν διότι οὐκ ἀνείλοντο τοὺς ναυαγούς .
After this a meeting of the Assembly was called, at which a number of people, and particularly Theramenes, spoke against the generals, saying that they ought to render an account of their conduct in not picking up the shipwrecked.


1.7.4
316
ὅτι μὲν γὰρ οὐδενὸς ἄλλου καθήπτοντο , ἐπιστολὴν ἐπεδείκνυε μαρτύριον ἣν ἔπεμψαν οἱ στρατηγοὶ εἰς τὴν βουλὴν καὶ εἰς τὸν δῆμον , ἄλλο οὐδὲν αἰτιώμενοι ἢ τὸν χειμῶνα .
For as proof that the generals fastened the responsibility upon no person apart from themselves, Theramenes showed a letter which they had sent to the Senate and to the Assembly, in which they put the blame upon nothing but the storm.


1.7.5
317
μετὰ ταῦτα δὲ οἱ στρατηγοὶ βραχέως ἕκαστος ἀπελογήσατο ( οὐ γὰρ προυτέθη σφίσι λόγος κατὰ τὸν νόμον ) , καὶ τὰ πεπραγμένα διηγοῦντο , ὅτι αὐτοὶ μὲν ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους πλέοιεν , τὴν δὲ ἀναίρεσιν τῶν ναυαγῶν προστάξαιεν τῶν τριηράρχων ἀνδράσιν ἱκανοῖς καὶ ἐστρατηγηκόσιν ἤδη , Θηραμένει καὶ Θρασυβούλῳ καὶ ἄλλοις τοιούτοις ·
After this the several generals spoke in their own defence (though								briefly, for they were not granted the hearing prescribed by the								law) and stated what they had done, saying that they themselves								undertook to sail against the enemy and that they assigned the duty								of recovering the shipwrecked to certain of the captains who were								competent men and had been generals in the past,—Theramenes,								Thrasybulus, and others of that sort;


1.7.6
318
καὶ εἴπερ γέ τινας δέοι , περὶ τῆς ἀναιρέσεως οὐδένα ἄλλον ἔχειν αὐτοὺς αἰτιάσασθαι ἢ τούτους οἷς προσετάχθη .
and if they had to blame any, they could blame no one else in the matter of the recovery except these men, to whom the duty was assigned.


1.7.6
319
καὶ οὐχ ὅτι γε κατηγοροῦσιν ἡμῶν , ἔφασαν , ψευσόμεθα φάσκοντες αὐτοὺς αἰτίους εἶναι , ἀλλὰ τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ χειμῶνος εἶναι τὸ κωλῦσαν τὴν ἀναίρεσιν .
And we shall not,  they added,  just because they accuse us, falsely say that they were to blame, but rather that it was the violence of the storm which prevented the recovery.


1.7.6
320
τούτων δὲ μάρτυρας παρείχοντο τοὺς κυβερνήτας καὶ ἄλλους τῶν συμπλεόντων πολλούς .
They offered as witnesses to the truth of these statements the pilots and many others among their ship-companions.


1.7.6
321
τοιαῦτα λέγοντες ἔπειθον τὸν δῆμον ·
With such arguments they were on the point of persuading the Assembly;


1.7.7
322
ἐβούλοντο δὲ πολλοὶ τῶν ἰδιωτῶν ἐγγυᾶσθαι ἀνιστάμενοι ·
and many of the citizens rose and wanted to give bail for them;


1.7.7
323
ἔδοξε δὲ ἀναβαλέσθαι εἰς ἑτέραν ἐκκλησίαν ( τότε γὰρ ὀψὲ ἦν καὶ τὰς χεῖρας οὐκ ἂν καθεώρων ) , τὴν δὲ βουλὴν προβουλεύσασαν εἰσενεγκεῖν ὅτῳ τρόπῳ οἱ ἄνδρες κρίνοιντο .
it was decided, however, that the matter should be postponed to another meeting of the Assembly (for by that time it was late in the day and they could not have distinguished the hands in the voting), and that the Senate should draft and bring in a proposal regarding the manner in which the men should be tried.


1.7.8
324
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐγίγνετο Ἀπατούρια , ἐν οἷς οἵ τε πατέρες καὶ οἱ συγγενεῖς σύνεισι σφίσιν αὐτοῖς .
After this the Apaturia was celebrated, at which fathers and kinsmen meet together.


1.7.8
325
οἱ οὖν περὶ τὸν Θηραμένην παρεσκεύασαν ἀνθρώπους μέλανα ἱμάτια ἔχοντας καὶ ἐν χρῷ κεκαρμένους πολλοὺς ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ἑορτῇ , ἵνα πρὸς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν ἥκοιεν , ὡς δὴ συγγενεῖς ὄντες τῶν ἀπολωλότων , καὶ Καλλίξενον ἔπεισαν ἐν τῇ βουλῇ κατηγορεῖν τῶν στρατηγῶν .
Accordingly Theramenes and his supporters arranged at this festival with a large number of people, who were clad in mourning garments and had their hair close shaven, to attend the meeting of the Assembly, pretending that they were kinsmen of those who had perished, and they bribed Callixeinus to accuse the generals in the Senate.


1.7.9
326
ἐντεῦθεν ἐκκλησίαν ἐποίουν , εἰς ἣν ἡ βουλὴ εἰσήνεγκε τὴν ἑαυτῆς γνώμην Καλλιξένου εἰπόντος τήνδε ·
Then they called an Assembly, at which the Senate brought in its proposal, which Callixeinus had drafted in the following terms:


1.7.9
327
ἐπειδὴ τῶν τε κατηγορούντων κατὰ τῶν στρατηγῶν καὶ ἐκείνων ἀπολογουμένων ἐν τῇ προτέρᾳ ἐκκλησίᾳ ἀκηκόασι , διαψηφίσασθαι Ἀθηναίους ἅπαντας κατὰ φυλάς ·
Resolved, that since the Athenians have heard in the previous meeting of the Assembly both the accusers who brought charges against the generals and the generals speaking in their own defence, they do now one and all cast their votes by tribes;


1.7.9
328
θεῖναι δὲ εἰς τὴν φυλὴν ἑκάστην δύο ὑδρίας ·
and that two urns be set at the voting-place of each tribe;


1.7.9
329
ἐφ’ ἑκάστῃ δὲ τῇ φυλῇ κήρυκα κηρύττειν , ὅτῳ δοκοῦσιν ἀδικεῖν οἱ στρατηγοὶ οὐκ ἀνελόμενοι τοὺς νικήσαντας ἐν τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ , εἰς τὴν προτέραν ψηφίσασθαι , ὅτῳ δὲ μή , εἰς τὴν ὑστέραν ·
and that in each tribe a herald proclaim that whoever adjudges the generals guilty, for not picking up the men who won the victory in the naval battle, shall cast his vote in the first urn, and whoever adjudges them not guilty, shall cast his vote in the second;


1.7.10
330
ἂν δὲ δόξωσιν ἀδικεῖν , θανάτῳ ζημιῶσαι καὶ τοῖς ἕνδεκα παραδοῦναι καὶ τὰ χρήματα δημοσιεῦσαι , τὸ δ’ ἐπιδέκατον τῆς θεοῦ εἶναι .
and if they be adjudged guilty, that they be punished with death and								handed over to the Eleven, and that their property be								confiscated and the tenth thereof belong to the goddess.


1.7.11
331
παρῆλθε δέ τις εἰς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν φάσκων ἐπὶ τεύχους ἀλφίτων σωθῆναι ·
And there came before the Assembly a man who said that he had been saved by floating upon a meal-tub,


1.7.11
332
ἐπιστέλλειν δ’ αὐτῷ τοὺς ἀπολλυμένους , ἐὰν σωθῇ , ἀπαγγεῖλαι τῷ δήμῳ ὅτι οἱ στρατηγοὶ οὐκ ἀνείλοντο τοὺς ἀρίστους ὑπὲρ τῆς πατρίδος γενομένους .
and that those who were perishing charged him to report to the people, if he were saved, that the generals did not pick up the men who had proved themselves most brave in the service of their country.


1.7.12
333
τὸν δὲ Καλλίξενον προσεκαλέσαντο παράνομα φάσκοντες συγγεγραφέναι Εὐρυπτόλεμός τε ὁ Πεισιάνακτος καὶ ἄλλοι τινές .
Now Euryptolemus, the son of Peisianax, and some others served a summons upon Callixeinus, alleging that he had made an unconstitutional proposal.


1.7.12
334
τοῦ δὲ δήμου ἔνιοι ταῦτα ἐπῄνουν , τὸ δὲ πλῆθος ἐβόα δεινὸν εἶναι εἰ μή τις ἐάσει τὸν δῆμον πράττειν ὃ ἂν βούληται .
And some of the people applauded this act, but the greater number cried out that it was monstrous if the people were to be prevented from doing whatever they wished.


1.7.13
335
καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις εἰπόντος Λυκίσκου καὶ τούτους τῇ αὐτῇ ψήφῳ κρίνεσθαι ᾗπερ καὶ τοὺς στρατηγούς , ἐὰν μὴ ἀφῶσι τὴν κλῆσιν , ἐπεθορύβησε πάλιν ὁ ὄχλος , καὶ ἠναγκάσθησαν ἀφιέναι τὰς κλήσεις .
Indeed, when Lyciscus thereupon moved that these men also should be								judged by the very same vote as the generals, unless they withdrew								the summons, the mob broke out again with shouts of approval, and								they were compelled to withdraw the summonses.


1.7.14
336
τῶν δὲ πρυτάνεών τινων οὐ φασκόντων προθήσειν τὴν διαψήφισιν παρὰ τὸν νόμον , αὖθις Καλλίξενος ἀναβὰς κατηγόρει αὐτῶν τὰ αὐτά .
Furthermore, when some of the Prytanes refused to put the question to the vote in violation of the law, Callixeinus again mounted the platform and urged the same charge against them.


1.7.14
337
οἱ δὲ ἐβόων καλεῖν τοὺς οὐ φάσκοντας .
The crowd cried out to summon to court those who refused.


1.7.15
338
οἱ δὲ πρυτάνεις φοβηθέντες ὡμολόγουν πάντες προθήσειν πλὴν Σωκράτους τοῦ Σωφρονίσκου ·
Then the Prytanes, stricken with fear, agreed to put the question,—all of them except Socrates, the son of Sophroniscus;


1.7.15
339
οὗτος δ’ οὐκ ἔφη ἀλλ’ ἢ κατὰ νόμον πάντα ποιήσειν .
and he said that in no case would he act except in accordance with the law.


1.7.16
340
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἀναβὰς Εὐρυπτόλεμος ἔλεξεν ὑπὲρ τῶν στρατηγῶν τάδε .
After this Euryptolemus mounted the platform and spoke as follows in defence of the generals:


1.7.16
341
τὰ μὲν κατηγορήσων , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , ἀνέβην ἐνθάδε Περικλέους ἀναγκαίου μοι ὄντος καὶ ἐπιτηδείου καὶ Διομέδοντος φίλου , τὰ δ’ ὑπεραπολογησόμενος , τὰ δὲ συμβουλεύσων ἅ μοι δοκεῖ ἄριστα εἶναι ἁπάσῃ τῇ πόλει .
I have come to the platform, men of Athens, partly to accuse Pericles, though he is my kinsman and intimate, and Diomedon, who is my friend, partly to speak in their defence, and partly to advise the measures which seem to me to be best for the state as a whole.


1.7.17
342
κατηγορῶ μὲν οὖν αὐτῶν ὅτι ἔπεισαν τοὺς συνάρχοντας βουλομένους πέμπειν γράμματα τῇ τε βουλῇ καὶ ὑμῖν ὅτι ἐπέταξαν τῷ Θηραμένει καὶ Θρασυβούλῳ τετταράκοντα καὶ ἑπτὰ τριήρεσιν ἀνελέσθαι τοὺς ναυαγούς , οἱ δὲ οὐκ ἀνείλοντο .
I accuse them, because they persuaded their colleagues to change								their purpose when they wanted to send a letter to the Senate and to								you, in which they stated that they assigned to Theramenes and								Thrasybulus, with forty-seven triremes, the duty of picking up the								shipwrecked, and that they failed to perform this duty.


1.7.18
343
εἶτα νῦν τὴν αἰτίαν κοινὴν ἔχουσιν ἐκείνων ἰδίᾳ ἁμαρτόντων , καὶ ἀντὶ τῆς τότε φιλανθρωπίας νῦν ὑπ’ ἐκείνων τε καί τινων ἄλλων ἐπιβουλευόμενοι κινδυνεύουσιν ἀπολέσθαι ;
Such being the case, are these generals to share the blame now with								Theramenes and Thrasybulus, although it was those alone who								blundered, and are they now, in return for the humanity they showed								then, to be put in hazard of their lives through the machinations of								those men and certain others?


1.7.19
344
οὔκ , ἂν ὑμεῖς γέ μοι πείθησθε τὰ δίκαια καὶ ὅσια ποιοῦντες , καὶ ὅθεν μάλιστ’ ἀληθῆ πεύσεσθε καὶ οὐ μετανοήσαντες ὕστερον εὑρήσετε σφᾶς αὐτοὺς ἡμαρτηκότας τὰ μέγιστα εἰς θεούς τε καὶ ὑμᾶς αὐτούς .
No! at least not if you take my advice and follow the just and righteous course, the course which will best enable you to learn the truth and to avoid finding out hereafter, to your sorrow, that it is you yourselves who have sinned most grievously, not only against the gods, but against yourselves.


1.7.19
345
συμβουλεύω δ’ ὑμῖν , ἐν οἷς οὔθ’ ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ οὔθ’ ὑπ’ ἄλλου οὐδενὸς ἔστιν ἐξαπατηθῆναι ὑμᾶς , καὶ τοὺς ἀδικοῦντας εἰδότες κολάσεσθε ᾗ ἂν βούλησθε δίκῃ , καὶ ἅμα πάντας καὶ καθ’ ἕνα ἕκαστον , εἰ μὴ πλέον , ἀλλὰ μίαν ἡμέραν δόντες αὐτοῖς ὑπὲρ αὑτῶν ἀπολογήσασθαι , μὴ ἄλλοις μᾶλλον πιστεύοντες ἢ ὑμῖν αὐτοῖς .
The advice I give you is such that, it you follow it, you cannot be deceived either by me or by anyone else, and that with full knowledge you will punish the guilty with whatever punishment you may desire, either all of them together or each one separately, namely, by first granting them at least one day, if not more, to speak in their own defence, and by putting your trust, not so much in others, but in yourselves.


1.7.20
346
ἴστε δέ , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , πάντες ὅτι τὸ Καννωνοῦ ψήφισμά ἐστιν ἰσχυρότατον , ὃ κελεύει , ἐάν τις τὸν τῶν Ἀθηναίων δῆμον ἀδικῇ , δεδεμένον ἀποδικεῖν ἐν τῷ δήμῳ , καὶ ἐὰν καταγνωσθῇ ἀδικεῖν , ἀποθανεῖν εἰς τὸ βάραθρον ἐμβληθέντα , τὰ δὲ χρήματα αὐτοῦ δημευθῆναι καὶ τῆς θεοῦ τὸ ἐπιδέκατον εἶναι .
Now you all know, men of Athens, that the decree of Cannonus is								exceedingly severe: it provides that if anyone shall wrong the								people of Athens, he shall plead his case in fetters before the								people, and if he be adjudged guilty, he shall be put to death by								being cast into the pit, and his								property shall be confiscated and the tenth part thereof shall								belong to the goddess.


1.7.21
347
κατὰ τοῦτο τὸ ψήφισμα κελεύω κρίνεσθαι τοὺς στρατηγοὺς καὶ νὴ Δία , ἂν ὑμῖν γε δοκῇ , πρῶτον Περικλέα τὸν ἐμοὶ προσήκοντα ·
Under this decree I urge you to try the generals, and, by Zeus, if it so please you, Pericles, my kinsman, first of them all;


1.7.21
348
αἰσχρὸν γάρ μοί ἐστιν ἐκεῖνον περὶ πλείονος ποιεῖσθαι ἢ τὴν ὅλην πόλιν .
for it would be base for me to think more of him than of the general interests of the state.


1.7.22
349
τοῦτο δ’ εἰ βούλεσθε , κατὰ τόνδε τὸν νόμον κρίνατε , ὅς ἐστιν ἐπὶ τοῖς ἱεροσύλοις καὶ προδόταις , ἐάν τις ἢ τὴν πόλιν προδιδῷ ἢ τὰ ἱερὰ κλέπτῃ , κριθέντα ἐν δικαστηρίῳ , ἂν καταγνωσθῇ , μὴ ταφῆναι ἐν τῇ Ἀττικῇ , τὰ δὲ χρήματα αὐτοῦ δημόσια εἶναι .
Or if you do not wish to do this, try them under the following law,								which applies to temple-robbers and traitors: namely, if anyone								shall be a traitor to the state or shall steal sacred property, he								shall be tried before a court, and if he be convicted, he shall not								be buried in Attica, and his property shall be confiscated.


1.7.23
350
τούτων ὁποτέρῳ βούλεσθε , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , τῷ νόμῳ κρινέσθων οἱ ἄνδρες κατὰ ἕνα ἕκαστον διῃρημένων τῆς ἡμέρας τριῶν μερῶν , ἑνὸς μὲν ἐν ᾧ συλλέγεσθαι ὑμᾶς δεῖ καὶ διαψηφίζεσθαι ἐάν τε ἀδικεῖν δοκῶσιν ἐάν τε μή , ἑτέρου δ’ ἐν ᾧ κατηγορῆσαι , ἑτέρου δ’ ἐν ᾧ ἀπολογήσασθαι .
By whichever of these laws you choose, men of Athens, let the men be								tried, each one separately, and let the day be								divided into three parts, one wherein you shall gather and vote as								to whether you judge them guilty or not, another wherein the								accusers shall present their case, and another wherein the accused								shall make their defence.


1.7.24
351
τούτων δὲ γιγνομένων οἱ μὲν ἀδικοῦντες τεύξονται τῆς μεγίστης τιμωρίας , οἱ δ’ ἀναίτιοι ἐλευθερωθήσονται ὑφ’ ὑμῶν , ὦ Ἀθηναῖοι , καὶ οὐκ ἀδικοῦντες ἀπολοῦνται .
If this is done, the guilty will								incur the severest punishment, and the guiltless will be set free by								you, men of Athens, and will not be put to death unjustly.


1.7.25
352
ὑμεῖς δὲ κατὰ τὸν νόμον εὐσεβοῦντες καὶ εὐορκοῦντες κρινεῖτε καὶ οὐ συμπολεμήσετε Λακεδαιμονίοις τοὺς ἐκείνους ἑβδομήκοντα ναῦς ἀφελομένους καὶ νενικηκότας , τούτους ἀπολλύντες ἀκρίτους παρὰ τὸν νόμον .
As for yourselves, you will be granting a trial in accordance with								the law and standing true to religion and your oaths, and you will								not be fighting on the side of the Lacedaemonians by putting to								death the men who captured seventy ships from them and defeated								them,—by putting to death these men, I say, without a trial, in								violation of the law.


1.7.26
353
τί δὲ καὶ δεδιότες σφόδρα οὕτως ἐπείγεσθε ;
What is it, pray, that you fear, that you are in such excessive haste?


1.7.26
354
ἢ μὴ οὐχ ὑμεῖς ὃν ἂν βούλησθε ἀποκτείνητε καὶ ἐλευθερώσητε , ἂν κατὰ τὸν νόμον κρίνητε , ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἂν παρὰ τὸν νόμον , ὥσπερ Καλλίξενος τὴν βουλὴν ἔπεισεν εἰς τὸν δῆμον εἰσενεγκεῖν μιᾷ ψήφῳ ;
Do you fear lest you will lose the right to put to death and set free anyone you please if you proceed in accordance with the law, but think that you will retain this right if you proceed in violation of the law, by the method which Callixeinus persuaded the Senate to report to the people, that is, by a single vote?


1.7.27
355
ἀλλ’ ἴσως ἄν τινα καὶ οὐκ αἴτιον ὄντα ἀποκτείναιτε , μεταμελήσει δὴ ὕστερον .
Yes, but you might possibly be putting to death some one who is really innocent; and repentance afterwards—ah, remember how painful and unavailing it always is,


1.7.27
356
ἀναμνήσθητε ὡς ἀλγεινὸν καὶ ἀνωφελὲς ἤδη ἐστί , πρὸς δ’ ἔτι καὶ περὶ θανάτου ἀνθρώπου ἡμαρτηκότες .
and especially when one’s error has brought about a man’s death.


1.7.28
357
δεινὰ δ’ ἂν ποιήσαιτε , εἰ Ἀριστάρχῳ μὲν πρότερον τὸν δῆμον καταλύοντι , εἶτα δ’ Οἰνόην προδιδόντι Θηβαίοις πολεμίοις οὖσιν , ἔδοτε ἡμέραν ἀπολογήσασθαι ᾗ ἐβούλετο καὶ τ- ἄλλα κατὰ τὸν νόμον προύθετε , τοὺς δὲ στρατηγοὺς τοὺς πάντα ὑμῖν κατὰ γνώμην πράξαντας , νικήσαντας δὲ τοὺς πολεμίους , τῶν αὐτῶν τούτων ἀποστερήσετε .
You would do a monstrous thing if, after granting in the past to									Aristarchus, the destroyer of the democracy and afterwards								the betrayer of Oenoe to your enemies the Thebans, a day in which to								defend himself as he pleased, and allowing him all his other rights								under the law,—if, I say, you shall now deprive the generals, who								have done everything to your satisfaction, and have defeated the								enemy, of these same rights.


1.7.29
358
μὴ ὑμεῖς γε , ὦ Ἀθηναῖοι , ἀλλ’ ἑαυτῶν ὄντας τοὺς νόμους , δι’ οὓς μάλιστα μέγιστοί ἐστε , φυλάττοντες , ἄνευ τούτων μηδὲν πράττειν πειρᾶσθε .
Let no such act be yours, men of Athens, but guard the laws, which are your own and above all else have made you supremely great, and do not try to do anything without their sanction.


1.7.29
359
ἐπανέλθετε δὲ καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτὰ τὰ πράγματα καθ’ ἃ καὶ αἱ ἁμαρτίαι δοκοῦσι γεγενῆσθαι τοῖς στρατηγοῖς .
And now come back to the actual circumstances under which the mistakes are thought to have been committed by the generals.


1.7.29
360
ἐπεὶ γὰρ κρατήσαντες τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ εἰς τὴν γῆν κατέπλευσαν , Διομέδων μὲν ἐκέλευεν ἀναχθέντας ἐπὶ κέρως ἅπαντας ἀναιρεῖσθαι τὰ ναυάγια καὶ τοὺς ναυαγούς , Ἐρασινίδης δ’ ἐπὶ τοὺς πρὸς Μυτιλήνην πολεμίους τὴν ταχίστην πλεῖν ἅπαντας ·
When, after winning the battle, they sailed in to the shore, Diomedon urged that they should one and all put out to sea in line and pick up the wreckage and the shipwrecked men, while Erasinides proposed that all should sail with the utmost speed against the enemy at Mytilene.


1.7.29
361
Θράσυλλος δὲ ἀμφότερα ἔφη γενέσθαι , ἂν τὰς μὲν αὐτοῦ καταλίπωσι , ταῖς δὲ ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους πλέωσι ·
But Thrasyllus said that both things would be accomplished if they should leave some of the ships there and should sail with the rest against the enemy;


1.7.30
362
καὶ δοξάντων τούτων καταλιπεῖν τρεῖς ναῦς ἕκαστον ἐκ τῆς αὑτοῦ συμμορίας , τῶν στρατηγῶν ὀκτὼ ὄντων , καὶ τὰς τῶν ταξιάρχων δέκα καὶ τὰς Σαμίων δέκα καὶ τὰς τῶν ναυάρχων τρεῖς , αὗται ἅπασαι γίγνονται ἑπτὰ καὶ τετταράκοντα , τέτταρες περὶ ἑκάστην ναῦν τῶν ἀπολωλυιῶν δώδεκα οὐσῶν .
and if this plan were decided upon, he advised that each of the								generals, who were eight in number, should leave behind three ships								from his own division, and that they should also leave the ten ships								of the taxiarchs, the ten of the Samians, and the three of the								nauarchs. These amount all told to forty-seven ships, four for each								one of the lost vessels, which were twelve in number.


1.7.31
363
τῶν δὲ καταλειφθέντων τῶν τριηράρχων ἦσαν καὶ Θρασύβουλος καὶ Θηραμένης , ὃς ἐν τῇ προτέρᾳ ἐκκλησίᾳ κατηγόρει τῶν στρατηγῶν .
Among the captains who were left behind were both Thrasybulus and Theramenes, the man who accused the generals at the former meeting of the Assembly.


1.7.31
364
ταῖς δὲ ἄλλαις ναυσὶν ἔπλεον ἐπὶ τὰς πολεμίας .
And with the rest of the ships they planned to sail against the enemy’s fleet.


1.7.31
365
τί τούτων οὐχ ἱκανῶς καὶ καλῶς ἔπραξαν ;
Now what one of these acts did they not do adequately and well?


1.7.31
366
οὐκοῦν δίκαιον τὰ μὲν πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους μὴ καλῶς πραχθέντα τοὺς πρὸς τούτοις ταχθέντας ὑπέχειν λόγον , τοὺς δὲ πρὸς τὴν ἀναίρεσιν μὴ ποιήσαντας ἃ οἱ στρατηγοὶ ἐκέλευσαν , διότι οὐκ ἀνείλοντο κρίνεσθαι .
It is but just, therefore, that those, on the one hand, who were detailed to go against the enemy should be held to account for their lack of success in dealing with the enemy, and that those, on the other hand, who were detailed to recover the shipwrecked, in case they did not do what the generals ordered, should be tried for not recovering them.


1.7.32
367
τοσοῦτον δ’ ἔχω εἰπεῖν ὑπὲρ ἀμφοτέρων , ὅτι ὁ χειμὼν διεκώλυσε μηδὲν πρᾶξαι ὧν οἱ στρατηγοὶ παρεσκευάσαντο .
This much, however, I can say in defence of both parties, that the storm absolutely prevented them from doing any of the things which the generals had planned.


1.7.32
368
τούτων δὲ μάρτυρες οἱ σωθέντες ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτομάτου , ὧν εἷς τῶν ἡμετέρων στρατηγῶν ἐπὶ καταδύσης νεὼς διασωθείς , ὃν κελεύουσι τῇ αὐτῇ ψήφῳ κρίνεσθαι , καὶ αὐτὸν τότε δεόμενον ἀναιρέσεως , ᾗπερ τοὺς οὐ πράξαντας τὰ προσταχθέντα .
And as witnesses to this fact you have those who were saved by mere chance, among whom is one of our generals, who came through safely on a disabled ship, and whom they now bid you judge by the same vote (although at that time he needed to be picked up himself) by which you judge those who did not do what they were ordered to do.


1.7.33
369
μὴ τοίνυν , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , ἀντὶ μὲν τῆς νίκης καὶ τῆς εὐτυχίας ὅμοια ποιήσητε τοῖς ἡττημένοις τε καὶ ἀτυχοῦσιν , ἀντὶ δὲ τῶν ἐκ θεοῦ ἀναγκαίων ἀγνωμονεῖν δόξητε , προδοσίαν καταγνόντες ἀντὶ τῆς ἀδυναμίας οὐχ ἱκανοὺς γενομένους διὰ τὸν χειμῶνα πρᾶξαι τὰ προσταχθέντα ·
Do not, then, men of Athens, in the face of your victory and your good fortune, act like men who are beaten and unfortunate, nor, in the face of heaven’s visitation, show yourselves unreasonable by giving a verdict of treachery instead of helplessness, since they found themselves unable on account of the storm to do what they had been ordered to do;


1.7.33
370
ἀλλὰ πολὺ δικαιότερον στεφάνοις γεραίρειν τοὺς νικῶντας ἢ θανάτῳ ζημιοῦν πονηροῖς ἀνθρώποις πειθομένους .
nay, it would be far more just for you to honour the victors with garlands than, yielding to the persuasions of wicked men, to punish them with death.


1.7.34
371
ταῦτ’ εἰπὼν Εὐρυπτόλεμος ἔγραψε γνώμην κατὰ τὸ Καννωνοῦ ψήφισμα κρίνεσθαι τοὺς ἄνδρας δίχα ἕκαστον ·
When Euryptolemus had thus spoken, he offered a resolution that the men be tried under the decree of Cannonus, each one separately;


1.7.34
372
ἡ δὲ τῆς βουλῆς ἦν μιᾷ ψήφῳ ἅπαντας κρίνειν .
whereas the proposal of the Senate was to judge them all by a single vote.


1.7.34
373
τούτων δὲ διαχειροτονουμένων τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἔκριναν τὴν Εὐρυπτολέμου ·
The vote being now taken as between these two proposals, they decided at first in favour of the resolution of Euryptolemus;


1.7.34
374
ὑπομοσαμένου δὲ Μενεκλέους καὶ πάλιν διαχειροτονίας γενομένης ἔκριναν τὴν τῆς βουλῆς .
but when Menecles interposed an objection under oath and a second vote was taken, they decided in favour of that of the Senate.


1.7.34
375
καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα κατεψηφίσαντο τῶν ναυμαχησάντων στρατηγῶν ὀκτὼ ὄντων ·
After this they condemned the generals who took part in the battle, eight in all;


1.7.34
376
ἀπέθανον δὲ οἱ παρόντες ἕξ .
and the six who were in Athens were put to death.


1.7.35
377
καὶ οὐ πολλῷ χρόνῳ ὕστερον μετέμελε τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις , καὶ ἐψηφίσαντο , οἵτινες τὸν δῆμον ἐξηπάτησαν , προβολὰς αὐτῶν εἶναι , καὶ ἐγγυητὰς καταστῆσαι , ἕως ἂν κριθῶσιν , εἶναι δὲ καὶ Καλλίξενον τούτων .
And not long afterwards the Athenians repented, and they voted that complaints be brought against any who had deceived the people, that they furnish bondsmen men until such time as they should be brought to trial, and that Callixeinus be included among them.


1.7.35
378
προυβλήθησαν δὲ καὶ ἄλλοι τέτταρες , καὶ ἐδέθησαν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐγγυησαμένων , ὕστερον δὲ στάσεώς τινος γενομένης , ἐν ᾗ Κλεοφῶν ἀπέθανεν , ἀπέδρασαν οὗτοι , πρὶν κριθῆναι ·
Complaints were brought against four others also, and they were put into confinement by their bondsmen. But when there broke out afterwards a factional disturbance, in the course of which Cleophon was put to death, these men escaped, before being brought to trial;


1.7.35
379
Καλλίξενος δὲ κατελθὼν ὅτε καὶ οἱ ἐκ Πειραιῶς εἰς τὸ ἄστυ , μισούμενος ὑπὸ πάντων λιμῷ ἀπέθανεν .
Callixeinus indeed returned, at the time when the Piraeus party returned to the city, but he was hated by everybody and died of starvation.



2.1.1
380
οἱ δ’ ἐν τῇ Χίῳ μετὰ τοῦ Ἐτεονίκου στρατιῶται ὄντες , ἕως μὲν θέρος ἦν , ἀπό τε τῆς ὥρας ἐτρέφοντο καὶ ἐργαζόμενοι μισθοῦ κατὰ τὴν χώραν ·
The troops that were at Chios under Eteonicus subsisted, so long as the summer lasted, upon the produce of the season and by working for hire up and down the island;


2.1.1
381
ἐπεὶ δὲ χειμὼν ἐγένετο καὶ τροφὴν οὐκ εἶχον γυμνοί τε ἦσαν καὶ ἀνυπόδητοι , συνίσταντο ἀλλήλοις καὶ συνετίθεντο ὡς τῇ Χίῳ ἐπιθησόμενοι ·
when winter came on, however, and they were without food and poorly clad and unshod, they got together and agreed to make an attack upon Chios;


2.1.1
382
οἷς δὲ ταῦτα ἀρέσκοι κάλαμον φέρειν ἐδόκει , ἵνα ἀλλήλους μάθοιεν ὁπόσοι εἴησαν .
and it was decided that those who approved this plan should carry a reed, so that they could tell how numerous they were.


2.1.2
383
πυθόμενος δὲ τὸ σύνθημα ὁ Ἐτεόνικος , ἀπόρως μὲν εἶχε τί χρῷτο τῷ πράγματι διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν καλαμηφόρων ·
Now when Eteonicus learned of the plot, he was uncertain how to deal with the matter on account of the great number of the reed-bearers.


2.1.2
384
τό τε γὰρ ἐκ τοῦ ἐμφανοῦς ἐπιχειρῆσαι σφαλερὸν ἐδόκει εἶναι , μὴ εἰς τὰ ὅπλα ὁρμήσωσι καὶ τὴν πόλιν κατασχόντες καὶ πολέμιοι γενόμενοι ἀπολέσωσι πάντα τὰ πράγματα , ἂν κρατήσωσι , τό τ’ αὖ ἀπολλύναι ἀνθρώπους συμμάχους πολλοὺς δεινὸν ἐφαίνετο εἶναι , μή τινα καὶ εἰς τοὺς ἄλλους Ἕλληνας διαβολὴν σχοῖεν καὶ οἱ στρατιῶται δύσνοι πρὸς τὰ πράγματα ὦσιν ·
To attack them openly seemed to him to be dangerous, for he feared that they might rush to their arms, gain possession of the city, turn enemies, and so ruin everything, in case they should prevail; while, in the other case, to be putting allied soldiers to death in such numbers was also clearly a serious matter, for in this way the Lacedaemonians might incur harsh criticism among the other Greeks as well, and the troops might be disaffected toward the cause.


2.1.3
385
ἀναλαβὼν δὲ μεθ’ ἑαυτοῦ ἄνδρας πεντεκαίδεκα ἐγχειρίδια ἔχοντας ἐπορεύετο κατὰ τὴν πόλιν , καὶ ἐντυχών τινι ὀφθαλμιῶντι ἀνθρώπῳ ἀπιόντι ἐξ ἰατρείου , κάλαμον ἔχοντι , ἀπέκτεινε .
Accordingly he took with him fifteen men armed with daggers andproceeded through the city, and meeting a man suffering fromophthalmia as he was leaving a physician’s house, a reed in hishand, he put him to death.


2.1.4
386
θορύβου δὲ γενομένου καὶ ἐρωτώντων τινῶν διὰ τί ἀπέθανεν ὁ ἄνθρωπος , παραγγέλλειν ἐκέλευεν ὁ Ἐτεόνικος , ὅτι τὸν κάλαμον εἶχε .
And when an uproar resulted and people asked why the man had been put to death, Eteonicus ordered his followers to give out word that it was because he had the reed.


2.1.4
387
κατὰ δὲ τὴν παραγγελίαν ἐρρίπτουν πάντες ὅσοι εἶχον τοὺς καλάμους , ἀεὶ ὁ ἀκούων δεδιὼς μὴ ὀφθείη ἔχων .
As a result of this announcement all those who were carrying reeds threw them away, each man as he heard the report being afraid that he might be seen with one.


2.1.5
388
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Ἐτεόνικος συγκαλέσας τοὺς Χίους χρήματα ἐκέλευσε συνενεγκεῖν , ὅπως οἱ ναῦται λάβωσι μισθὸν καὶ μὴ νεωτερίσωσί τι ·
After this Eteonicus called together the Chians and bade them contribute money, in order that the sailors might get their pay and not attempt anything seditious; and the Chians did so.


2.1.5
389
οἱ δὲ εἰσήνεγκαν ·
At the same time he ordered his men to embark upon their ships;


2.1.5
390
ἅμα δὲ εἰς τὰς ναῦς ἐσήμηνεν εἰσβαίνειν ·
and going along past each ship in its turn he encouraged and advised them at length, as though he knew nothing of what had happened,


2.1.5
391
προσιὼν δὲ ἐν μέρει παρ’ ἑκάστην ναῦν παρεθάρρυνέ τε καὶ παρῄνει πολλά , ὡς τοῦ γεγενημένου οὐδὲν εἰδώς , καὶ μισθὸν ἑκάστῳ μηνὸς διέδωκε .
and distributed a month’s pay to all hands.


2.1.6
392
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Χῖοι καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι σύμμαχοι συλλεγέντες εἰς Ἔφεσον ἐβουλεύσαντο περὶ τῶν ἐνεστηκότων πραγμάτων πέμπειν εἰς Λακεδαίμονα πρέσβεις ταῦτά τε ἐροῦντας καὶ Λύσανδρον αἰτήσοντας ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς , εὖ φερόμενον παρὰ τοῖς συμμάχοις κατὰ τὴν προτέραν ναυαρχίαν , ὅτε καὶ τὴν ἐν Νοτίῳ ἐνίκησε ναυμαχίαν .
After this the Chians and the rest ofthe allies gathered at Ephesus and resolved, in view of the existingsituation, to send ambassadors to Lacedaemon to report the facts andto ask for Lysander as commander of the fleet, a man who was in highfavour among the allies as a result of his former command, when hewon the battle of Notium.


2.1.7
393
καὶ ἀπεπέμφθησαν πρέσβεις , σὺν αὐτοῖς δὲ καὶ παρὰ Κύρου τ- αὐτὰ λέγοντες ἄγγελοι .
Ambassadors were accordingly sent, and with them went also envoys from Cyrus with the same request.


2.1.7
394
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἔδοσαν τὸν Λύσανδρον ὡς ἐπιστολέα , ναύαρχον δὲ Ἄρακον ·
And the Lacedaemonians granted them Lysander as vice-admiral, but made Aracus admiral;


2.1.7
395
οὐ γὰρ νόμος αὐτοῖς δὶς τὸν αὐτὸν ναυαρχεῖν ·
for it was contrary to their law for a man to hold the office of admiral twice;


2.1.7
396
τὰς μέντοι ναῦς παρέδοσαν Λυσάνδρῳ ἐτῶν ἤδη τῷ πολέμῳ πέντε καὶ εἴκοσι παρεληλυθότων .
nevertheless, they put the ships under the command of Lysander—the war having now lasted twenty-five years.


2.1.8
397
τούτῳ δὲ τῷ ἐνιαυτῷ καὶ Κῦρος ἀπέκτεινεν Αὐτοβοισάκην καὶ Μιτραῖον , υἱεῖς ὄντας τῆς Δαρειαίου ἀδελφῆς τῆς τοῦ Ξέρξου τοῦ Δαρείου πατρός , ὅτι αὐτῷ ἀπαντῶντες οὐ διέωσαν διὰ τῆς κόρης τὰς χεῖρας , ὃ ποιοῦσι βασιλεῖ μόνον ·
It was in this year that Cyrus put to death Autoboesaces and Mitraeus, who were sons of Darius’ sister—the daughter of Darius’ father Xerxes—because upon meeting him they did not thrust their hands through the corê, an honour they show the King alone.


2.1.8
398
ἡ δὲ κόρη ἐστὶ μακρότερον ἢ χειρίς , ἐν ᾗ τὴν χεῖρα ἔχων οὐδὲν ἂν δύναιτο ποιῆσαι .
(The corê is a longer sleeve than the cheiris, and a man who had his hand in one would be powerless to do anything.)


2.1.9
399
ἱεραμένης μὲν οὖν καὶ ἡ γυνὴ ἔλεγον πρὸς Δαρειαῖον δεινὸν εἶναι εἰ περιόψεται τὴν λίαν ὕβριν τούτου ·
In consequence, Hieramenes and his wife said to Darius that it would be shameful if he were to overlook such wanton violence on the part of Cyrus;


2.1.9
400
ὁ δὲ αὐτὸν μεταπέμπεται ὡς ἀρρωστῶν , πέμψας ἀγγέλους .
and Darius, on the plea that he was ill, sent messengers and summoned Cyrus to come to him.


2.1.10
401
τῷ δ’ ἐπιόντι ἔτει ἐπὶ Ἀρχύτα μὲν ἐφορεύοντος , ἄρχοντος δ’ ἐν Ἀθήναις Ἀλεξίου , Λύσανδρος ἀφικόμενος εἰς Ἔφεσον μετεπέμψατο Ἐτεόνικον ἐκ Χίου σὺν ταῖς ναυσί , καὶ τὰς ἄλλας πάσας συνήθροισεν , εἴ πού τις ἦν , καὶ ταύτας τ’ ἐπεσκεύαζε καὶ ἄλλας ἐν Ἀντάνδρῳ ἐναυπηγεῖτο .
In the following year—Archytas beingnow ephor, and Alexias archon atAthens—Lysander arrived at Ephesus and sent for Eteonicus to comethither from Chios with the ships, while he also gathered togetherall the other ships that were anywhere to be found; then he occupiedhimself with refitting these vessels and building more atAntandrus.


2.1.11
402
ἐλθὼν δὲ παρὰ Κῦρον χρήματα ᾔτει ·
Meantime he went to Cyrus and asked for money;


2.1.11
403
ὁ δ’ αὐτῷ εἶπεν ὅτι τὰ μὲν παρὰ βασιλέως ἀνηλωμένα εἴη , καὶ ἔτι πλείω πολλῷ , δεικνύων ὅσα ἕκαστος τῶν ναυάρχων ἔχοι , ὅμως δ’ ἔδωκε .
and Cyrus told him that the funds provided by the King had been spent, in fact much more besides, showing him how much each of the admirals had received; nevertheless he did give him money.


2.1.12
404
λαβὼν δὲ ὁ Λύσανδρος τ- ἀργύριον , ἐπὶ τὰς τριήρεις τριηράρχους ἐπέστησε καὶ τοῖς ναύταις τὸν ὀφειλόμενον μισθὸν ἀπέδωκε .
And upon receiving it Lysander appointed to each trireme its captain and paid his sailors the wages that were due them.


2.1.12
405
παρεσκευάζοντο δὲ καὶ οἱ τῶν Ἀθηναίων στρατηγοὶ πρὸς τὸ ναυτικὸν ἐν τῇ Σάμῳ .
Meanwhile the Athenian generals also were getting their fleet in readiness, at Samos.


2.1.13
406
Κῦρος δ’ ἐπὶ τούτοις μετεπέμψατο Λύσανδρον , ἐπεὶ αὐτῷ παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς ἧκεν ἄγγελος λέγων ὅτι ἀρρωστῶν ἐκεῖνον καλοίη , ὢν ἐν Θαμνηρίοις τῆς Μηδίας ἐγγὺς Καδουσίων , ἐφ’ οὓς ἐστράτευσεν ἀφεστῶτας .
At this point Cyrus sent for Lysander,for a messenger had come to him from his father with word that hewas ill and summoned him, he being at Thamneria, in Media, near thecountry of the Cadusians, against whom he had made an expedition,for they were in revolt.


2.1.14
407
ἥκοντα δὲ Λύσανδρον οὐκ εἴα ναυμαχεῖν πρὸς Ἀθηναίους , ἐὰν μὴ πολλῷ πλείους ναῦς ἔχῃ ·
And when Lysander arrived, Cyrus warned him not to give battle to the Athenians unless he should far outnumber them in ships;


2.1.14
408
εἶναι γὰρ χρήματα πολλὰ καὶ βασιλεῖ καὶ ἑαυτῷ , ὥστε τούτου ἕνεκεν πολλὰς πληροῦν .
for, Cyrus said, both the King and he had money in abundance, and hence, so far as that point was concerned, it would be possible to man many ships.


2.1.14
409
παρέδειξε δ’ αὐτῷ πάντας τοὺς φόρους τοὺς ἐκ τῶν πόλεων , οἳ αὐτῷ ἴδιοι ἦσαν , καὶ τὰ περιττὰ χρήματα ἔδωκε ·
He then assigned to Lysander all the tribute which came in from his cities and belonged to him personally, and gave him also the balance he had on hand;


2.1.14
410
καὶ ἀναμνήσας ὡς εἶχε φιλίας πρός τε τὴν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων πόλιν καὶ πρὸς Λύσανδρον ἰδίᾳ , ἀνέβαινε παρὰ τὸν πατέρα .
and, after reminding Lysander how good a friend he was both to the Lacedaemonian state and to him personally, he set out on the journey to his father.


2.1.15
411
Λύσανδρος δ’ , ἐπεὶ αὐτῷ Κῦρος πάντα παραδοὺς τὰ αὑτοῦ πρὸς τὸν πατέρα ἀρρωστοῦντα μετάπεμπτος ἀνέβαινε , μισθὸν διαδοὺς τῇ στρατιᾷ ἀνήχθη τῆς Καρίας εἰς τὸν Κεράμειον κόλπον .
Now Lysander, when Cyrus had thus given over to him all his money and set out, in response to the summons, to visit his sick father, distributed pay to his men and set sail to the Ceramic Gulf, in Caria.


2.1.15
412
καὶ προσβαλὼν πόλει τῶν Ἀθηναίων συμμάχῳ ὄνομα Κεδρείαις τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ προσβολῇ κατὰ κράτος αἱρεῖ καὶ ἐξηνδραπόδισεν .
There he attacked a city named Cedreiae which was an ally of the Athenians, and on the second day’s assault captured it by storm and reduced the inhabitants to slavery; they were a mixture of Greek and barbarian blood.


2.1.15
413
ἦσαν δὲ μιξοβάρβαροι οἱ ἐνοικοῦντες .
Thence he sailed away to Rhodes.


2.1.16
414
ἐκεῖθεν δ’ ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Ῥόδον .
As for the Athenians, they harried the territory of the King, using Samos as a base,


2.1.16
415
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐκ τῆς Σάμου ὁρμώμενοι τὴν βασιλέως κακῶς ἐποίουν , καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν Χίον καὶ τὴν Ἔφεσον ἐπέπλεον , καὶ παρεσκευάζοντο πρὸς ναυμαχίαν , καὶ στρατηγοὺς πρὸς τοῖς ὑπάρχουσι προσείλοντο Μένανδρον , Τυδέα , Κηφισόδοτον .
and sailed against Chios and Ephesus; they were also making their preparations for battle, and had chosen three generals in addition to the former number,—Menander, Tydeus, and Cephisodotus.


2.1.17
416
Λύσανδρος δ’ ἐκ τῆς Ῥόδου παρὰ τὴν Ἰωνίαν ἐκπλεῖ πρὸς τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον πρός τε τῶν πλοίων τὸν ἔκπλουν καὶ ἐπὶ τὰς ἀφεστηκυίας αὐτῶν πόλεις .
Meanwhile Lysander sailed from Rhodes along the coast of Ionia to the Hellespont, in order to prevent the passing out of the grain-ships and to take action against the cities which had revolted from the Lacedaemonians.


2.1.17
417
ἀνήγοντο δὲ καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐκ τῆς Χίου πελάγιοι ·
The Athenians likewise set out thither from Chios, keeping to the open sea;


2.1.18
418
ἡ γὰρ Ἀσία πολεμία αὐτοῖς ἦν .
for Asia was hostile to them.


2.1.18
419
Λύσανδρος δ’ ἐξ Ἀβύδου παρέπλει εἰς Λάμψακον σύμμαχον οὖσαν Ἀθηναίων ·
But Lysander coasted along from Abydus to Lampsacus, which was an ally of the Athenians;


2.1.18
420
καὶ οἱ Ἀβυδηνοὶ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι παρῆσαν πεζῇ .
and the people of Abydus and the other cities were at hand on the shore to support him,


2.1.18
421
ἡγεῖτο δὲ Θώραξ Λακεδαιμόνιος .
being commanded by Thorax, a Lacedaemonian.


2.1.19
422
προσβαλόντες δὲ τῇ πόλει αἱροῦσι κατὰ κράτος , καὶ διήρπασαν οἱ στρατιῶται οὖσαν πλουσίαν καὶ οἴνου καὶ σίτου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιτηδείων πλήρη ·
Then they attacked the city and captured it by storm, whereupon the soldiers plundered it.


2.1.19
423
τὰ δὲ ἐλεύθερα σώματα πάντα ἀφῆκε Λύσανδρος .
It was a wealthy city, full of wine and grain and all other kinds of supplies. But Lysander let go all the free persons who were captured.


2.1.20
424
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι κατὰ πόδας πλέοντες ὡρμίσαντο τῆς Χερρονήσου ἐν Ἐλαιοῦντι ναυσὶν ὀγδοήκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν .
Now the Athenians had been sailing in the wake of Lysander’s fleet, and they anchored at Elaeus, in the Chersonese, with one hundred and eighty ships.


2.1.20
425
ἐνταῦθα δὴ ἀριστοποιουμένοις αὐτοῖς ἀγγέλλεται τὰ περὶ Λάμψακον , καὶ εὐθὺς ἀνήχθησαν εἰς Σηστόν .
While they were breakfasting there, the news about Lampsacus was reported to them, and they set out immediately to Sestus.


2.1.21
426
ἐκεῖθεν δ’ εὐθὺς ἐπισιτισάμενοι ἔπλευσαν εἰς Αἰγὸς ποταμοὺς ἀντίον τῆς Λαμψάκου ·
From there, as soon as they had provisioned, they sailed to Aegospotami, which is opposite Lampsacus,


2.1.21
427
διεῖχε δ’ ὁ Ἑλλήσποντος ταύτῃ σταδίους ὡς πεντεκαίδεκα .
the Hellespont at this point being about fifteen stadia wide.


2.1.21
428
ἐνταῦθα δὴ ἐδειπνοποιοῦντο .
There they took dinner.


2.1.22
429
Λύσανδρος δὲ τῇ ἐπιούσῃ νυκτί , ἐπεὶ ὄρθρος ἦν , ἐσήμηνεν εἰς τὰς ναῦς ἀριστοποιησαμένους εἰσβαίνειν , πάντα δὲ παρασκευασάμενος ὡς εἰς ναυμαχίαν καὶ τὰ παραβλήματα παραβάλλων , προεῖπεν ὡς μηδεὶς κινήσοιτο ἐκ τῆς τάξεως μηδὲ ἀνάξοιτο .
And during the ensuing night, when early dawn came, Lysander gave thesignal for his men to take breakfast and embark upon their ships,and after making everything ready for battle and stretching the sidescreens, he gave orders that no one should stir from hisposition or put out.


2.1.23
430
οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι ἅμα τῷ ἡλίῳ ἀνίσχοντι ἐπὶ τῷ λιμένι παρετάξαντο ἐν μετώπῳ ὡς εἰς ναυμαχίαν .
At sunrise the Athenians formed their ships in line for battle at the mouth of the harbour.


2.1.23
431
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐκ ἀντανήγαγε Λύσανδρος , καὶ τῆς ἡμέρας ὀψὲ ἦν , ἀπέπλευσαν πάλιν εἰς τοὺς Αἰγὸς ποταμούς .
Since, however, Lysander did not put out against them, they sailed back again, when it grew late in the day, to Aegospotami.


2.1.24
432
Λύσανδρος δὲ τὰς ταχίστας τῶν νεῶν ἐκέλευσεν ἕπεσθαι τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις , ἐπειδὰν δὲ ἐκβῶσι , κατιδόντας ὅ τι ποιοῦσιν ἀποπλεῖν καὶ αὐτῷ ἐξαγγεῖλαι .
Thereupon Lysander ordered the swiftest of his ships to follow the Athenians and, when they had disembarked, to observe what they did, and then to sail back and report to him;


2.1.24
433
καὶ οὐ πρότερον ἐξεβίβασεν ἐκ τῶν νεῶν πρὶν αὗται ἧκον .
and he did not disembark his men from their vessels until these scout-ships had returned.


2.1.24
434
ταῦτα δ’ ἐποίει τέτταρας ἡμέρας ·
This he did for four days;


2.1.24
435
καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐπανήγοντο .
and the Athenians continued to sail out and offer battle.


2.1.25
436
Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ κατιδὼν ἐκ τῶν τειχῶν τοὺς μὲν Ἀθηναίους ἐν αἰγιαλῷ ὁρμοῦντας καὶ πρὸς οὐδεμιᾷ πόλει , τὰ δ’ ἐπιτήδεια ἐκ Σηστοῦ μετιόντας πεντεκαίδεκα σταδίους ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν , τοὺς δὲ πολεμίους ἐν λιμένι καὶ πρὸς πόλει ἔχοντας πάντα , οὐκ ἐν καλῷ ἔφη αὐτοὺς ὁρμεῖν , ἀλλὰ μεθορμίσαι εἰς Σηστὸν παρῄνει πρός τε λιμένα καὶ πρὸς πόλιν ·
Meantime Alcibiades, who could discern from his castle that the Athenians were moored on an open shore, with no city near by, and were fetching their provisions from Sestus, a distance of fifteen stadia from their ships, while the enemy, being in a harbour and near a city, had everything needful, told the Athenians that they were not moored in a good place, and advised them to shift their anchorage to Sestus and thus gain a harbour and a city;


2.1.25
437
οὗ ὄντες ναυμαχήσετε , ἔφη , ὅταν βούλησθε .
for if you are there, he said, you will be able to fight when you please.


2.1.26
438
οἱ δὲ στρατηγοί , μάλιστα δὲ Τυδεὺς καὶ Μένανδρος , ἀπιέναι αὐτὸν ἐκέλευσαν ·
The generals, however, and especially Tydeus and Menander, bade him be gone;


2.1.26
439
αὐτοὶ γὰρ νῦν στρατηγεῖν , οὐκ ἐκεῖνον .
for they said that they were in command now, not he.


2.1.26
440
καὶ ὁ μὲν ᾤχετο .
So he went away.


2.1.27
441
Λύσανδρος δ’ , ἐπεὶ ἦν ἡμέρα πέμπτη ἐπιπλέουσι τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις , εἶπε τοῖς παρ’ αὐτοῦ ἑπομένοις , ἐπὰν κατίδωσιν αὐτοὺς ἐκβεβηκότας καὶ ἐσκεδασμένους κατὰ τὴν Χερρόνησον , ὅπερ ἐποίουν πολὺ μᾶλλον καθ’ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν , τά τε σιτία πόρρωθεν ὠνούμενοι καὶ καταφρονοῦντες δὴ τοῦ Λυσάνδρου , ὅτι οὐκ ἀντανῆγεν , ἀποπλέοντας τ- ἔμπαλιν παρ’ αὐτὸν ἆραι ἀσπίδα κατὰ μέσον τὸν πλοῦν .
And now Lysander, on the fifth day the Athenians sailed out against him, told his men, who followed them back, that as soon as they saw that the enemy had disembarked and had scattered up and down the Chersonese, —and the Athenians did this far more freely every day, not only because they bought their provisions at a distance, but also because they presumed to think lightly of Lysander for not putting out to meet them,—they were to sail back to him and to hoist a shield when midway in their course.


2.1.27
442
οἱ δὲ ταῦτα ἐποίησαν ὡς ἐκέλευσε .
And they did just as he had ordered.


2.1.28
443
Λύσανδρος δ’ εὐθὺς ἐσήμηνε τὴν ταχίστην πλεῖν ·
Straightway Lysander gave a signal to his fleet to sail with all speed,


2.1.28
444
συμπαρῄει δὲ καὶ Θώραξ τὸ πεζὸν ἔχων .
and Thorax with his troops went with the fleet.


2.1.28
445
Κόνων δὲ ἰδὼν τὸν ἐπίπλουν , ἐσήμηνεν εἰς τὰς ναῦς βοηθεῖν κατὰ κράτος .
Now when Conon saw the oncoming attack, he signalled the Athenians to hasten with all their might to their ships.


2.1.28
446
διεσκεδασμένων δὲ τῶν ἀνθρώπων , αἱ μὲν τῶν νεῶν δίκροτοι ἦσαν , αἱ δὲ μονόκροτοι , αἱ δὲ παντελῶς κεναί ·
But since his men were scattered here and there, some of the ships had but two banks of oars manned, some but one, and some were entirely empty;


2.1.28
447
ἡ δὲ Κόνωνος καὶ ἄλλαι περὶ αὐτὸν ἑπτὰ πλήρεις ἀνήχθησαν ἁθρόαι καὶ ἡ Πάραλος , τὰς δ’ ἄλλας πάσας Λύσανδρος ἔλαβε πρὸς τῇ γῇ .
Conon’s own ship, indeed, and seven others accompanying him, which were fully manned, put to sea in close order, and the Paralus with them, but all the rest Lysander captured on the beach.


2.1.28
448
τοὺς δὲ πλείστους ἄνδρας ἐν τῇ γῇ συνέλεξεν ·
He also gathered up on the shore most of the men of their crews;


2.1.28
449
οἱ δὲ καὶ ἔφυγον εἰς τὰ τειχύδρια .
some, however, gained the shelter of the neighbouring strongholds.


2.1.29
450
Κόνων δὲ ταῖς ἐννέα ναυσὶ φεύγων , ἐπεὶ ἔγνω τῶν Ἀθηναίων τὰ πράγματα διεφθαρμένα , κατασχὼν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀβαρνίδα τὴν Λαμψάκου ἄκραν ἔλαβεν αὐτόθεν τὰ μεγάλα τῶν Λυσάνδρου νεῶν ἱστία , καὶ αὐτὸς μὲν ὀκτὼ ναυσὶν ἀπέπλευσε παρ’ Εὐαγόραν εἰς Κύπρον , ἡ δὲ Πάραλος εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας ἀπαγγελοῦσα τὰ γεγονότα .
But when Conon, fleeing with his nineships, realized that the Athenian cause was lost, he put in atAbarnis, the promontory of Lampsacus, and there seized the cruisingsails that belonged to Lysander’s ships; then he sailed away witheight ships to seek refuge with Euagoras in Cyprus, while theParalus went to Athens with the tidings of what had happened.


2.1.30
451
Λύσανδρος δὲ τάς τε ναῦς καὶ τοὺς αἰχμαλώτους καὶ τ- ἄλλα πάντα εἰς Λάμψακον ἀπήγαγεν , ἔλαβε δὲ καὶ τῶν στρατηγῶν ἄλλους τε καὶ Φιλοκλέα καὶ Ἀδείμαντον .
As for Lysander, he took his prizes and prisoners and everything else back to Lampsacus, the prisoners including Philocles, Adeimantus, and some of the other generals.


2.1.30
452
ᾗ δ’ ἡμέρᾳ ταῦτα κατειργάσατο , ἔπεμψε Θεόπομπον τὸν Μιλήσιον λῃστὴν εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἀπαγγελοῦντα τὰ γεγονότα , ὃς ἀφικόμενος τριταῖος ἀπήγγειλε .
Furthermore, on the day when he achieved this victory he sent Theopompus, the Milesian buccaneer, to Lacedaemon to report what had happened, and Theopompus arrived and delivered his message on the third day.


2.1.31
453
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Λύσανδρος ἁθροίσας τοὺς συμμάχους ἐκέλευσε βουλεύεσθαι περὶ τῶν αἰχμαλώτων .
After this Lysander gathered together the allies and bade them deliberate regarding the disposition to be made of the prisoners.


2.1.31
454
ἐνταῦθα δὴ κατηγορίαι ἐγίγνοντο πολλαὶ τῶν Ἀθηναίων , ἅ τε ἤδη παρενενομήκεσαν καὶ ἃ ἐψηφισμένοι ἦσαν ποιεῖν , εἰ κρατήσειαν τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ , τὴν δεξιὰν χεῖρα ἀποκόπτειν τῶν ζωγρηθέντων πάντων , καὶ ὅτι λαβόντες δύο τριήρεις , Κορινθίαν καὶ Ἀνδρίαν , τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐξ αὐτῶν πάντας κατακρημνίσειαν ·
Thereupon many charges began to be urged against the Athenians, not only touching the outrages they had already committed and what they had voted to do if they were victorious in the battle, —namely, to cut off the right hand of every man taken alive,—but also the fact that after capturing two triremes, one a Corinthian and the other an Andrian, they had thrown the crews overboard to a man.


2.1.31
455
Φιλοκλῆς δ’ ἦν στρατηγὸς τῶν Ἀθηναίων , ὃς τούτους διέφθειρεν .
And it was Philocles, one of the Athenian generals, who had thus made away with these men.


2.1.32
456
ἐλέγετο δὲ καὶ ἄλλα πολλά , καὶ ἔδοξεν ἀποκτεῖναι τῶν αἰχμαλώτων ὅσοι ἦσαν Ἀθηναῖοι πλὴν Ἀδειμάντου , ὅτι μόνος ἐπελάβετο ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ τοῦ περὶ τῆς ἀποτομῆς τῶν χειρῶν ψηφίσματος ·
Many other stories were told, and it was finally resolved to put to death all of the prisoners who were Athenians, with the exception of Adeimantus, because he was the one man who in the Athenian Assembly had opposed the decree in regard to cutting off the hands of captives;


2.1.32
457
ᾐτιάθη μέντοι ὑπό τινων προδοῦναι τὰς ναῦς .
he was charged, however, by some people with having betrayed the fleet.


2.1.32
458
Λύσανδρος δὲ Φιλοκλέα πρῶτον ἐρωτήσας , ὃς τοὺς Ἀνδρίους καὶ Κορινθίους κατεκρήμνισε , τί εἴη ἄξιος παθεῖν ἀρξάμενος εἰς Ἕλληνας παρανομεῖν , ἀπέσφαξεν .
As to Philocles, who threw overboard the Andrians and Corinthians, Lysander first asked him what he deserved to suffer for having begun outrageous practices towards Greeks, and then had his throat cut.


2.2.1
459
ἐπεὶ δὲ τὰ ἐν τῇ Λαμψάκῳ κατεστήσατο , ἔπλει ἐπὶ τὸ Βυζάντιον καὶ Καλχηδόνα .
After setting in order the affairs of Lampsacus, Lysander sailed against Byzantium and Calchedon.


2.2.1
460
οἱ δ’ αὐτὸν ὑπεδέχοντο , τοὺς τῶν Ἀθηναίων φρουροὺς ὑποσπόνδους ἀφέντες .
And the people of those cities admitted him, allowing the Athenian garrisons, by the terms of the surrender, to withdraw.


2.2.1
461
οἱ δὲ προδόντες Ἀλκιβιάδῃ τὸ Βυζάντιον τότε μὲν ἔφυγον εἰς τὸν Πόντον , ὕστερον δ’ εἰς Ἀθήνας καὶ ἐγένοντο Ἀθηναῖοι .
And those who had betrayed Byzantium to Alcibiades fled at this time to the Pontus, but afterwards they went to Athens and became Athenian citizens.


2.2.2
462
Λύσανδρος δὲ τούς τε φρουροὺς τῶν Ἀθηναίων καὶ εἴ τινά που ἄλλον ἴδοι Ἀθηναῖον , ἀπέπεμπεν εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας , διδοὺς ἐκεῖσε μόνον πλέουσιν ἀσφάλειαν , ἄλλοθι δ’ οὔ , εἰδὼς ὅτι ὅσῳ ἂν πλείους συλλεγῶσιν εἰς τὸ ἄστυ καὶ τὸν Πειραιᾶ , θᾶττον τῶν ἐπιτηδείων ἔνδειαν ἔσεσθαι .
Now the Athenian garrisons, and in fact every other Athenian whom he saw anywhere, Lysander sent home to Athens, giving them safe conduct if they sailed to that one place and not if they went to any other;


2.2.2
463
καταλιπὼν δὲ Βυζαντίου καὶ Καλχηδόνος Σθενέλαον ἁρμοστὴν Λάκωνα , αὐτὸς ἀποπλεύσας εἰς Λάμψακον τὰς ναῦς ἐπεσκεύαζεν .
for he knew that the more people were collected in the city and Piraeus, the more quickly there would be a scarcity of provisions. Then, after leaving Sthenelaus, a Laconian, as governor of Byzantium and Calchedon, he sailed back to Lampsacus and occupied himself with refitting his ships.


2.2.3
464
ἐν δὲ ταῖς Ἀθήναις τῆς Παράλου ἀφικομένης νυκτὸς ἐλέγετο ἡ συμφορά , καὶ οἰμωγὴ ἐκ τοῦ Πειραιῶς διὰ τῶν μακρῶν τειχῶν εἰς ἄστυ διῆκεν , ὁ ἕτερος τῷ ἑτέρῳ παραγγέλλων ·
It was at night that the Paralus arrived at Athens with tidings of the disaster,


2.2.3
465
ὥστ’ ἐκείνης τῆς νυκτὸς οὐδεὶς ἐκοιμήθη , οὐ μόνον τοὺς ἀπολωλότας πενθοῦντες , ἀλλὰ πολὺ μᾶλλον ἔτι αὐτοὶ ἑαυτούς , πείσεσθαι νομίζοντες οἷα ἐποίησαν Μηλίους τε Λακεδαιμονίων ἀποίκους ὄντας , κρατήσαντες πολιορκίᾳ , καὶ Ἱστιαιέας καὶ Σκιωναίους καὶ Τορωναίους καὶ Αἰγινήτας καὶ ἄλλους πολλοὺς τῶν Ἑλλήνων .
and a sound of wailing ran from Piraeus through the long walls to the city, one man passing on the news to another; and during that night no one slept, all mourning, not for the lost alone, but far more for their own selves, thinking that they would suffer such treatment as they had visited upon the Melians, colonists of the Lacedaemonians, after reducing them by siege, and upon the Histiaeans and Scionaeans and Toronaeans and Aeginetans and many other Greek peoples.


2.2.4
466
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐκκλησίαν ἐποίησαν , ἐν ᾗ ἔδοξε τούς τε λιμένας ἀποχῶσαι πλὴν ἑνὸς καὶ τὰ τείχη εὐτρεπίζειν καὶ φυλακὰς ἐφιστάναι καὶ τ- ἄλλα πάντα ὡς εἰς πολιορκίαν παρασκευάζειν τὴν πόλιν .
On the following day they convened an Assembly, at which it was resolved to block up all the harbours except one, to repair the walls, to station guards, and in all other respects to get the city ready for a siege.


2.2.4
467
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν περὶ ταῦτα ἦσαν .
They busied themselves, accordingly, with these matters.


2.2.5
468
Λύσανδρος δ’ ἐκ τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου ναυσὶ διακοσίαις ἀφικόμενος εἰς Λέσβον κατεσκευάσατο τάς τε ἄλλας πόλεις ἐν αὐτῇ καὶ Μυτιλήνην ·
Meanwhile Lysander, sailing out of the Hellespont with two hundred ships, arrived at Lesbos and arranged the affairs of Mytilene and the other cities of the island;


2.2.5
469
εἰς δὲ τὰ ἐπὶ Θρᾴκης χωρία ἔπεμψε δέκα τριήρεις ἔχοντα Ἐτεόνικον , ὃς τὰ ἐκεῖ πάντα πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους μετέστησεν .
and he sent Eteonicus with ten triremes to the places on the Thracian coast, and Eteonicus brought over everything in that region to the side of the Lacedaemonians.


2.2.6
470
εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ ἡ ἄλλη Ἑλλὰς ἀφειστήκει Ἀθηναίων μετὰ τὴν ναυμαχίαν πλὴν Σαμίων ·
Indeed, the rest of the Greek world also had fallen away from the Athenians immediately after the battle, with the exception of Samos;


2.2.6
471
οὗτοι δὲ σφαγὰς τῶν γνωρίμων ποιήσαντες κατεῖχον τὴν πόλιν .
there the people slaughtered the aristocrats and held possession of their city.


2.2.7
472
Λύσανδρος δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα ἔπεμψε πρὸς Ἆγίν τε εἰς Δεκέλειαν καὶ εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ὅτι προσπλεῖ σὺν διακοσίαις ναυσί .
After this Lysander sent word to Agis, at Decelea, and to Lacedaemon that he was coming with two hundred ships.


2.2.7
473
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δ’ ἐξῇσαν πανδημεὶ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι Πελοποννήσιοι πλὴν Ἀργείων , παραγγείλαντος τοῦ ἑτέρου Λακεδαιμονίων βασιλέως Παυσανίου .
Thereupon the Lacedaemonians took the field with their whole force, and likewise the rest of the Peloponnesians excepting the Argives, at the command of Pausanias, the other king of the Lacedaemonians.


2.2.8
474
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἅπαντες ἡθροίσθησαν , ἀναλαβὼν αὐτοὺς πρὸς τὴν πόλιν ἐστρατοπέδευσεν ἐν τῇ Ἀκαδημείᾳ τῷ καλουμένῳ γυμνασίῳ .
And when all had been gathered together, Pausanias led them to Athensand encamped in the Academy.


2.2.9
475
Λύσανδρος δὲ ἀφικόμενος εἰς Αἴγιναν ἀπέδωκε τὴν πόλιν Αἰγινήταις , ὅσους ἐδύνατο πλείστους αὐτῶν ἁθροίσας , ὡς δ’ αὔτως καὶ Μηλίοις καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ὅσοι τῆς αὑτῶν ἐστέροντο .
Meantime Lysander, upon reaching Aegina, restored the state to the Aeginetans, gathering together as many of them as he could, and he did the same thing for the Melians also and for all the others who had been deprived of their native states.


2.2.9
476
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο δῃώσας Σαλαμῖνα ὡρμίσατο πρὸς τὸν Πειραιᾶ ναυσὶ πεντήκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν , καὶ τὰ πλοῖα εἶργε τοῦ εἴσπλου .
Then, after laying waste Salamis, he anchored at Piraeus with one hundred and fifty ships and closed the entrance to the harbour against all merchantmen.


2.2.10
477
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι πολιορκούμενοι κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν ἠπόρουν τί χρὴ ποιεῖν , οὔτε νεῶν οὔτε συμμάχων αὐτοῖς ὄντων οὔτε σίτου ·
Now the Athenians, being thus besieged by land and by sea, knew not what to do, since they had neither ships nor allies nor provisions;


2.2.10
478
ἐνόμιζον δὲ οὐδεμίαν εἶναι σωτηρίαν εἰ μὴ παθεῖν ἃ οὐ τιμωρούμενοι ἐποίησαν , ἀλλὰ διὰ τὴν ὕβριν ἠδίκουν ἀνθρώπους μικροπολίτας οὐδ’ ἐπὶ μιᾷ αἰτίᾳ ἑτέρᾳ ἢ ὅτι ἐκείνοις συνεμάχουν .
and they thought that there was no way out, save only to suffer the pains which they had themselves inflicted, not in retaliation, but in wantonness and unjustly upon the people of small states, for no other single reason than because they were in alliance with the Lacedaemonians.


2.2.11
479
διὰ ταῦτα τοὺς ἀτίμους ἐπιτίμους ποιήσαντες ἐκαρτέρουν , καὶ ἀποθνῃσκόντων ἐν τῇ πόλει λιμῷ πολλῶν οὐ διελέγοντο περὶ διαλλαγῆς .
On this account they restored to the disfranchised their political rights and held out steadfastly, refusing to make overtures for peace even though many were dying in the city from starvation.


2.2.11
480
ἐπεὶ δὲ παντελῶς ἤδη ὁ σῖτος ἐπελελοίπει , ἔπεμψαν πρέσβεις παρ’ Ἆγιν , βουλόμενοι σύμμαχοι εἶναι Λακεδαιμονίοις ἔχοντες τὰ τείχη καὶ τὸν Πειραιᾶ , καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις συνθήκας ποιεῖσθαι .
When, however, their provisions had entirely given out, they sent ambassadors to Agis declaring their wish to become allies of the Lacedaemonians while still keeping their walls and Piraeus, and on these terms to conclude a treaty.


2.2.12
481
ὁ δὲ αὐτοὺς εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἐκέλευεν ἰέναι ·
But Agis bade them go to Lacedaemon,


2.2.12
482
οὐ γὰρ εἶναι κύριος αὐτός .
saying that he himself had no authority.


2.2.12
483
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἀπήγγειλαν οἱ πρέσβεις ταῦτα τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις , ἔπεμψαν αὐτοὺς εἰς Λακεδαίμονα .
And when the ambassadors reported to the Athenians this reply, they sent them to Lacedaemon.


2.2.13
484
οἱ δ’ ἐπεὶ ἦσαν ἐν Σελλασίᾳ πλησίον τῆς Λακωνικῆς καὶ ἐπύθοντο οἱ ἔφοροι αὐτῶν ἃ ἔλεγον , ὄντα οἷάπερ καὶ πρὸς Ἆγιν , αὐτόθεν αὐτοὺς ἐκέλευον ἀπιέναι , καὶ εἴ τι δέονται εἰρήνης , κάλλιον ἥκειν βουλευσαμένους .
But when they were at Sellasia, near Laconia, and the ephors learnedfrom them what proposals they were bringing,—the same, namely, asthose which they had presented to Agis,—they directed them to goback again without coming a stepfarther and, if they really had any desire for peace, to take bettercounsel before they returned.


2.2.14
485
οἱ δὲ πρέσβεις ἐπεὶ ἧκον οἴκαδε καὶ ἀπήγγειλαν ταῦτα εἰς τὴν πόλιν , ἀθυμία ἐνέπεσε πᾶσιν ·
And when the ambassadors reached home and reported this to the people, despondency descended upon all;


2.2.14
486
ᾤοντο γὰρ ἀνδραποδισθήσεσθαι , καὶ ἕως ἂν πέμπωσιν ἑτέρους πρέσβεις , πολλοὺς τῷ λιμῷ ἀπολεῖσθαι .
for they imagined that they would be reduced to slavery, and that while they were sending another set of ambassadors, many would die of the famine.


2.2.15
487
περὶ δὲ τῶν τειχῶν τῆς καθαιρέσεως οὐδεὶς ἐβούλετο συμβουλεύειν ·
Nevertheless, no one wanted to make any proposal involving the destruction of the walls;


2.2.15
488
Ἀρχέστρατος γὰρ εἰπὼν ἐν τῇ βουλῇ Λακεδαιμονίοις κράτιστον εἶναι ἐφ’ οἷς προυκαλοῦντο εἰρήνην ποιεῖσθαι , ἐδέθη ·
for when Archestratus said in the Senate that it was best to make peace with the Lacedaemonians on the terms they offered,


2.2.15
489
προυκαλοῦντο δὲ τῶν μακρῶν τειχῶν ἐπὶ δέκα σταδίους καθελεῖν ἑκατέρου ·
—and the terms were that they should tear down a portion ten stadia long of each of the two long walls,—


2.2.15
490
ἐγένετο δὲ ψήφισμα μὴ ἐξεῖναι περὶ τούτων συμβουλεύειν .
he was thrown into prison, and a decree was passed forbidding the making of a proposal of this sort.


2.2.16
491
τοιούτων δὲ ὄντων Θηραμένης εἶπεν ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ ὅτι εἰ βούλονται αὐτὸν πέμψαι παρὰ Λύσανδρον , εἰδὼς ἥξει Λακεδαιμονίους πότερον ἐξανδραποδίσασθαι τὴν πόλιν βουλόμενοι ἀντέχουσι περὶ τῶν τειχῶν ἢ πίστεως ἕνεκα .
This being the condition of affairs in Athens, Theramenes said in the Assembly that if they were willing to send him to Lysander, he would find out before he came back whether the Lacedaemonians were insistent in the matter of the walls because they wished to reduce the city to slavery, or in order to obtain a guarantee of good faith.


2.2.16
492
πεμφθεὶς δὲ διέτριβε παρὰ Λυσάνδρῳ τρεῖς μῆνας καὶ πλείω , ἐπιτηρῶν ὁπότε Ἀθηναῖοι ἔμελλον διὰ τὸ ἐπιλελοιπέναι τὸν σῖτον ἅπαντα ὅ τι τις λέγοι ὁμολογήσειν .
Upon being sent, however, he stayed with Lysander three months and more, waiting for the time when, on account of the failure of provisions, the Athenians would agree to anything and everything which might be proposed.


2.2.17
493
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἧκε τετάρτῳ μηνί , ἀπήγγειλεν ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ ὅτι αὐτὸν Λύσανδρος τέως μὲν κατέχοι , εἶτα κελεύοι εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἰέναι ·
And when he returned in the fourth month, he reported in the Assembly that Lysander had detained him all this time and had then directed him to go to Lacedaemon,


2.2.17
494
οὐ γὰρ εἶναι κύριος ὧν ἐρωτῷτο ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ , ἀλλὰ τοὺς ἐφόρους .
saying that he had no authority in the matters concerning which Theramenes asked for information, but only the ephors.


2.2.17
495
μετὰ ταῦτα ᾑρέθη πρεσβευτὴς εἰς Λακεδαίμονα αὐτοκράτωρ δέκατος αὐτός .
After this Theramenes was chosen ambassador to Lacedaemon with full power, being at the head of an embassy of ten.


2.2.18
496
Λύσανδρος δὲ τοῖς ἐφόροις ἔπεμψεν ἀγγελοῦντα μετ’ ἄλλων Λακεδαιμονίων Ἀριστοτέλην , φυγάδα Ἀθηναῖον ὄντα , ὅτι ἀποκρίναιτο Θηραμένει ἐκείνους κυρίους εἶναι εἰρήνης καὶ πολέμου .
Lysander meanwhile sent Aristoteles, an Athenian exile, in companywith some Lacedaemonians, to report to the ephors that the answer hehad made to Theramenes was that they only had authority in thematter of peace and war.


2.2.19
497
Θηραμένης δὲ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι πρέσβεις ἐπεὶ ἦσαν ἐν Σελλασίᾳ , ἐρωτώμενοι δὲ ἐπὶ τίνι λόγῳ ἥκοιεν εἶπον ὅτι αὐτοκράτορες περὶ εἰρήνης , μετὰ ταῦτα οἱ ἔφοροι καλεῖν ἐκέλευον αὐτούς .
Now when Theramenes and the other ambassadors were at Sellasia and, on being asked with what proposals they had come, replied that they had full power to treat for peace,


2.2.19
498
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἧκον , ἐκκλησίαν ἐποίησαν , ἐν ᾗ ἀντέλεγον Κορίνθιοι καὶ Θηβαῖοι μάλιστα , πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ ἄλλοι τῶν Ἑλλήνων , μὴ σπένδεσθαι Ἀθηναίοις , ἀλλ’ ἐξαιρεῖν .
the ephors thereupon gave orders to summon them to Lacedaemon. When they arrived, the ephors called an assembly, at which the Corinthians and Thebans in particular, though many other Greeks agreed with them, opposed making a treaty with the Athenians and favoured destroying their city.


2.2.20
499
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ οὐκ ἔφασαν πόλιν Ἑλληνίδα ἀνδραποδιεῖν μέγα ἀγαθὸν εἰργασμένην ἐν τοῖς μεγίστοις κινδύνοις γενομένοις τῇ Ἑλλάδι , ἀλλ’ ἐποιοῦντο εἰρήνην ἐφ’ ᾧ τά τε μακρὰ τείχη καὶ τὸν Πειραιᾶ καθελόντας καὶ τὰς ναῦς πλὴν δώδεκα παραδόντας καὶ τοὺς φυγάδας καθέντας τὸν αὐτὸν ἐχθρὸν καὶ φίλον νομίζοντας Λακεδαιμονίοις ἕπεσθαι καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν ὅποι ἂν ἡγῶνται .
The Lacedaemonians, however, said that they would not enslave a Greekcity which had done great service amid the greatest perils that hadbefallen Greece, and they offered to make peace on these conditions:that the Athenians should destroy the long walls and the walls ofPiraeus, surrender all their ships except twelve, allow their exilesto return, count the same people friends and enemies as theLacedaemonians did, and follow the Lacedaemonians both by land andby sea wherever they should lead the way.


2.2.21
500
Θηραμένης δὲ καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ πρέσβεις ἐπανέφερον ταῦτα εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας .
So Theramenes and his fellow-ambassadors brought back this word to Athens.


2.2.21
501
εἰσιόντας δ’ αὐτοὺς ὄχλος περιεχεῖτο πολύς , φοβούμενοι μὴ ἄπρακτοι ἥκοιεν ·
And as they were entering the city, a great crowd gathered around them, fearful that they had returned unsuccessful;


2.2.21
502
οὐ γὰρ ἔτι ἐνεχώρει μέλλειν διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἀπολλυμένων τῷ λιμῷ .
for it was no longer possible to delay, on account of the number who were dying of the famine.


2.2.22
503
τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίᾳ ἀπήγγελλον οἱ πρέσβεις ἐφ’ οἷς οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ποιοῖντο τὴν εἰρήνην ·
On the next day the ambassadors reported to the Assembly the terms on which the Lacedaemonians offered to make peace;


2.2.22
504
προηγόρει δὲ αὐτῶν Θηραμένης , λέγων ὡς χρὴ πείθεσθαι Λακεδαιμονίοις καὶ τὰ τείχη περιαιρεῖν .
Theramenes acted as spokesman for the embassy, and urged that it was best to obey the Lacedaemonians and tear down the walls.


2.2.22
505
ἀντειπόντων δέ τινων αὐτῷ , πολὺ δὲ πλειόνων συνεπαινεσάντων , ἔδοξε δέχεσθαι τὴν εἰρήνην .
And while some spoke in opposition to him, a far greater number supported him, and it was voted to accept the peace.


2.2.23
506
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Λύσανδρός τε κατέπλει εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ καὶ οἱ φυγάδες κατῇσαν καὶ τὰ τείχη κατέσκαπτον ὑπ’ αὐλητρίδων πολλῇ προθυμίᾳ , νομίζοντες ἐκείνην τὴν ἡμέραν τῇ Ἑλλάδι ἄρχειν τῆς ἐλευθερίας .
After this Lysander sailed into Piraeus, the exiles returned, and thePeloponnesians with great enthusiasm began to tear down the walls tothe music of flute-girls, thinking that that day was the beginningof freedom for Greece.


2.2.24
507
καὶ ὁ ἐνιαυτὸς ἔληγεν , ἐν ᾧ μεσοῦντι Διονύσιος ὁ Ἑρμοκράτους Συρακόσιος ἐτυράννησε , μάχῃ μὲν πρότερον ἡττηθέντων ὑπὸ Συρακοσίων Καρχηδονίων , σπάνει δὲ σίτου ἑλόντων Ἀκράγαντα , ἐκλιπόντων τῶν Σικελιωτῶν τὴν πόλιν .
So the year ended, in the middle ofwhich Dionysius of Syracuse, the son of Hermocrates, became tyrant,after the Carthaginians had been defeated in battle by theSyracusans, but had captured Acragas by famine, the Siceliotsabandoning the city.


2.3.1
508
τῷ δ’ ἐπιόντι ἔτει ᾧ ἦν Ὀλυμπιάς , ᾗ τὸ στάδιον ἐνίκα Κροκίνας Θετταλός , Εὐδίου ἐν Σπάρτῃ ἐφορεύοντος , Πυθοδώρου δ’ ἐν Ἀθήναις ἄρχοντος , ὃν Ἀθηναῖοι , ὅτι ἐν ὀλιγαρχίᾳ ᾑρέθη , οὐκ ὀνομάζουσιν , ἀλλ’ ἀναρχίαν τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν καλοῦσιν .
In the following year—in which was celebrated an Olympiad, wherein Crocinas the Thessalian was victorious in the stadium, Endius being now ephor at Sparta and Pythodorus archon at Athens.


2.3.1
509
ἐγένετο δὲ αὕτη ἡ ὀλιγαρχία ὧδε .
Since, however, Pythodorus was chosen during the time of the oligarchy, the Athenians do not use his name to mark the year, but call it the archonless year.


2.3.2
510
ἔδοξε τῷ δήμῳ τριάκοντα ἄνδρας ἑλέσθαι , οἳ τοὺς πατρίους νόμους συγγράψουσι , καθ’ οὓς πολιτεύσουσι .
it was voted by the people to choose thirty men to frame the ancient laws into a constitution under which to conduct the government.


2.3.2
511
καὶ ᾑρέθησαν οἵδε ·
And the following men were chosen:


2.3.2
512
Πολυχάρης , Κριτίας , Μηλόβιος , Ἱππόλοχος , Εὐκλείδης , Ἱέρων , Μνησίλοχος , Χρέμων , Θηραμένης , Ἀρεσίας , Διοκλῆς , Φαιδρίας , Χαιρέλεως , Ἀναίτιος , Πείσων , Σοφοκλῆς , Ἐρατοσθένης , Χαρικλῆς , Ὀνομακλῆς , Θέογνις , Αἰσχίνης , Θεογένης , Κλεομήδης , Ἐρασίστρατος , Φείδων , Δρακοντίδης , Εὐμάθης , Ἀριστοτέλης , Ἱππόμαχος , Μνησιθείδης .
Polychares, Critias, Melobius, Hippolochus, Eucleides, Hieron, Mnesilochus, Chremon, Theramenes, Aresias, Diocles, Phaedrias, Chaereleos, Anaetius, Peison, Sophocles, Eratosthenes, Charicles, Onomacles, Theognis, Aeschines, Theogenes, Cleomedes, Erasistratus, Pheidon, Dracontides, Eumathes, Aristoteles, Hippomachus, Mnesitheides.


2.3.3
513
τούτων δὲ πραχθέντων ἀπέπλει Λύσανδρος πρὸς Σάμον , Ἆγις δ’ ἐκ τῆς Δεκελείας ἀπαγαγὼν τὸ πεζὸν στράτευμα διέλυσε κατὰ πόλεις ἑκάστους .
When this had been done, Lysander sailed off to Samos, while Agiswithdrew the land force from Decelea and dismissed the severalcontingents to their cities.


2.3.4
514
κατὰ δὲ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν περὶ ἡλίου ἔκλειψιν Λυκόφρων ὁ Φεραῖος , βουλόμενος ἄρξαι ὅλης τῆς Θετταλίας , τοὺς ἐναντιουμένους αὐτῷ τῶν Θετταλῶν , Λαρισαίους τε καὶ ἄλλους , μάχῃ ἐνίκησε καὶ πολλοὺς ἀπέκτεινεν .
It was near this date, and at aboutthe time of an eclipse of the sun, that Lycophron of Pherae, whowanted to make himself ruler of all Thessaly, defeated in battlethose among the Thessalians who opposed him, namely the Larisaeansand others, and slew many of them.


2.3.5
515
ἐν δὲ τῷ αὐτῷ χρόνῳ καὶ Διονύσιος ὁ Συρακόσιος τύραννος μάχῃ ἡττηθεὶς ὑπὸ Καρχηδονίων Γέλαν καὶ Καμάριναν ἀπώλεσε .
It was at the same time also that Dionysius, the tyrant of Syracuse, was defeated in battle by the Carthaginians and lost Gela and Camarina.


2.3.5
516
μετ’ ὀλίγον δὲ καὶ Λεοντῖνοι Συρακοσίοις συνοικοῦντες ἀπέστησαν εἰς τὴν αὑτῶν πόλιν ἀπὸ Διονυσίου καὶ Συρακοσίων .
Shortly afterwards also the Leontines, who had been dwelling at Syracuse, revolted from Dionysius and the Syracusans and returned to their own city.


2.3.5
517
παραχρῆμα δὲ καὶ οἱ Συρακόσιοι ἱππεῖς ὑπὸ Διονυσίου εἰς Κατάνην ἀπεστάλησαν .
And immediately thereafter the Syracusan horsemen were despatched by Dionysius to Catana.


2.3.6
518
οἱ δὲ Σάμιοι πολιορκούμενοι ὑπὸ Λυσάνδρου πάντῃ , ἐπεὶ οὐ βουλομένων αὐτῶν τὸ πρῶτον ὁμολογεῖν προσβάλλειν ἤδη ἔμελλεν ὁ Λύσανδρος , ὡμολόγησαν ἓν ἱμάτιον ἔχων ἕκαστος ἀπιέναι τῶν ἐλευθέρων , τὰ δ’ ἄλλα παραδοῦναι ·
Meanwhile the Samians were being besieged by Lysander on every side,


2.3.6
519
καὶ οὕτως ἐξῆλθον .
and when, seeing that at first they refused to come to terms, he was on the point of making an attack upon them, they came to an agreement with him that every free person should depart from the city with but one cloak and that all else should be surrendered; and on these terms they withdrew.


2.3.7
520
Λύσανδρος δὲ τοῖς ἀρχαίοις πολίταις παραδοὺς τὴν πόλιν καὶ τὰ ἐνόντα πάντα καὶ δέκα ἄρχοντας καταστήσας φρουρεῖν ἀφῆκε τὸ τῶν συμμάχων ναυτικὸν κατὰ πόλεις , ταῖς δὲ Λακωνικαῖς ναυσὶν ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Λακεδαίμονα , ἀπάγων τά τε τῶν αἰχμαλώτων νεῶν ἀκρωτήρια καὶ τὰς ἐκ Πειραιῶς τριήρεις πλὴν δώδεκα καὶ στεφάνους , οὓς παρὰ τῶν πόλεων ἐλάμβανε δῶρα ἰδίᾳ , καὶ ἀργυρίου τετρακόσια καὶ ἑβδομήκοντα τάλαντα , ἃ περιεγένοντο τῶν φόρων , οὓς αὐτῷ Κῦρος παρέδειξεν εἰς τὸν πόλεμον , καὶ εἴ τι ἄλλο ἐκτήσατο ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ .
And Lysander gave over the city and everything therein to the formercitizens, and appointed ten rulers to guard it; then he dismissedthe naval contingents of the allies to their several cities,


2.3.9
521
ταῦτα δὲ πάντα Λακεδαιμονίοις ἀπέδωκε τελευτῶντος τοῦ θέρους εἰς ὃ ἑξάμηνος καὶ ὀκτὼ καὶ εἴκοσιν ἔτη τῷ πολέμῳ ἐτελεύτα , ἐν οἷς ἔφοροι οἱ ἀριθμούμενοι οἵδε ἐγένοντο , Αἰνησίας πρῶτος , ἐφ’ οὗ ἤρξατο ὁ πόλεμος , πέμπτῳ καὶ δεκάτῳ ἔτει τῶν μετ’ Εὐβοίας ἅλωσιν τριακονταετίδων σπονδῶν , μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον οἵδε ·
All these things he delivered over to the Lacedaemonians at the closeof the summer—with which ended the twenty-eight years and six monthsof the war, during which years the eponymous ephors were thefollowing: Aenesias first, in whose term the war began, in thefifteenth year of the thirty years’ truce which followed theconquest of Euboea, and after him the following:


2.3.10
522
Βρασίδας , Ἰσάνωρ , Σωστρατίδας , Ἔξαρχος , Ἀγησίστρατος , Ἀγγενίδας , Ὀνομακλῆς , Ζεύξιππος , Πιτύας , Πλειστόλας , Κλεινόμαχος , Ἴλαρχος , Λέων , Χαιρίλας , Πατησιάδας , Κλεοσθένης , Λυκάριος , Ἐπήρατος , Ὀνομάντιος , Ἀλεξιππίδας , Μισγολαΐδας , Ἰσίας , Ἄρακος , Εὐάρχιππος , Παντακλῆς , Πιτύας , Ἀρχύτας , Εὔδιος , ἐφ’ οὗ Λύσανδρος πράξας τὰ εἰρημένα οἴκαδε κατέπλευσεν .
Brasidas, Isanor, Sostratidas, Exarchus, Agesistratus, Angenidas,Onomacles, Zeuxippus, Pityas, Pleistolas, Cleinomachus, Ilarchus,Leon, Chaerilas, Patesiadas, Cleosthenes, Lycarius, Eperatus,Onomantius, Alexippidas, Misgolaidas, Isias, Aracus, Euarchippus,Pantacles, Pityas, Archytas, and Endius; it was in Endius’ term thatLysander sailed home after performing the deeds above described.


2.3.11
523
οἱ δὲ τριάκοντα ᾑρέθησαν μὲν ἐπεὶ τάχιστα τὰ μακρὰ τείχη καὶ τὰ περὶ τὸν Πειραιᾶ καθῃρέθη ·
Now at Athens the Thirty had been chosen as soon as the long walls and the walls round Piraeus were demolished;


2.3.11
524
αἱρεθέντες δὲ ἐφ’ ᾧτε συγγράψαι νόμους , καθ’ οὕστινας πολιτεύσοιντο , τούτους μὲν ἀεὶ ἔμελλον συγγράφειν τε καὶ ἀποδεικνύναι , βουλὴν δὲ καὶ τὰς ἄλλας ἀρχὰς κατέστησαν ὡς ἐδόκει αὐτοῖς .
although chosen, however, for the purpose of framing a constitution under which to conduct the government, they continually delayed framing and publishing this constitution, but they appointed a Senate and the other magistrates as they saw fit.


2.3.12
525
ἔπειτα πρῶτον μὲν οὓς πάντες ᾔδεσαν ἐν τῇ δημοκρατίᾳ ἀπὸ συκοφαντίας ζῶντας καὶ τοῖς καλοῖς κ- ἀγαθοῖς βαρεῖς ὄντας , συλλαμβάνοντες ὑπῆγον θανάτου ·
Then, as a first step, they arrested and brought to trial for their lives those persons who, by common knowledge, had made a living in the time of the democracy by acting as informers and had been offensive to the aristocrats;


2.3.12
526
καὶ ἥ τε βουλὴ ἡδέως αὐτῶν κατεψηφίζετο οἵ τε ἄλλοι ὅσοι συνῄδεσαν ἑαυτοῖς μὴ ὄντες τοιοῦτοι οὐδὲν ἤχθοντο .
and the Senate was glad to pronounce these people guilty, and the rest of the citizens—at least all who were conscious that they were not of the same sort themselves—were not at all displeased.


2.3.13
527
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἤρξαντο βουλεύεσθαι ὅπως ἂν ἐξείη αὐτοῖς τῇ πόλει χρῆσθαι ὅπως βούλοιντο , ἐκ τούτου πρῶτον μὲν πέμψαντες εἰς Λακεδαίμονα Αἰσχίνην τε καὶ Ἀριστοτέλην ἔπεισαν Λύσανδρον φρουροὺς σφίσι συμπρᾶξαι ἐλθεῖν , ἕως δὴ τοὺς πονηροὺς ἐκποδὼν ποιησάμενοι καταστήσαιντο τὴν πολιτείαν ·
When, however, the Thirty began to consider how they might become free to do just as they pleased with the state, their first act was to send Aeschines and Aristoteles to Lacedaemon and persuade Lysander to help them to secure the sending of a Lacedaemonian garrison,


2.3.13
528
θρέψειν δὲ αὐτοὶ ὑπισχνοῦντο .
to remain until, as they said, they could put the scoundrels out of the way and establish their government; and they promised to maintain this garrison at their own charges.


2.3.14
529
ὁ δὲ πεισθεὶς τούς τε φρουροὺς καὶ Καλλίβιον ἁρμοστὴν συνέπραξεν αὐτοῖς πεμφθῆναι .
Lysander consented, and helped them to secure the dispatch of the troops and of Callibius as governor.


2.3.14
530
οἱ δ’ ἐπεὶ τὴν φρουρὰν ἔλαβον , τὸν μὲν Καλλίβιον ἐθεράπευον πάσῃ θεραπείᾳ , ὡς πάντα ἐπαινοίη ἃ πράττοιεν , τῶν δὲ φρουρῶν τούτου συμπέμποντος αὐτοῖς οὓς ἐβούλοντο συνελάμβανον οὐκέτι τοὺς πονηρούς τε καὶ ὀλίγου ἀξίους , ἀλλ’ ἤδη οὓς ἐνόμιζον ἥκιστα μὲν παρωθουμένους ἀνέχεσθαι , ἀντιπράττειν δέ τι ἐπιχειροῦντας πλείστους ἂν τοὺς συνεθέλοντας λαμβάνειν .
But when they had got the garrison, they paid court to Callibius in every way, in order that he might approve of everything they did, and as he detailed guardsmen to go with them, they arrested the people whom they wished to reach,—not now the scoundrels and persons of little account, but from this time forth the men who, they thought, were least likely to submit to being ignored, and who, if they undertook to offer any opposition, would obtain supporters in the greatest numbers.


2.3.15
531
τῷ μὲν οὖν πρώτῳ χρόνῳ ὁ Κριτίας τῷ Θηραμένει ὁμογνώμων τε καὶ φίλος ἦν ·
Now in the beginning Critias and Theramenes were agreed in their policy and friendly;


2.3.15
532
ἐπεὶ δὲ αὐτὸς μὲν προπετὴς ἦν ἐπὶ τὸ πολλοὺς ἀποκτείνειν , ἅτε καὶ φυγὼν ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου , ὁ δὲ Θηραμένης ἀντέκοπτε , λέγων ὅτι οὐκ εἰκὸς εἴη θανατοῦν , εἴ τις ἐτιμᾶτο ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου , τοὺς δὲ καλοὺς κ- ἀγαθοὺς μηδὲν κακὸν εἰργάζετο , ἐπεὶ καὶ ἐγώ , ἔφη , καὶ σὺ πολλὰ δὴ τοῦ ἀρέσκειν ἕνεκα τῇ πόλει καὶ εἴπομεν καὶ ἐπράξαμεν ·
but when Critias showed himself eager to put many to death, because, for one thing, he had been banished by the democracy, Theramenes opposed him, saying that it was not reasonable to put a man to death because he was honoured by the commons, provided he was doing no harm to the aristocrats. For, said he, you and I also have said and done many things for the sake of winning the favour of the city.


2.3.16
533
ὁ δέ ( ἔτι γὰρ οἰκείως ἐχρῆτο τῷ Θηραμένει ) ἀντέλεγεν ὅτι οὐκ ἐγχωροίη τοῖς πλεονεκτεῖν βουλομένοις μὴ οὐκ ἐκποδὼν ποιεῖσθαι τοὺς ἱκανωτάτους διακωλύειν ·
Then Critias (for he still treated Theramenes as a friend) replied that it was impossible for people who wanted to gain power not to put out of the way those who were best able to thwart them.


2.3.16
534
εἰ δέ , ὅτι τριάκοντά ἐσμεν καὶ οὐχ εἷς , ἧττόν τι οἴει ὥσπερ τυραννίδος ταύτης τῆς ἀρχῆς χρῆναι ἐπιμελεῖσθαι , εὐήθης εἶ .
But if, he said, merely because we are thirty and not one, you imagine that it is any the less necessary for us to keep a close watch over this government, just as one would if it were an absolute monarchy, you are foolish.


2.3.17
535
ἐπεὶ δέ , ἀποθνῃσκόντων πολλῶν καὶ ἀδίκως , πολλοὶ δῆλοι ἦσαν συνιστάμενοί τε καὶ θαυμάζοντες τί ἔσοιτο ἡ πολιτεία , πάλιν ἔλεγεν ὁ Θηραμένης ὅτι εἰ μή τις κοινωνοὺς ἱκανοὺς λήψοιτο τῶν πραγμάτων , ἀδύνατον ἔσοιτο τὴν ὀλιγαρχίαν διαμένειν .
But when, on account of the great numbers continually—andunjustly—put to death, it was evident that many were bandingtogether and wondering what the state was coming to, Theramenesspoke again, saying that unless they admitted an adequate number ofcitizens into partnership with them in the management of affairs, itwould be impossible for the oligarchy to endure.


2.3.18
536
ἐκ τούτου μέντοι Κριτίας καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι τριάκοντα , ἤδη φοβούμενοι καὶ οὐχ ἥκιστα τὸν Θηραμένην , μὴ συρρυείησαν πρὸς αὐτὸν οἱ πολῖται , καταλέγουσι τρισχιλίους τοὺς μεθέξοντας δὴ τῶν πραγμάτων ·
Accordingly Critias and the rest of the Thirty, who were by this timealarmed and feared above all that the citizens would flock to thesupport of Theramenes, enrolled a body of three thousand, who wereto share, as they said, in the government.


2.3.19
537
ὁ δ’ αὖ Θηραμένης καὶ πρὸς ταῦτα ἔλεγεν ὅτι ἄτοπον δοκοίη ἑαυτῷ γε εἶναι τὸ πρῶτον μὲν βουλομένους τοὺς βελτίστους τῶν πολιτῶν κοινωνοὺς ποιήσασθαι τρισχιλίους , ὥσπερ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τοῦτον ἔχοντά τινα ἀνάγκην καλοὺς καὶ ἀγαθοὺς εἶναι , καὶ οὔτ’ ἔξω τούτων σπουδαίους οὔτ’ ἐντὸς τούτων πονηροὺς οἷόν τε εἴη γενέσθαι ·
Theramenes, however, objected to this move also, saying that, in the first place, it seemed to him absurd that, when they wanted to make the best of the citizens their associates, they should limit themselves to three thousand, as though this number must somehow be good men and true and there could neither be excellent men outside this body nor rascals within it.


2.3.19
538
ἔπειτα δ’ , ἔφη , ὁρῶ ἔγωγε δύο ἡμᾶς τὰ ἐναντιώτατα πράττοντας , βιαίαν τε τὴν ἀρχὴν καὶ ἥττονα τῶν ἀρχομένων κατασκευαζομένους .
Besides, he said, we are undertaking, in my opinion, two absolutely inconsistent things,—to rig up our government on the basis of force and at the same time to make it weaker than its subjects.


2.3.20
539
ὁ μὲν ταῦτ’ ἔλεγεν .
This was what Theramenes said.


2.3.20
540
οἱ δ’ ἐξέτασιν ποιήσαντες τῶν μὲν τρισχιλίων ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ , τῶν δ’ ἔξω τοῦ καταλόγου ἄλλων ἀλλαχοῦ , ἔπειτα κελεύσαντες ἐπὶ τὰ ὅπλα , ἐν ᾧ ἐκεῖνοι ἀπεληλύθεσαν πέμψαντες τοὺς φρουροὺς καὶ τῶν πολιτῶν τοὺς ὁμογνώμονας αὑτοῖς τὰ ὅπλα πάντων πλὴν τῶν τρισχιλίων παρείλοντο , καὶ ἀνακομίσαντες ταῦτα εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν συνέθηκαν ἐν τῷ ναῷ .
As for the Thirty, they held a review, the Three Thousand assembling in the market-place and those who were not on the roll in various places here and there; then they gave the order to pile arms, and while the men were off duty and away, they sent their Lacedaemonian guardsmen and such citizens as were in sympathy with them, seized the arms of all except the Three Thousand, carried them up to the Acropolis, and deposited them in the temple.


2.3.21
541
τούτων δὲ γενομένων , ὡς ἐξὸν ἤδη ποιεῖν αὐτοῖς ὅ τι βούλοιντο , πολλοὺς μὲν ἔχθρας ἕνεκα ἀπέκτεινον , πολλοὺς δὲ χρημάτων .
And now, when this had been accomplished, thinking that they were at length free to do whatever they pleased, they put many people to death out of personal enmity, and many also for the sake of securing their property.


2.3.21
542
ἔδοξε δ’ αὐτοῖς , ὅπως ἔχοιεν καὶ τοῖς φρουροῖς χρήματα διδόναι , καὶ τῶν μετοίκων ἕνα ἕκαστον λαβεῖν , καὶ αὐτοὺς μὲν ἀποκτεῖναι , τὰ δὲ χρήματα αὐτῶν ἀποσημήνασθαι .
One measure that they resolved upon, in order to get money to pay their guardsmen, was that each of their number should seize one of the aliens residing in the city, and that they should put these men to death and confiscate their property.


2.3.22
543
ἐκέλευον δὲ καὶ τὸν Θηραμένην λαβεῖν ὅντινα βούλοιτο .
So they bade Theramenes also to seize anyone he pleased;


2.3.22
544
ὁ δ’ ἀπεκρίνατο ·
and he replied:


2.3.22
545
ἀλλ’ οὐ δοκεῖ μοι , ἔφη , καλὸν εἶναι φάσκοντας βελτίστους εἶναι ἀδικώτερα τῶν συκοφαντῶν ποιεῖν .
But it is not honourable, as it seems to me, he said, for people who style themselves the best citizens to commit acts of greater injustice than the informers used to do.


2.3.22
546
ἐκεῖνοι μὲν γὰρ παρ’ ὧν χρήματα λαμβάνοιεν ζῆν εἴων , ἡμεῖς δὲ ἀποκτενοῦμεν μηδὲν ἀδικοῦντας , ἵνα χρήματα λαμβάνωμεν ;
For they allowed those from whom they got money, to live; but shall we, in order to get money, put to death men who are guilty of no wrong-doing?


2.3.22
547
πῶς οὐ ταῦτα τῷ παντὶ ἐκείνων ἀδικώτερα ;
Are not such acts altogether more unjust than theirs were?


2.3.23
548
οἱ δ’ ἐμποδὼν νομίζοντες αὐτὸν εἶναι τῷ ποιεῖν ὅ τι βούλοιντο , ἐπιβουλεύουσιν αὐτῷ , καὶ ἰδίᾳ πρὸς τοὺς βουλευτὰς ἄλλος πρὸς ἄλλον διέβαλλον ὡς λυμαινόμενον τὴν πολιτείαν .
Then the Thirty, thinking that Theramenes was an obstacle to their doing whatever they pleased, plotted against him, and kept accusing him to individual senators, one to one man and another to another, of injuring the government.


2.3.23
549
καὶ παραγγείλαντες νεανίσκοις οἳ ἐδόκουν αὐτοῖς θρασύτατοι εἶναι ξιφίδια ὑπὸ μάλης ἔχοντας παραγενέσθαι , συνέλεξαν τὴν βουλήν .
And after passing the word to some young men, who seemed to them most audacious, to be in attendance with daggers hidden under their arms, they convened the Senate.


2.3.24
550
ἐπεὶ δὲ ὁ Θηραμένης παρῆν , ἀναστὰς ὁ Κριτίας ἔλεξεν ὧδε .
Then when Theramenes arrived, Critias arose and spoke as follows:


2.3.24
551
ὦ ἄνδρες βουλευταί , εἰ μέν τις ὑμῶν νομίζει πλείους τοῦ καιροῦ ἀποθνῄσκειν , ἐννοησάτω ὅτι ὅπου πολιτεῖαι μεθίστανται πανταχοῦ ταῦτα γίγνεται ·
Gentlemen of the Senate, if anyone among you thinks that more people than is fitting are being put to death, let him reflect that where governments are changed these things always take place;


2.3.24
552
πλείστους δὲ ἀνάγκη ἐνθάδε πολεμίους εἶναι τοῖς εἰς ὀλιγαρχίαν μεθιστᾶσι διά τε τὸ πολυανθρωποτάτην τῶν Ἑλληνίδων τὴν πόλιν εἶναι καὶ διὰ τὸ πλεῖστον χρόνον ἐν ἐλευθερίᾳ τὸν δῆμον τεθράφθαι .
and it is inevitable that those who are changing the government here to an oligarchy should have most numerous enemies, both because the state is the most populous of the Greek states and because the commons have been bred up in a condition of freedom for the longest time.


2.3.25
553
ἡμεῖς δὲ γνόντες μὲν τοῖς οἵοις ἡμῖν τε καὶ ὑμῖν χαλεπὴν πολιτείαν εἶναι δημοκρατίαν , γνόντες δὲ ὅτι Λακεδαιμονίοις τοῖς περισώσασιν ἡμᾶς ὁ μὲν δῆμος οὔποτ’ ἂν φίλος γένοιτο , οἱ δὲ βέλτιστοι ἀεὶ ἂν πιστοὶ διατελοῖεν , διὰ ταῦτα σὺν τῇ Λακεδαιμονίων γνώμῃ τήνδε τὴν πολιτείαν καθίσταμεν .
Now we, believing that for men like ourselves and you democracy is agrievous form of government, and convinced that the commons wouldnever become friendly to the Lacedaemonians, our preservers, whilethe aristocrats would continue ever faithful to them, for thesereasons are establishing, with the approval of the Lacedaemonians,the present form of government.


2.3.26
554
καὶ ἐάν τινα αἰσθανώμεθα ἐναντίον τῇ ὀλιγαρχίᾳ , ὅσον δυνάμεθα ἐκποδὼν ποιούμεθα ·
And if we find anyone opposed to the oligarchy, so far as we have the power we put him out of the way;


2.3.26
555
πολὺ δὲ μάλιστα δοκεῖ ἡμῖν δίκαιον εἶναι , εἴ τις ἡμῶν αὐτῶν λυμαίνεται ταύτῃ τῇ καταστάσει , δίκην αὐτὸν διδόναι .
but in particular we consider it to be right that, if any one of our own number is harming this order of things, he should be punished.


2.3.27
556
νῦν οὖν αἰσθανόμεθα Θηραμένην τουτονὶ οἷς δύναται ἀπολλύντα ἡμᾶς τε καὶ ὑμᾶς .
Now in fact we find this man Theramenes trying, by what means he can, to destroy both ourselves and you.


2.3.27
557
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ἀληθῆ , ἂν κατανοῆτε , εὑρήσετε οὔτε ψέγοντα οὐδένα μᾶλλον Θηραμένους τουτουὶ τὰ παρόντα οὔτε ἐναντιούμενον , ὅταν τινὰ ἐκποδὼν βουλώμεθα ποιήσασθαι τῶν δημαγωγῶν .
As proof that this is true you will discover, if you consider the matter, that no one finds more fault with the present proceedings than Theramenes here, or offers more opposition when we wish to put some demagogue out of the way.


2.3.27
558
εἰ μὲν τοίνυν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ταῦτα ἐγίγνωσκε , πολέμιος μὲν ἦν , οὐ μέντοι πονηρός γ’ ἂν δικαίως ἐνομίζετο ·
Now if he had held these views from the beginning, he was, to be sure, an enemy, but nevertheless he would not justly be deemed a scoundrel.


2.3.28
559
νῦν δὲ αὐτὸς μὲν ἄρξας τῆς πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους πίστεως καὶ φιλίας , αὐτὸς δὲ τῆς τοῦ δήμου καταλύσεως , μάλιστα δὲ ἐξορμήσας ὑμᾶς τοῖς πρώτοις ὑπαγομένοις εἰς ὑμᾶς δίκην ἐπιτιθέναι , νῦν ἐπεὶ καὶ ὑμεῖς καὶ ἡμεῖς φανερῶς ἐχθροὶ τῷ δήμῳ γεγενήμεθα , οὐκέτ’ αὐτῷ τὰ γιγνόμενα ἀρέσκει , ὅπως αὐτὸς μὲν αὖ ἐν τῷ ἀσφαλεῖ καταστῇ , ἡμεῖς δὲ δίκην δῶμεν τῶν πεπραγμένων .
In fact, however, he was the very man who took the initiative in thepolicy of establishing a cordial understanding with theLacedaemonians; he was the very man who began the overthrow of thedemocracy, and who urged you most to inflict punishment upon thosewho were first brought before you for trial; but now, when you andwe have manifestly become hateful to the democrats, he no longerapproves of what is going on,—just so that he may get on the safeside again, and that we may be punished for what has been done.


2.3.29
560
ὥστε οὐ μόνον ὡς ἐχθρῷ αὐτῷ προσήκει ἀλλὰ καὶ ὡς προδότῃ ὑμῶν τε καὶ ἡμῶν διδόναι τὴν δίκην .
Therefore he ought to be punished, not merely as an enemy, but also as a traitor both to you and to ourselves.


2.3.29
561
καίτοι τοσούτῳ μὲν δεινότερον προδοσία πολέμου , ὅσῳ χαλεπώτερον φυλάξασθαι τὸ ἀφανὲς τοῦ φανεροῦ , τοσούτῳ δ’ ἔχθιον , ὅσῳ πολεμίοις μὲν ἄνθρωποι καὶ σπένδονται καὶ αὖθις πιστοὶ γίγνονται , ὃν δ’ ἂν προδιδόντα λαμβάνωσι , τούτῳ οὔτε ἐσπείσατο πώποτε οὐδεὶς οὔτ’ ἐπίστευσε τοῦ λοιποῦ .
And treason is a far more dreadful thing than war, inasmuch as it is harder to take precaution against the hidden than against the open danger, and a far more hateful thing, inasmuch as men make peace with enemies and become their trustful friends again, but if they catch a man playing the traitor, they never in any case make peace with that man or trust him thereafter.


2.3.30
562
ἵνα δὲ εἰδῆτε ὅτι οὐ καινὰ ταῦτα οὗτος ποιεῖ , ἀλλὰ φύσει προδότης ἐστίν , ἀναμνήσω ὑμᾶς τὰ τούτῳ πεπραγμένα .
Now to let you know that this man’s present doings are nothing new, but that he is, rather, a traitor by nature, I will recall to you his past deeds.


2.3.30
563
οὗτος γὰρ ἐξ ἀρχῆς μὲν τιμώμενος ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου κατὰ τὸν πατέρα Ἅγνωνα , προπετέστατος ἐγένετο τὴν δημοκρατίαν μεταστῆσαι εἰς τοὺς τετρακοσίους , καὶ ἐπρώτευεν ἐν ἐκείνοις .
This man in the beginning, although he had received honours at the hands of the democracy, was extremely eager, like his father Hagnon, to change the democracy into the oligarchy of the Four Hundred, and he was a leader in that government.


2.3.30
564
ἐπεὶ δ’ ᾔσθετο ἀντίπαλόν τι τῇ ὀλιγαρχίᾳ συνιστάμενον , πρῶτος αὖ ἡγεμὼν τῷ δήμῳ ἐπ’ ἐκείνους ἐγένετο ·
When, however, he perceived that some opposition to the oligarchy was gathering, he took the lead again—as champion of the democrats against the oligarchs!


2.3.31
565
ὅθεν δήπου καὶ κόθορνος ἐπικαλεῖται .
That is the reason, you know, why he is nicknamed Buskin:


2.3.31
566
καὶ γὰρ ὁ κόθορνος ἁρμόττειν μὲν τοῖς ποσὶν ἀμφοτέροις δοκεῖ , ἀποβλέπει δὲ ἀπ’ ἀμφοτέρων .
for as the buskin seems to fit both feet, so he faces both ways.


2.3.31
567
δεῖ δέ , ὦ Θηράμενες , ἄνδρα τὸν ἄξιον ζῆν οὐ προάγειν μὲν δεινὸν εἶναι εἰς πράγματα τοὺς συνόντας , ἂν δέ τι ἀντικόπτῃ , εὐθὺς μεταβάλλεσθαι , ἀλλ’ ὥσπερ ἐν νηὶ διαπονεῖσθαι , ἕως ἂν εἰς οὖρον καταστῶσιν ·
But, Theramenes, the man who deserves to live ought not to be clever at leading his comrades into dangerous undertakings and then, if any hindrance offers itself, to turn around on the instant, but he ought, as one on shipboard, to hold to his task until they come into a fair breeze.


2.3.31
568
εἰ δὲ μή , πῶς ἂν ἀφίκοιντό ποτε ἔνθα δεῖ , εἰ ἐπειδάν τι ἀντικόψῃ , εὐθὺς εἰς τ- ἐναντία πλέοιεν ;
Otherwise, how in the world would sailors reach the port for which they are bound, if they should sail in the opposite direction the moment any hindrance offered itself?


2.3.32
569
καὶ εἰσὶ μὲν δήπου πᾶσαι μεταβολαὶ πολιτειῶν θανατηφόροι , σὺ δὲ διὰ τὸ εὐμετάβολος εἶναι πλείστοις μὲν μεταίτιος εἶ ἐξ ὀλιγαρχίας ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου ἀπολωλέναι , πλείστοις δ’ ἐκ δημοκρατίας ὑπὸ τῶν βελτιόνων .
It is true, of course, that all sorts of changes in government are attended by loss of life, but you, thanks to your changing sides so easily, share the responsibility, not merely for the slaughter of a large number of oligarchs by the commons, but also for the slaughter of a large number of democrats by the aristocracy.


2.3.32
570
οὗτος δέ τοί ἐστιν ὃς καὶ ταχθεὶς ἀνελέσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν στρατηγῶν τοὺς καταδύντας Ἀθηναίων ἐν τῇ περὶ Λέσβον ναυμαχίᾳ αὐτὸς οὐκ ἀνελόμενος ὅμως τῶν στρατηγῶν κατηγορῶν ἀπέκτεινεν αὐτούς , ἵνα αὐτὸς περισωθείη .
And this Theramenes, you remember, was the man who, although detailed by the generals to pick up the Athenians whose ships were disabled in the battle off Lesbos, failed to do so, and nevertheless was the very one who accused the generals and brought about their death in order that he might save his own life!


2.3.33
571
ὅστις γε μὴν φανερός ἐστι τοῦ μὲν πλεονεκτεῖν ἀεὶ ἐπιμελόμενος , τοῦ δὲ καλοῦ καὶ τῶν φίλων μηδὲν ἐντρεπόμενος , πῶς τούτου χρή ποτε φείσασθαι ;
Now when a man clearly shows that he is always looking out for his own advantage and taking no thought for honour or his friends, how in the world can it be right to spare him?


2.3.33
572
πῶς δὲ οὐ φυλάξασθαι , εἰδότας αὐτοῦ τὰς μεταβολάς , ὡς μὴ καὶ ἡμᾶς τ- αὐτὸ δυνασθῇ ποιῆσαι ;
Ought we not surely, knowing of his previous changes, to take care that he shall not be able to do the same thing to us also?


2.3.33
573
ἡμεῖς οὖν τοῦτον ὑπάγομεν καὶ ὡς ἐπιβουλεύοντα καὶ ὡς προδιδόντα ἡμᾶς τε καὶ ὑμᾶς .
We therefore arraign him on the charge of plotting against and betraying both ourselves and you.


2.3.33
574
ὡς δ’ εἰκότα ποιοῦμεν , καὶ τάδ’ ἐννοήσατε .
And in proof that what we are thus doing is proper, consider this fact also.


2.3.34
575
καλλίστη μὲν γὰρ δήπου δοκεῖ πολιτεία εἶναι ἡ Λακεδαιμονίων ·
The constitution of the Lacedaemonians is, we know, deemed the best of all constitutions.


2.3.34
576
εἰ δὲ ἐκείνῃ ἐπιχειρήσειέ τις τῶν ἐφόρων ἀντὶ τοῦ τοῖς πλείοσι πείθεσθαι ψέγειν τε τὴν ἀρχὴν καὶ ἐναντιοῦσθαι τοῖς πραττομένοις , οὐκ ἂν οἴεσθε αὐτὸν καὶ ὑπ’ αὐτῶν τῶν ἐφόρων καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς ἄλλης ἁπάσης πόλεως τῆς μεγίστης τιμωρίας ἀξιωθῆναι ;
Now in Lacedaemon if one of the ephors should undertake to find fault with the government and to oppose what was being done instead of yielding to the majority, do you not suppose that he would be regarded, not only by the ephors themselves but also by all the rest of the state, as having merited the severest punishment?


2.3.34
577
καὶ ὑμεῖς οὖν , ἐὰν σωφρονῆτε , οὐ τούτου ἀλλ’ ὑμῶν αὐτῶν φείσεσθε , ὡς οὗτος σωθεὶς μὲν πολλοὺς ἂν μέγα φρονεῖν ποιήσειε τῶν ἐναντία γιγνωσκόντων ὑμῖν , ἀπολόμενος δὲ πάντων καὶ τῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει καὶ τῶν ἔξω ὑποτέμοι ἂν τὰς ἐλπίδας .
Even so you, if you are wise, will not spare this Theramenes, but rather yourselves; for to leave him alive would cause many of those who hold opposite views to yours to cherish high thoughts, while to destroy him would cut off the hopes of them all, both within and without the city.


2.3.35
578
ὁ μὲν ταῦτ’ εἰπὼν ἐκαθέζετο ·
When Critias had so spoken, he sat down;


2.3.35
579
Θηραμένης δὲ ἀναστὰς ἔλεξεν ·
and Theramenes rose and said:


2.3.35
580
ἀλλὰ πρῶτον μὲν μνησθήσομαι , ὦ ἄνδρες , ὃ τελευταῖον κατ’ ἐμοῦ εἶπε .
I will mention first, gentlemen, the last thing Critias said against me.


2.3.35
581
φησὶ γάρ με τοὺς στρατηγοὺς ἀποκτεῖναι κατηγοροῦντα .
He says that I brought about the death of the generals by my accusation.


2.3.35
582
ἐγὼ δὲ οὐκ ἦρχον δήπου τοῦ κατ’ ἐκείνων λόγου , ἀλλ’ ἐκεῖνοι ἔφασαν προσταχθέν μοι ὑφ’ ἑαυτῶν οὐκ ἀνελέσθαι τοὺς δυστυχοῦντας ἐν τῇ περὶ Λέσβον ναυμαχίᾳ .
But it was not I, as you know, who began the matter by accusing them; on the contrary, it was they who accused me, by stating that although that duty was assigned me by them, I failed to pick up the unfortunates in the battle off Lesbos.


2.3.35
583
ἐγὼ δὲ ἀπολογούμενος ὡς διὰ τὸν χειμῶνα οὐδὲ πλεῖν , μὴ ὅτι ἀναιρεῖσθαι τοὺς ἄνδρας δυνατὸν ἦν , ἔδοξα τῇ πόλει εἰκότα λέγειν , ἐκεῖνοι δ’ ἑαυτῶν κατηγορεῖν ἐφαίνοντο .
I said in my defence that on account of the storm it was not possible even to sail, much less to pick up the men, and it was decided by the state that my plea was a reasonable one, while the generals were clearly accusing themselves.


2.3.35
584
φάσκοντες γὰρ οἷόν τε εἶναι σῶσαι τοὺς ἄνδρας , προέμενοι ἀπολέσθαι αὐτοὺς ἀποπλέοντες ᾤχοντο .
For though they said it was possible to save the men, they nevertheless sailed away and left them to perish.


2.3.36
585
οὐ μέντοι θαυμάζω γε τὸ Κριτίαν παρανενομηκέναι ·
I do not wonder, however, that Critias has misunderstood the matter;


2.3.36
586
ὅτε γὰρ ταῦτα ἦν , οὐ παρὼν ἐτύγχανεν , ἀλλ’ ἐν Θετταλίᾳ μετὰ Προμηθέως δημοκρατίαν κατεσκεύαζε καὶ τοὺς πενέστας ὥπλιζεν ἐπὶ τοὺς δεσπότας .
for when these events took place, it chanced that he was not here; he was establishing a democracy in Thessaly along with Prometheus, and arming the serfs against their masters.


2.3.37
587
ὧν μὲν οὖν οὗτος ἐκεῖ ἔπραττε μηδὲν ἐνθάδε γένοιτο ·
God forbid that any of the things which he was doing there should come to pass here.


2.3.37
588
τάδε γε μέντοι ὁμολογῶ ἐγὼ τούτῳ , εἴ τις ὑμᾶς μὲν τῆς ἀρχῆς βούλεται παῦσαι , τοὺς δ’ ἐπιβουλεύοντας ὑμῖν ἰσχυροὺς ποιεῖ , δίκαιον εἶναι τῆς μεγίστης αὐτὸν τιμωρίας τυγχάνειν ·
I quite agree with him, however, on this point, that if anyone is desirous of deposing you from your office and is making strong those who are plotting against you, it is just for him to incur the severest punishment.


2.3.37
589
ὅστις μέντοι ὁ ταῦτα πράττων ἐστὶν οἶμαι ἂν ὑμᾶς κάλλιστα κρίνειν , τά τε πεπραγμένα καὶ ἃ νῦν πράττει ἕκαστος ἡμῶν εἰ κατανοήσετε .
But I think you can best judge who it is that is doing this, if you will consider the course which each of us two has taken and is now taking.


2.3.38
590
οὐκοῦν μέχρι μὲν τοῦ ὑμᾶς τε καταστῆναι εἰς τὴν βουλείαν καὶ ἀρχὰς ἀποδειχθῆναι καὶ τοὺς ὁμολογουμένως συκοφάντας ὑπάγεσθαι πάντες τ- αὐτὰ ἐγιγνώσκομεν ·
Well then, up to the time when you became members of the Senate and magistrates were appointed and the notorious informers were brought to trial, all of us held the same views;


2.3.38
591
ἐπεὶ δέ γε οὗτοι ἤρξαντο ἄνδρας καλούς τε κ- ἀγαθοὺς συλλαμβάνειν , ἐκ τούτου κ- ἐγὼ ἠρξάμην τ- ἐναντία τούτοις γιγνώσκειν .
but when these Thirty began to arrest men of worth and standing, then I, on my side, began to hold views opposed to theirs.


2.3.39
592
ᾔδειν γὰρ ὅτι ἀποθνῄσκοντος μὲν Λέοντος τοῦ Σαλαμινίον , ἀνδρὸς καὶ ὄντος καὶ δοκοῦντος ἱκανοῦ εἶναι , ἀδικοῦντος δ’ οὐδὲ ἕν , οἱ ὅμοιοι τούτῳ φοβήσοιντο , φοβούμενοι δὲ ἐναντίοι τῇδε τῇ πολιτείᾳ ἔσοιντο ·
For when Leon the Salaminian was put to death,—a man of capacity, both actually and by repute,—although he was not guilty of a single act of wrong-doing, I knew that those who were like him would be fearful, and, being fearful, would be enemies of this government.


2.3.39
593
ἐγίγνωσκον δὲ ὅτι συλλαμβανομένου Νικηράτου τοῦ Νικίου , καὶ πλουσίου καὶ οὐδὲν πώποτε δημοτικὸν οὔτε αὐτοῦ οὔτε τοῦ πατρὸς πράξαντος , οἱ τούτῳ ὅμοιοι δυσμενεῖς ἡμῖν γενήσοιντο .
I also knew, when Niceratus, the son of Nicias, was arrested,—a man of wealth who, like his father, had never done anything to curry popular favour,—that those who were like him would become hostile to us.


2.3.40
594
ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ Ἀντιφῶντος ὑφ’ ἡμῶν ἀπολλυμένου , ὃς ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ δύο τριήρεις εὖ πλεούσας παρείχετο , ἠπιστάμην ὅτι καὶ οἱ πρόθυμοι τῇ πόλει γεγενημένοι πάντες ὑπόπτως ἡμῖν ἕξοιεν .
And further, when Antiphon, who during the war supplied from his ownmeans two fast-sailing triremes, was put to death by us, I knew thatall those who had been zealous in thestate’s cause would look upon us with suspicion. I objected, also,when they said that each of us must seize one of the residentaliens; for it was entirely clear that if these men were put todeath, the whole body of such aliens would become enemies of thegovernment.


2.3.41
595
ἀντεῖπον δὲ καὶ ὅτε τῶν μετοίκων ἕνα ἕκαστον λαβεῖν ἔφασαν χρῆναι ·
I objected likewise when they said that it was necessary to seize one from each of the metics;


2.3.41
596
εὔδηλον γὰρ ἦν ὅτι τούτων ἀπολομένων καὶ οἱ μέτοικοι ἅπαντες πολέμιοι τῇ πολιτείᾳ ἔσοιντο .
for it was very clear that if these men were put to death, all the metics would become enemies of the government.


2.3.41
597
ἀντεῖπον δὲ καὶ ὅτε τὰ ὅπλα τοῦ πλήθους παρῃροῦντο , οὐ νομίζων χρῆναι ἀσθενῆ τὴν πόλιν ποιεῖν ·
I objected likewise when they took away from the people their arms, because I thought that we ought not to make the state weak;


2.3.41
598
οὐδὲ γὰρ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἑώρων τούτου ἕνεκα βουλομένους περισῶσαι ἡμᾶς , ὅπως ὀλίγοι γενόμενοι μηδὲν δυναίμεθ’ αὐτοὺς ὠφελεῖν ·
for I saw that, in preserving us, the purpose of the Lacedaemonians had not been that we might become few in number and unable to do them any service;


2.3.41
599
ἐξῆν γὰρ αὐτοῖς , εἰ τούτου γε δέοιντο , καὶ μηδένα λιπεῖν ὀλίγον ἔτι χρόνον τῷ λιμῷ πιέσαντας .
for if this had been what they desired, it was within their power, by keeping up the pressure of famine a little while longer, to leave not a single man alive.


2.3.42
600
οὐδέ γε τὸ φρουροὺς μισθοῦσθαι συνήρεσκέ μοι , ἐξὸν αὐτῶν τῶν πολιτῶν τοσούτους προσλαμβάνειν , ἕως ῥᾳδίως ἐμέλλομεν οἱ ἄρχοντες τῶν ἀρχομένων κρατήσειν .
Again, the hiring of guardsmen did not please me, for we might have enlisted in our service an equal number of our own citizens, until we, the rulers, should easily have made ourselves masters of our subjects.


2.3.42
601
ἐπεί γε μὴν πολλοὺς ἑώρων ἐν τῇ πόλει τῇ ἀρχῇ τῇδε δυσμενεῖς , πολλοὺς δὲ φυγάδας γιγνομένους , οὐκ αὖ ἐδόκει μοι οὔτε Θρασύβουλον οὔτε Ἄνυτον οὔτε Ἀλκιβιάδην φυγαδεύειν ·
And further, when I saw that many in the city were becoming hostile to this government and that many were becoming exiles, it did not seem to me best to banish either Thrasybulus or Anytus or Alcibiades;


2.3.42
602
ᾔδειν γὰρ ὅτι οὕτω γε τὸ ἀντίπαλον ἰσχυρὸν ἔσοιτο , εἰ τῷ μὲν πλήθει ἡγεμόνες ἱκανοὶ προσγενήσοιντο , τοῖς δ’ ἡγεῖσθαι βουλομένοις σύμμαχοι πολλοὶ φανήσοιντο .
for I knew that by such measures the opposition would be made strong, if once the commons should acquire capable leaders and if those who wished to be leaders should find a multitude of supporters.


2.3.43
603
ὁ ταῦτα οὖν νουθετῶν ἐν τῷ φανερῷ πότερα εὐμενὴς ἂν δικαίως ἢ προδότης νομίζοιτο ;
Now would the man who offers openly this sort of admonition be fairly regarded as a well-wisher, or as a traitor?


2.3.43
604
οὐχ οἱ ἐχθρούς , ὦ Κριτία , κωλύοντες πολλοὺς ποιεῖσθαι , οὐδ’ οἱ συμμάχους πλείστους διδάσκοντες κτᾶσθαι , οὗτοι τοὺς πολεμίους ἰσχυροὺς ποιοῦσιν , ἀλλὰ πολὺ μᾶλλον οἱ ἀδίκως τε χρήματα ἀφαιρούμενοι καὶ τοὺς οὐδὲν ἀδικοῦντας ἀποκτείνοντες , οὗτοί εἰσιν οἱ καὶ πολλοὺς τοὺς ἐναντίους ποιοῦντες καὶ προδιδόντες οὐ μόνον τοὺς φίλους ἀλλὰ καὶ ἑαυτοὺς δι’ αἰσχροκέρδειαν .
It is not, Critias, the men who prevent one’s making enemies in abundance nor the men who teach one how to gain allies in the greatest numbers,—it is not these, I say, who make one’s enemies strong; but it is much rather those who unjustly rob others of property and put to death people who are guilty of no wrong, who, I say, make their opponents numerous and betray not only their friends but also themselves, and all to satisfy their covetousness.


2.3.44
605
εἰ δὲ μὴ ἄλλως γνωστὸν ὅτι ἀληθῆ λέγω , ὧδε ἐπισκέψασθε .
And if it is not evident in any other way that what I say is true, look at the matter in this way:


2.3.44
606
πότερον οἴεσθε Θρασύβουλον καὶ Ἄνυτον καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους φυγάδας ἃ ἐγὼ λέγω μᾶλλον ἂν ἐνθάδε βούλεσθαι γίγνεσθαι ἢ ἃ οὗτοι πράττουσιν ;
do you suppose that Thrasybulus and Anytus and the other exiles would prefer to have us follow here the policy which I am urging by word, or the policy which these men are carrying out in deed?


2.3.44
607
ἐγὼ μὲν γὰρ οἶμαι νῦν μὲν αὐτοὺς νομίζειν συμμάχων πάντα μεστὰ εἶναι ·
For my part, I fancy that now they believe every spot is full of allies,


2.3.44
608
εἰ δὲ τὸ κράτιστον τῆς πόλεως προσφιλῶς ἡμῖν εἶχε , χαλεπὸν ἂν ἡγεῖσθαι εἶναι καὶ τὸ ἐπιβαίνειν ποι τῆς χώρας .
while if the best element in the state were friendly to us, they would count it difficult even to set foot anywhere in the land!


2.3.45
609
ἃ δ’ αὖ εἶπεν ὡς ἐγώ εἰμι οἷος ἀεί ποτε μεταβάλλεσθαι , κατανοήσατε καὶ ταῦτα .
Again, as to his statement that I have a propensity to be always changing sides, consider these facts also:


2.3.45
610
τὴν μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ τῶν τετρακοσίων πολιτείαν καὶ αὐτὸς δήπου ὁ δῆμος ἐψηφίσατο , διδασκόμενος ὡς οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι πάσῃ πολιτείᾳ μᾶλλον ἂν ἢ δημοκρατίᾳ πιστεύσειαν .
it was the people itself, as everybody knows, which voted for the government of the Four Hundred, being advised that the Lacedaemonians would trust any form of government sooner than a democracy.


2.3.46
611
ἐπεὶ δέ γε ἐκεῖνοι μὲν οὐδὲν ἀνίεσαν , οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ Ἀριστοτέλην καὶ Μελάνθιον καὶ Ἀρίσταρχον στρατηγοῦντες φανεροὶ ἐγένοντο ἐπὶ τῷ χώματι ἔρυμα τειχίζοντες , εἰς ὃ ἐβούλοντο τοὺς πολεμίους δεξάμενοι ὑφ’ αὑτοῖς καὶ τοῖς ἑταίροις τὴν πόλιν ποιήσασθαι , εἰ ταῦτ’ αἰσθόμενος ἐγὼ διεκώλυσα , τοῦτ’ ἐστὶ προδότην εἶναι τῶν φίλων ;
But when the Lacedaemonians did not in the least relax their effortsin prosecuting the war, and Aristoteles, Melanthius, Aristarchus,and their fellow-generals were found to be building a fort on thepeninsula, into which they proposed to admit theenemy and so bring the state under the control of themselves andtheir oligarchical associates,—if I perceived this plan and thwartedit, is that being a traitor to one’s friends?


2.3.47
612
ἀποκαλεῖ δὲ κόθορνόν με , ὡς ἀμφοτέροις πειρώμενον ἁρμόττειν .
He dubs me Buskin, because, as he says, I try to fit both parties.


2.3.47
613
ὅστις δὲ μηδετέροις ἀρέσκει , τοῦτον ὢ πρὸς τῶν θεῶν τί ποτε καὶ καλέσαι χρή ;
But for the man who pleases neither party,—what in the name of the gods should we call him?


2.3.47
614
σὺ γὰρ δὴ ἐν μὲν τῇ δημοκρατίᾳ πάντως μισοδημότατος ἐνομίζου , ἐν δὲ τῇ ἀριστοκρατίᾳ πάντων μισοχρηστότατος γεγένησαι .
For you in the days of the democracy were regarded as the bitterest of all haters of the commons, and under the aristocracy you have shown yourself the bitterest of all haters of the better classes.


2.3.48
615
ἐγὼ δ’ , ὦ Κριτία , ἐκείνοις μὲν ἀεί ποτε πολεμῶ τοῖς οὐ πρόσθεν οἰομένοις καλὴν ἂν δημοκρατίαν εἶναι , πρὶν ἂν καὶ οἱ δοῦλοι καὶ οἱ δι’ ἀπορίαν δραχμῆς ἂν ἀποδόμενοι τὴν πόλιν δραχμῆς μετέχοιεν , καὶ τοῖσδέ γ’ αὖ ἀεὶ ἐναντίος εἰμὶ οἳ οὐκ οἴονται καλὴν ἂν ἐγγενέσθαι ὀλιγαρχίαν , πρὶν ἂν εἰς τὸ ὑπ’ ὀλίγων τυραννεῖσθαι τὴν πόλιν καταστήσειαν .
But I, Critias, am forever at war with the men who do not think there could be a good democracy until the slaves and those who would sell the state for lack of a shilling should share in the government,


2.3.48
616
τὸ μέντοι σὺν τοῖς δυναμένοις καὶ μεθ’ ἵππων καὶ μετ’ ἀσπίδων ὠφελεῖν διὰ τούτων τὴν πολιτείαν πρόσθεν ἄριστον ἡγούμην εἶναι καὶ νῦν οὐ μεταβάλλομαι .
and on the other hand I am forever an enemy to those who do not think that a good oligarchy could be established until they should bring the state to the point of being ruled absolutely by a few. But to direct the government in company with those who have the means to be of service, whether with horses or with shields,—this plan I regarded as best in former days and I do not change my opinion now.


2.3.49
617
εἰ δ’ ἔχεις εἰπεῖν , ὦ Κριτία , ὅπου ἐγὼ σὺν τοῖς δημοτικοῖς ἢ τυραννικοῖς τοὺς καλούς τε κ- ἀγαθοὺς ἀποστερεῖν πολιτείας ἐπεχείρησα , λέγε ·
And if you can mention any instance, Critias, where I joined hands with demagogues or despots and undertook to deprive men of standing of their citizenship, then speak.


2.3.49
618
ἐὰν γὰρ ἐλεγχθῶ ἢ νῦν ταῦτα πράττων ἢ πρότερον πώποτε πεποιηκώς , ὁμολογῶ τὰ πάντων ἔσχατα παθὼν ἂν δικαίως ἀποθνῄσκειν .
For if I am found guilty either of doing this thing now or of ever having done it in the past, I admit that I should justly suffer the very uttermost of all penalties and be put to death.


2.3.50
619
ὡς δ’ εἰπὼν ταῦτα ἐπαύσατο , καὶ ἡ βουλὴ δήλη ἐγένετο εὐμενῶς ἐπιθορυβήσασα , γνοὺς ὁ Κριτίας ὅτι εἰ ἐπιτρέψοι τῇ βουλῇ διαψηφίζεσθαι περὶ αὐτοῦ , ἀναφεύξοιτο , καὶ τοῦτο οὐ βιωτὸν ἡγησάμενος , προσελθὼν καὶ διαλεχθείς τι τοῖς τριάκοντα ἐξῆλθε , καὶ ἐπιστῆναι ἐκέλευσε τοὺς τὰ ἐγχειρίδια ἔχοντας φανερῶς τῇ βουλῇ ἐπὶ τοῖς δρυφάκτοις .
When with these words he ceasedspeaking and the Senate had shown its good will by applause,Critias, realizing that if he should allow the Senate to passjudgment on the case, Theramenes would escape, and thinking thatthis would be unendurable, went and held a brief consultation withthe Thirty, and then went out and ordered the men with the daggersto take their stand at the railing in plainsight of the Senate.


2.3.51
620
πάλιν δὲ εἰσελθὼν εἶπεν ·
Then he came in again and said:


2.3.51
621
ἐγώ , ὦ βουλή , νομίζω προστάτου ἔργον εἶναι οἵου δεῖ , ὃς ἂν ὁρῶν τοὺς φίλους ἐξαπατωμένους μὴ ἐπιτρέπῃ .
Senators, I deem it the duty of a leader who is what he ought to be, in case he sees that his friends are being deceived, not to permit it.


2.3.51
622
καὶ ἐγὼ οὖν τοῦτο ποιήσω .
I, therefore, shall follow that course.


2.3.51
623
καὶ γὰρ οἵδε οἱ ἐφεστηκότες οὔ φασιν ἡμῖν ἐπιτρέψειν , εἰ ἀνήσομεν ἄνδρα τὸν φανερῶς τὴν ὀλιγαρχίαν λυμαινόμενον .
Besides, these men who have taken their stand here say that if we propose to let a man go who is manifestly injuring the oligarchy, they will not suffer us to do so.


2.3.51
624
ἔστι δὲ ἐν τοῖς καινοῖς νόμοις τῶν μὲν ἐν τοῖς τρισχιλίοις ὄντων μηδένα ἀποθνῄσκειν ἄνευ τῆς ὑμετέρας ψήφου , τῶν δ’ ἔξω τοῦ καταλόγου κυρίους εἶναι τοὺς τριάκοντα θανατοῦν .
Now it is provided in the new laws that while no one of those who are on the roll of the Three Thousand may be put to death without your vote, the Thirty shall have power of life or death over those outside the roll.


2.3.51
625
ἐγὼ οὖν , ἔφη , Θηραμένην τουτονὶ ἐξαλείφω ἐκ τοῦ καταλόγου , συνδοκοῦν ἅπασιν ἡμῖν .
I, therefore, he said, strike off this man Theramenes from the roll, with the approval of all the Thirty.


2.3.51
626
καὶ τοῦτον , ἔφη , ἡμεῖς θανατοῦμεν .
That being done, he added, we now condemn him to death.


2.3.52
627
ἀκούσας ταῦτα ὁ Θηραμένης ἀνεπήδησεν ἐπὶ τὴν ἑστίαν καὶ εἶπεν ·
When Theramenes heard this, he sprang to the altar and said:


2.3.52
628
ἐγὼ δ’ , ἔφη , ὦ ἄνδρες , ἱκετεύω τὰ πάντων ἐννομώτατα , μὴ ἐπὶ Κριτίᾳ εἶναι ἐξαλείφειν μήτε ἐμὲ μήτε ὑμῶν ὃν ἂν βούληται , ἀλλ’ ὅνπερ νόμον οὗτοι ἔγραψαν περὶ τῶν ἐν τῷ καταλόγῳ , κατὰ τοῦτον καὶ ὑμῖν καὶ ἐμοὶ τὴν κρίσιν εἶναι .
And I, sirs, said he, beg only bare justice,—that it be not within the power of Critias to strike off either me or whomsoever of you he may wish, but rather that both in your case and in mine the judgment may be rendered strictly in accordance with that law which these men have made regarding those on the roll.


2.3.53
629
καὶ τοῦτο μέν , ἔφη , μὰ τοὺς θεοὺς οὐκ ἀγνοῶ , ὅτι οὐδέν μοι ἀρκέσει ὅδε ὁ βωμός , ἀλλὰ βούλομαι καὶ τοῦτο ἐπιδεῖξαι , ὅτι οὗτοι οὐ μόνον εἰσὶ περὶ ἀνθρώπους ἀδικώτατοι , ἀλλὰ καὶ περὶ θεοὺς ἀσεβέστατοι .
To be sure, said he, I know, I swear by the gods, only too well, that this altar will avail me nothing,


2.3.53
630
ὑμῶν μέντοι , ἔφη , ὦ ἄνδρες καλοὶ κ- ἀγαθοί , θαυμάζω , εἰ μὴ βοηθήσετε ὑμῖν αὐτοῖς , καὶ ταῦτα γιγνώσκοντες ὅτι οὐδὲν τὸ ἐμὸν ὄνομα εὐεξαλειπτότερον ἢ τὸ ὑμῶν ἑκάστου .
but I wish to show that these Thirty are not only most unjust toward men, but also most impious toward the gods. But I am surprised at you, said he, gentlemen of the aristocracy, that you are not going to defend your own rights, especially when you know that my name is not a whit easier to strike off than the name of each of you.


2.3.54
631
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἐκέλευσε μὲν ὁ τῶν τριάκοντα κῆρυξ τοὺς ἕνδεκα ἐπὶ τὸν Θηραμένην ·
At this moment the herald of the Thirty ordered the Eleven to seize Theramenes;


2.3.54
632
ἐκεῖνοι δὲ εἰσελθόντες σὺν τοῖς ὑπηρέταις , ἡγουμένου αὐτῶν Σατύρου τοῦ θρασυτάτου τε καὶ ἀναιδεστάτου , εἶπε μὲν ὁ Κριτίας ·
and when they came in, attended by their servants and with Satyrus, the most audacious and shameless of them, at their head, Critias said:


2.3.54
633
παραδίδομεν ὑμῖν , ἔφη , Θηραμένην τουτονὶ κατακεκριμένον κατὰ τὸν νόμον ·
We hand over to you, said he, this man Theramenes, condemned according to the law.


2.3.55
634
ὑμεῖς δὲ λαβόντες καὶ ἀπαγαγόντες οἱ ἕνδεκα οὗ δεῖ τὰ ἐκ τούτων πράττετε .
Do you, the Eleven, take him and lead him to the proper place and do that which follows.


2.3.55
635
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα εἶπεν , εἷλκε μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ βωμοῦ ὁ Σάτυρος , εἷλκον δὲ οἱ ὑπηρέται .
When Critias had spoken these words, Satyrus dragged Theramenes away from the altar, and his servants lent their aid.


2.3.55
636
ὁ δὲ Θηραμένης ὥσπερ εἰκὸς καὶ θεοὺς ἐπεκαλεῖτο καὶ ἀνθρώπους καθορᾶν τὰ γιγνόμενα .
And Theramenes, as was natural, called upon gods and men to witness what was going on.


2.3.55
637
ἡ δὲ βουλὴ ἡσυχίαν εἶχεν , ὁρῶσα καὶ τοὺς ἐπὶ τοῖς δρυφάκτοις ὁμοίους Σατύρῳ καὶ τὸ ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ βουλευτηρίου πλῆρες τῶν φρουρῶν , καὶ οὐκ ἀγνοοῦντες ὅτι ἐγχειρίδια ἔχοντες παρῆσαν .
But the senators kept quiet, seeing that the men at the rail were of the same sort as Satyrus and that the space in front of the senate-house was filled with the guardsmen, and being well aware that the former had come armed with daggers.


2.3.56
638
οἱ δ’ ἀπήγαγον τὸν ἄνδρα διὰ τῆς ἀγορᾶς μάλα μεγάλῃ τῇ φωνῇ δηλοῦντα οἷα ἔπασχε .
So they led the man away through the market-place, while he proclaimed in a very loud voice the wrongs he was suffering.


2.3.56
639
λέγεται δ’ ἓν ῥῆμα καὶ τοῦτο αὐτοῦ .
One saying of his that is reported was this:


2.3.56
640
ὡς εἶπεν ὁ Σάτυρος ὅτι οἰμώξοιτο , εἰ μὴ σιωπήσειεν , ἐπήρετο ·
when Satyrus told him that if he did not keep quiet, he would suffer for it, he asked:


2.3.56
641
ἂν δὲ σιωπῶ , οὐκ ἄρ’ , ἔφη , οἰμώξομαι ;
Then if I do keep quiet, shall I not suffer?


2.3.56
642
καὶ ἐπεί γε ἀποθνῄσκειν ἀναγκαζόμενος τὸ κώνειον ἔπιε , τὸ λειπόμενον ἔφασαν ἀποκοτταβίσαντα εἰπεῖν αὐτόν ·
And when, being compelled to die, he had drunk the hemlock, they said that he threw out the last drops, like a man playing kottabos, and exclaimed:


2.3.56
643
Κριτίᾳ τοῦτ’ ἔστω τῷ καλῷ .
Here’s to the health of my beloved Critias.


2.3.56
644
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν οὐκ ἀγνοῶ , ὅτι ταῦτα ἀποφθέγματα οὐκ ἀξιόλογα , ἐκεῖνο δὲ κρίνω τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀγαστόν , τὸ τοῦ θανάτου παρεστηκότος μήτε τὸ φρόνιμον μήτε τὸ παιγνιῶδες ἀπολιπεῖν ἐκ τῆς ψυχῆς .
Now I am not unaware of this, that these are not sayings worthy of record; still, I deem it admirable in the man that when death was close at hand, neither self-possession nor the spirit of playfulness departed from his soul.


2.4.1
645
Θηραμένης μὲν δὴ οὕτως ἀπέθανεν ·
So, then, Theramenes died;


2.4.1
646
οἱ δὲ τριάκοντα , ὡς ἐξὸν ἤδη αὐτοῖς τυραννεῖν ἀδεῶς , προεῖπον μὲν τοῖς ἔξω τοῦ καταλόγου μὴ εἰσιέναι εἰς τὸ ἄστυ , ἦγον δὲ ἐκ τῶν χωρίων , ἵν’ αὐτοὶ καὶ οἱ φίλοι τοὺς τούτων ἀγροὺς ἔχοιεν .
but the Thirty, thinking that now they could play the tyrant without fear, issued a proclamation forbidding those who were outside the roll to enter the city and evicted them from their estates, in order that they themselves and their friends might have these people’s lands.


2.4.1
647
φευγόντων δὲ εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ καὶ ἐντεῦθεν πολλοὺς ἄγοντες ἐνέπλησαν καὶ τὰ Μέγαρα καὶ τὰς Θήβας τῶν ὑποχωρούντων .
And when they fled to Piraeus, they drove many of them away from there also, and filled both Megara and Thebes with the refugees.


2.4.2
648
ἐκ δὲ τούτου Θρασύβουλος ὁρμηθεὶς ἐκ Θηβῶν ὡς σὺν ἑβδομήκοντα Φυλὴν χωρίον καταλαμβάνει ἰσχυρόν .
Presently Thrasybulus set out from Thebes with about seventy companions and seized Phyle, a strong fortress.


2.4.2
649
οἱ δὲ τριάκοντα ἐβοήθουν ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεως σύν τε τοῖς τρισχιλίοις καὶ σὺν τοῖς ἱππεῦσι καὶ μάλ’ εὐημερίας οὔσης .
And the Thirty marched out from the city against him with the Three Thousand and the cavalry, the weather being very fine indeed.


2.4.2
650
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφίκοντο , εὐθὺς μὲν θρασυνόμενοί τινες τῶν νέων προσέβαλλον πρὸς τὸ χωρίον , καὶ ἐποίησαν μὲν οὐδέν , τραύματα δὲ λαβόντες ἀπῆλθον .
When they reached Phyle, some of the young men were so bold as to attack the fortress at once, but they accomplished nothing and suffered some wounds themselves before they retired.


2.4.3
651
βουλομένων δὲ τῶν τριάκοντα ἀποτειχίζειν , ὅπως ἐκπολιορκήσειαν αὐτοὺς ἀποκλείσαντες τὰς ἐφόδους τῶν ἐπιτηδείων , ἐπιγίγνεται τῆς νυκτὸς χιὼν παμπλήθης καὶ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ .
And while the Thirty were planning to invest the place, so as to force them to surrender by shutting off their avenues for receiving provisions, a very heavy snow storm came on during the night and continued on the following day.


2.4.3
652
οἱ δὲ νιφόμενοι ἀπῆλθον εἰς τὸ ἄστυ , μάλα συχνοὺς τῶν σκευοφόρων ὑπὸ τῶν ἐκ Φυλῆς ἀποβαλόντες .
So they came back to the city in the snow, after losing a goodly number of their camp-followers by the attacks of the men in Phyle.


2.4.4
653
γιγνώσκοντες δὲ ὅτι καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἀγρῶν λεηλατήσοιεν , εἰ μή τις φυλακὴ ἔσοιτο , διαπέμπουσιν εἰς τὰς ἐσχατιὰς ὅσον πεντεκαίδεκα στάδια ἀπὸ Φυλῆς τούς τε Λακωνικοὺς πλὴν ὀλίγων φρουροὺς καὶ τῶν ἱππέων δύο φυλάς .
Then the Thirty, knowing that the enemy would also gather plunder from the farms if there were no force to protect them, sent out all but a few of the Laconian guardsmen and two divisions of the cavalry to the outlying districts about fifteen stadia from Phyle.


2.4.4
654
οὗτοι δὲ στρατοπεδευσάμενοι ἐν χωρίῳ λασίῳ ἐφύλαττον .
These troops made their camp in a bushy spot and proceeded to keep guard.


2.4.5
655
ὁ δὲ Θρασύβουλος , ἤδη συνειλεγμένων εἰς τὴν Φυλὴν περὶ ἑπτακοσίους , λαβὼν αὐτοὺς καταβαίνει τῆς νυκτός ·
Now by this time about seven hundred men were gathered at Phyle. During the night Thrasybulus marched down with them;


2.4.5
656
θέμενος δὲ τὰ ὅπλα ὅσον τρία ἢ τέτταρα στάδια ἀπὸ τῶν φρουρῶν ἡσυχίαν εἶχεν .
and about three or four stadia from the guardsmen he had his troops ground their arms and keep quiet.


2.4.6
657
ἐπεὶ δὲ πρὸς ἡμέραν ἐγίγνετο , καὶ ἤδη ἀνίσταντο ὅποι ἐδεῖτο ἕκαστος ἀπὸ τῶν ὅπλων , καὶ οἱ ἱπποκόμοι ψήχοντες τοὺς ἵππους ψόφον ἐποίουν , ἐν τούτῳ ἀναλαβόντες οἱ περὶ Θρασύβουλον τὰ ὅπλα δρόμῳ προσέπιπτον ·
Then when it was drawing towards day and the enemy were already getting up and going away from their camp whithersoever each one had to go, and the grooms were keeping up a hubbub as they curried their horses, at this moment Thrasybulus and his men picked up their arms and charged on the run.


2.4.6
658
καὶ ἔστι μὲν οὓς αὐτῶν κατέβαλον , πάντας δὲ τρεψάμενοι ἐδίωξαν ἓξ ἢ ἑπτὰ στάδια , καὶ ἀπέκτειναν τῶν μὲν ὁπλιτῶν πλέον ἢ εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατόν , τῶν δὲ ἱππέων Νικόστρατόν τε τὸν καλὸν ἐπικαλούμενον , καὶ ἄλλους δὲ δύο , ἔτι καταλαβόντες ἐν ταῖς εὐναῖς .
They struck down some of the enemy and turned them all to flight, pursuing them for six or seven stadia; and they killed more than one hundred and twenty of the hoplites, and among the cavalry Nicostratus, nicknamed the beautiful, and two more besides, catching them while still in their beds.


2.4.7
659
ἐπαναχωρήσαντες δὲ καὶ τροπαῖον στησάμενοι καὶ συσκευασάμενοι ὅπλα τε ὅσα ἔλαβον καὶ σκεύη ἀπῆλθον ἐπὶ Φυλῆς .
Then after returning from the pursuit and erecting a trophy and packing up all the arms and baggage they had captured, they went back to Phyle.


2.4.7
660
οἱ δὲ ἐξ ἄστεως ἱππεῖς βοηθήσαντες τῶν μὲν πολεμίων οὐδένα ἔτι εἶδον , προσμείναντες δὲ ἕως τοὺς νεκροὺς ἀνείλοντο οἱ προσήκοντες ἀνεχώρησαν εἰς ἄστυ .
And when the cavalry from the city came to the rescue, there were none of the enemy left to be seen; so after waiting until their relatives had taken up the bodies of the dead, they returned to the city.


2.4.8
661
ἐκ δὲ τούτου οἱ τριάκοντα , οὐκέτι νομίζοντες ἀσφαλῆ σφίσι τὰ πράγματα , ἐβουλήθησαν Ἐλευσῖνα ἐξιδιώσασθαι , ὥστε εἶναι σφίσι καταφυγήν , εἰ δεήσειε .
After this the Thirty, deeming their government no longer secure, formed a plan to appropriate Eleusis, so as to have a place of refuge if it should prove necessary.


2.4.8
662
καὶ παραγγείλαντες τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν ἦλθον εἰς Ἐλευσῖνα Κριτίας τε καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι τῶν τριάκοντα ·
Accordingly Critias and the rest of the Thirty, having issued orders to the cavalry to accompany them, went to Eleusis.


2.4.8
663
ἐξέτασίν τε ποιήσαντες ἐν τοῖς ἱππεῦσι , φάσκοντες εἰδέναι βούλεσθαι πόσοι εἶεν καὶ πόσης φυλακῆς προσδεήσοιντο , ἐκέλευον ἀπογράφεσθαι πάντας ·
There they held a review of the townspeople under guard of the cavalry, pretending that they wanted to know how numerous they were and how large an additional garrison they would require, and then ordered them all to register;


2.4.8
664
τὸν δὲ ἀπογραψάμενον ἀεὶ διὰ τῆς πυλίδος ἐπὶ τὴν θάλατταν ἐξιέναι .
and each man when he had registered had to pass out by the gate in the town wall in the direction of the sea.


2.4.8
665
ἐπὶ δὲ τῷ αἰγιαλῷ τοὺς μὲν ἱππέας ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν κατέστησαν , τὸν δ’ ἐξιόντα ἀεὶ οἱ ὑπηρέται συνέδουν .
Meanwhile they had stationed the cavalry on the shore on either side of the gate, and as each man passed out their servants bound him fast.


2.4.8
666
ἐπεὶ δὲ πάντες συνειλημμένοι ἦσαν , Λυσίμαχον τὸν ἵππαρχον ἐκέλευον ἀναγαγόντα παραδοῦναι αὐτοὺς τοῖς ἕνδεκα .
And when all had thus been seized, they ordered Lysimachus, the cavalry commander, to take them to Athens and turn them over to the Eleven.


2.4.9
667
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ εἰς τὸ Ὠιδεῖον παρεκάλεσαν τοὺς ἐν τῷ καταλόγῳ ὁπλίτας καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἱππέας .
On the following day they summoned to the Odeum the hoplites who were on the roll and the cavalry also.


2.4.9
668
ἀναστὰς δὲ Κριτίας ἔλεξεν ·
Then Critias rose and said:


2.4.9
669
ἡμεῖς , ἔφη , ὦ ἄνδρες , οὐδὲν ἧττον ὑμῖν κατασκευάζομεν τὴν πολιτείαν ἢ ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς .
We, gentlemen, said he, are establishing this government no less for you than for ourselves.


2.4.9
670
δεῖ οὖν ὑμᾶς , ὥσπερ καὶ τιμῶν μεθέξετε , οὕτω καὶ τῶν κινδύνων μετέχειν .
Therefore, even as you will share in honours, so also you must share in the dangers.


2.4.9
671
τῶν οὖν συνειλημμένων Ἐλευσινίων καταψηφιστέον ἐστίν , ἵνα τ- αὐτὰ ἡμῖν καὶ θαρρῆτε καὶ φοβῆσθε .
Therefore you must vote condemnation of the Eleusinians who have been seized, that you may have the same hopes and fears as we.


2.4.9
672
δείξας δέ τι χωρίον , εἰς τοῦτο ἐκέλευε φανερὰν φέρειν τὴν ψῆφον .
Then he showed them a place and bade them cast their ballots therein, in plain sight of everybody.


2.4.10
673
οἱ δὲ Λακωνικοὶ φρουροὶ ἐν τῷ ἡμίσει τοῦ Ὠιδείου ἐξωπλισμένοι ἦσαν ·
Now the Laconian guardsmen were in one half of the Odeum, fully armed;


2.4.10
674
ἦν δὲ ταῦτα ἀρεστὰ καὶ τῶν πολιτῶν οἷς τὸ πλεονεκτεῖν μόνον ἔμελεν .
and these proceedings were pleasing also to such of the citizens as cared only for their own advantage.


2.4.10
675
ἐκ δὲ τούτου λαβὼν ὁ Θρασύβουλος τοὺς ἀπὸ Φυλῆς περὶ χιλίους ἤδη συνειλεγμένους , ἀφικνεῖται τῆς νυκτὸς εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ .
Soon after this Thrasybulus took the men of Phyle, who had now gathered to the number of about one thousand, and came by night to Piraeus.


2.4.10
676
οἱ δὲ τριάκοντα ἐπεὶ ᾔσθοντο ταῦτα , εὐθὺς ἐβοήθουν σύν τε τοῖς Λακωνικοῖς καὶ σὺν τοῖς ἱππεῦσι καὶ τοῖς ὁπλίταις ·
When the Thirty learned of this, they at once set out against him, with the Laconian guardsmen and their own cavalry and hoplites;


2.4.10
677
ἔπειτα ἐχώρουν κατὰ τὴν εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ ἁμαξιτὸν ἀναφέρουσαν .
then they advanced along the carriage road which leads up to Piraeus.


2.4.11
678
οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ Φυλῆς ἔτι μὲν ἐπεχείρησαν μὴ ἀνιέναι αὐτούς , ἐπεὶ δὲ μέγας ὁ κύκλος ὢν πολλῆς φυλακῆς ἐδόκει δεῖσθαι οὔπω πολλοῖς οὖσι , συνεσπειράθησαν ἐπὶ τὴν Μουνιχίαν .
And for a time the men from Phyle tried to prevent their coming up,


2.4.11
679
οἱ δ’ ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεως εἰς τὴν Ἱπποδάμειον ἀγορὰν ἐλθόντες πρῶτον μὲν συνετάξαντο , ὥστε ἐμπλῆσαι τὴν ὁδὸν ἣ φέρει πρός τε τὸ ἱερὸν τῆς Μουνιχίας Ἀρτέμιδος καὶ τὸ Βενδίδειον ·
but when they saw that the line of the town wall, extensive as it was, needed a large force for its defence, whereas they were not yet numerous, they gathered in a compact body on the hill of Munichia.


2.4.11
680
καὶ ἐγένοντο βάθος οὐκ ἔλαττον ἢ ἐπὶ πεντήκοντα ἀσπίδων .
And the men from the city, when they came to the market-place of Hippodamus, first formed themselves in line of battle, so that they filled the road which leads to the temple of Artemis of Munichia and the sanctuary of Bendis;


2.4.11
681
οὕτω δὲ συντεταγμένοι ἐχώρουν ἄνω .
and they made a line not less than fifty shields in depth; then, in this formation, they advanced up the hill.


2.4.12
682
οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ Φυλῆς ἀντενέπλησαν μὲν τὴν ὁδόν , βάθος δὲ οὐ πλέον ἢ εἰς δέκα ὁπλίτας ἐγένοντο .
As for the men from Phyle, they too filled the road, but they made a line not more than ten hoplites in depth.


2.4.12
683
ἐτάχθησαν μέντοι ἐπ’ αὐτοῖς πελτοφόροι τε καὶ ψιλοὶ ἀκοντισταί , ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις οἱ πετροβόλοι .
Behind the hoplites, however, were stationed peltasts and light javelin-men, and behind them the stone-throwers.


2.4.12
684
οὗτοι μέντοι συχνοὶ ἦσαν ·
And of these there were many, for they came from that neighbourhood.


2.4.12
685
καὶ γὰρ αὐτόθεν προσεγένοντο .
And now, while the enemy were advancing,


2.4.12
686
ἐν ᾧ δὲ προσῇσαν οἱ ἐναντίοι , Θρασύβουλος τοὺς μεθ’ αὑτοῦ θέσθαι κελεύσας τὰς ἀσπίδας καὶ αὐτὸς θέμενος , τὰ δ’ ἄλλα ὅπλα ἔχων , κατὰ μέσον στὰς ἔλεξεν ·
Thrasybulus ordered his men to ground their shields and did the same himself, though still keeping the rest of his arms, and then took his stand in the midst of them and spoke as follows:


2.4.13
687
ἄνδρες πολῖται , τοὺς μὲν διδάξαι , τοὺς δὲ ἀναμνῆσαι ὑμῶν βούλομαι ὅτι εἰσὶ τῶν προσιόντων οἱ μὲν τὸ δεξιὸν ἔχοντες οὓς ὑμεῖς ἡμέραν πέμπτην τρεψάμενοι ἐδιώξατε , οἱ δ’ ἐπὶ τοῦ εὐωνύμου ἔσχατοι , οὗτοι δὴ οἱ τριάκοντα , οἳ ἡμᾶς καὶ πόλεως ἀπεστέρουν οὐδὲν ἀδικοῦντας καὶ οἰκιῶν ἐξήλαυνον καὶ τοὺς φιλτάτους τῶν ἡμετέρων ἀπεσημαίνοντο .
Fellow-citizens, I wish to inform some of you and to remind others that those who form the right wing of the approaching force are the very men whom you turned to flight and pursued four days ago,


2.4.13
688
ἀλλὰ νῦν τοι παραγεγένηνται οὗ οὗτοι μὲν οὔποτε ᾤοντο , ἡμεῖς δὲ ἀεὶ ηὐχόμεθα .
but the men upon the extreme left—they, yes they, are the Thirty, who robbed us of our city when we were guilty of no wrong, and drove us from our homes, and proscribed those who were dearest to us. But now, behold, they have found themselves in a situation in which they never expected to be, but we always prayed that they might be.


2.4.14
689
ἔχοντες γὰρ ὅπλα μὲν ἐναντίοι αὐτοῖς καθέσταμεν ·
For with arms in our hands we stand face to face with them;


2.4.14
690
οἱ δὲ θεοί , ὅτι ποτὲ καὶ δειπνοῦντες συνελαμβανόμεθα καὶ καθεύδοντες καὶ ἀγοράζοντες , οἱ δὲ καὶ οὐχ ὅπως ἀδικοῦντες , ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ἐπιδημοῦντες ἐφυγαδευόμεθα , νῦν φανερῶς ἡμῖν συμμαχοῦσι .
and the gods, because once we were seized while dining or sleeping or trading, because some of us also were banished when we were not only guilty of no offence, but were not even in the city, are now manifestly fighting on our side.


2.4.14
691
καὶ γὰρ ἐν εὐδίᾳ χειμῶνα ποιοῦσιν , ὅταν ἡμῖν συμφέρῃ , καὶ ὅταν ἐγχειρῶμεν , πολλῶν ὄντων ἐναντίων ὀλίγοις οὖσι τροπαῖα ἵστασθαι διδόασι ·
For in fair weather they send a storm, when it is to our advantage, and when we attack, they grant us, though we are few in number and our enemies are many, to set up trophies of victory;


2.4.15
692
καὶ νῦν δὲ κεκομίκασιν ἡμᾶς εἰς χωρίον ἐν ᾧ οὗτοι μὲν οὔτε βάλλειν οὔτε ἀκοντίζειν ὑπὲρ τῶν προτεταγμένων διὰ τὸ πρὸς ὄρθιον ἰέναι δύναιντ’ ἄν , ἡμεῖς δὲ εἰς τὸ κάταντες καὶ δόρατα ἀφιέντες καὶ ἀκόντια καὶ πέτρους ἐξιξόμεθά τε αὐτῶν καὶ πολλοὺς κατατρώσομεν .
and now in like manner they have brought us to a place where the menbefore you, because they are marching up hill, cannot throw eitherspears or javelins over the heads of those in front of them, whilewe, throwing both spears and javelins and stones down hill, shallreach them and strike down many.


2.4.16
693
καὶ ᾤετο μὲν ἄν τις δεήσειν τοῖς γε πρωτοστάταις ἐκ τοῦ ἴσου μάχεσθαι ·
And though one would have supposed that we should have to fight with their front ranks at least on even terms,


2.4.16
694
νῦν δέ , ἂν ὑμεῖς , ὥσπερ προσήκει , προθύμως ἀφιῆτε τὰ βέλη , ἁμαρτήσεται μὲν οὐδεὶς ὧν γε μεστὴ ἡ ὁδός , φυλαττόμενοι δὲ δραπετεύσουσιν ἀεὶ ὑπὸ ταῖς ἀσπίσιν ·
yet in fact, if you let fly your missiles with a will, as you should, no one will miss his man when the road is full of them, and they in their efforts to protect themselves will be continually skulking under their shields.


2.4.16
695
ὥστε ἐξέσται ὥσπερ τυφλοὺς καὶ τύπτειν ὅπου ἂν βουλώμεθα καὶ ἐναλλομένους ἀνατρέπειν .
You will therefore be able, just as if they were blind men, to strike them wherever you please and then leap upon them and overthrow them.


2.4.17
696
ἀλλ’ , ὦ ἄνδρες , οὕτω χρὴ ποιεῖν ὅπως ἕκαστός τις ἑαυτῷ συνείσεται τῆς νίκης αἰτιώτατος ὤν .
And now, comrades, we must so act that each man shall feel in his breast that he is chiefly responsible for the victory.


2.4.17
697
αὕτη γὰρ ἡμῖν , ἂν θεὸς θέλῃ , νῦν ἀποδώσει καὶ πατρίδα καὶ οἴκους καὶ ἐλευθερίαν καὶ τιμὰς καὶ παῖδας , οἷς εἰσί , καὶ γυναῖκας .
For victory, God willing, will now give back to us country and homes, freedom and honours, children, to such as have them, and wives.


2.4.17
698
ὦ μακάριοι δῆτα , οἳ ἂν ἡμῶν νικήσαντες ἐπίδωσι τὴν πασῶν ἡδίστην ἡμέραν .
Happy, indeed, are those of us who shall win the victory and live to behold the gladdest day of all!


2.4.17
699
εὐδαίμων δὲ καὶ ἄν τις ἀποθάνῃ ·
And happy also he who is slain;


2.4.17
700
μνημείου γὰρ οὐδεὶς οὕτω πλούσιος ὢν καλοῦ τεύξεται .
for no one, however rich he may be, will gain a monument so glorious.


2.4.17
701
ἐξάρξω μὲν οὖν ἐγὼ ἡνίκ’ ἂν καιρὸς ᾖ παιᾶνα ·
Now, when the right moment comes, I will strike up the paean;


2.4.17
702
ὅταν δὲ τὸν Ἐνυάλιον παρακαλέσωμεν , τότε πάντες ὁμοθυμαδὸν ἀνθ’ ὧν ὑβρίσθημεν τιμωρώμεθα τοὺς ἄνδρας .
and when we call Enyalius to our aid, then let us all, moved by one spirit, take vengeance upon these men for the outrages we have suffered.


2.4.18
703
ταῦτα δ’ εἰπὼν καὶ μεταστραφεὶς πρὸς τοὺς ἐναντίους , ἡσυχίαν εἶχε ·
After saying these words and turning about to face the enemy, he kept quiet;


2.4.18
704
καὶ γὰρ ὁ μάντις παρήγγελλεν αὐτοῖς μὴ πρότερον ἐπιτίθεσθαι , πρὶν ἂν τῶν σφετέρων ἢ πέσοι τις ἢ τρωθείη ·
for the seer bade them not to attack until one of their own number was either killed or wounded.


2.4.18
705
ἐπειδὰν μέντοι τοῦτο γένηται , ἡγησόμεθα μέν , ἔφη , ἡμεῖς , νίκη δ’ ὑμῖν ἔσται ἑπομένοις , ἐμοὶ μέντοι θάνατος , ὥς γέ μοι δοκεῖ .
But as soon as that happens, he said, we shall lead on, and to you who follow will come victory, but death, methinks, to me.


2.4.19
706
καὶ οὐκ ἐψεύσατο , ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ ἀνέλαβον τὰ ὅπλα , αὐτὸς μὲν ὥσπερ ὑπὸ μοίρας τινὸς ἀγόμενος ἐκπηδήσας πρῶτος ἐμπεσὼν τοῖς πολεμίοις ἀποθνῄσκει , καὶ τέθαπται ἐν τῇ διαβάσει τοῦ Κηφισοῦ ·
And his saying did not prove false, for when they had taken up their shields,


2.4.19
707
οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι ἐνίκων καὶ κατεδίωξαν μέχρι τοῦ ὁμαλοῦ .
he, as though led on by a kind of fate, leaped forth first of all, fell upon the enemy, and was slain, and he lies buried at the ford of the Cephisus; but the others were victorious, and pursued the enemy as far as the level ground.


2.4.19
708
ἀπέθανον δ’ ἐνταῦθα τῶν μὲν τριάκοντα Κριτίας τε καὶ Ἱππόμαχος , τῶν δὲ ἐν Πειραιεῖ δέκα ἀρχόντων Χαρμίδης ὁ Γλαύκωνος , τῶν δ’ ἄλλων περὶ ἑβδομήκοντα .
In this battle fell two of the Thirty, Critias and Hippomachus, one of the Ten who ruled in Piraeus, Charmides, the son of Glaucon, and about seventy of the others.


2.4.19
709
καὶ τὰ μὲν ὅπλα ἔλαβον , τοὺς δὲ χιτῶνας οὐδενὸς τῶν πολιτῶν ἐσκύλευσαν .
And the victors took possession of their arms, but they did not strip off the tunic of any citizen.


2.4.19
710
ἐπεὶ δὲ τοῦτο ἐγένετο καὶ τοὺς νεκροὺς ὑποσπόνδους ἀπεδίδοσαν , προσιόντες ἀλλήλοις πολλοὶ διελέγοντο .
When this had been done and while they were giving back the bodies of the dead, many on either side mingled and talked with one another.


2.4.20
711
Κλεόκριτος δὲ ὁ τῶν μυστῶν κῆρυξ , μάλ’ εὔφωνος ὤν , κατασιωπησάμενος ἔλεξεν ·
And Cleocritus, the herald of the initiated, a man with a very fine voice, obtained silence and said:


2.4.20
712
ἄνδρες πολῖται , τί ἡμᾶς ἐξελαύνετε ;
Fellow citizens, why do you drive us out of the city?


2.4.20
713
τί ἀποκτεῖναι βούλεσθε ;
Why do you wish to kill us?


2.4.20
714
ἡμεῖς γὰρ ὑμᾶς κακὸν μὲν οὐδὲν πώποτε ἐποιήσαμεν , μετεσχήκαμεν δὲ ὑμῖν καὶ ἱερῶν τῶν σεμνοτάτων καὶ θυσιῶν καὶ ἑορτῶν τῶν καλλίστων , καὶ συγχορευταὶ καὶ συμφοιτηταὶ γεγενήμεθα καὶ συστρατιῶται , καὶ πολλὰ μεθ’ ὑμῶν κεκινδυνεύκαμεν καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν ὑπὲρ τῆς κοινῆς ἀμφοτέρων ἡμῶν σωτηρίας τε καὶ ἐλευθερίας .
For we never did you any harm, but we have shared with you in the most solemn rites and sacrifices and the most splendid festivals, we have been companions in the dance and schoolmates and comrades in arms, and we have braved many dangers with you both by land and by sea in defense of the common safety and freedom of us both.


2.4.21
715
πρὸς θεῶν πατρῴων καὶ μητρῴων καὶ συγγενείας καὶ κηδεστίας καὶ ἑταιρίας , πάντων γὰρ τούτων πολλοὶ κοινωνοῦμεν ἀλλήλοις , αἰδούμενοι καὶ θεοὺς καὶ ἀνθρώπους παύσασθε ἁμαρτάνοντες εἰς τὴν πατρίδα , καὶ μὴ πείθεσθε τοῖς ἀνοσιωτάτοις τριάκοντα , οἳ ἰδίων κερδέων ἕνεκα ὀλίγου δεῖν πλείους ἀπεκτόνασιν Ἀθηναίων ἐν ὀκτὼ μησὶν ἢ πάντες Πελοποννήσιοι δέκα ἔτη πολεμοῦντες .
In the name of the gods of our fathers and mothers, in the name ofour ties of kinship and marriage and comradeship,—for all these manyof us share with one another,—cease, out of shame before gods andmen, to sin against your fatherland, and do not obey those mostaccursed Thirty, who for the sake of their private gain have killedin eight months more Athenians, almost, than all the Peloponnesiansin ten years of war.


2.4.22
716
ἐξὸν δ’ ἡμῖν ἐν εἰρήνῃ πολιτεύεσθαι , οὗτοι τὸν πάντων αἴσχιστόν τε καὶ χαλεπώτατον καὶ ἀνοσιώτατον καὶ ἔχθιστον καὶ θεοῖς καὶ ἀνθρώποις πόλεμον ἡμῖν πρὸς ἀλλήλους παρέχουσιν .
And when we might live in peace as fellow citizens, these men bring upon us war with one another, a war most utterly shameful and intolerable, utterly unholy and hated by both gods and men.


2.4.22
717
ἀλλ’ εὖ γε μέντοι ἐπίστασθε ὅτι καὶ τῶν νῦν ὑφ’ ἡμῶν ἀποθανόντων οὐ μόνον ὑμεῖς ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡμεῖς ἔστιν οὓς πολλὰ κατεδακρύσαμεν .
Yet for all that, be well assured that for some of those now slain by our hands not only you, but we also, have wept bitterly.


2.4.22
718
ὁ μὲν τοιαῦτα ἔλεγεν ·
Thus he spoke;


2.4.22
719
οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ ἄρχοντες καὶ διὰ τὸ τοιαῦτα προσακούειν τοὺς μεθ’ αὑτῶν ἀπήγαγον εἰς τὸ ἄστυ .
but the surviving officials of the oligarchy, partly because their followers were hearing such things, led them back to the city.


2.4.23
720
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ οἱ μὲν τριάκοντα πάνυ δὴ ταπεινοὶ καὶ ἔρημοι συνεκάθηντο ἐν τῷ συνεδρίῳ ·
On the following day the Thirty, utterly dejected and with but few adherents left, held their session in the council-chamber;


2.4.23
721
τῶν δὲ τρισχιλίων ὅπου ἕκαστοι τεταγμένοι ἦσαν , πανταχοῦ διεφέροντο πρὸς ἀλλήλους .
and as for the Three Thousand, wherever their several detachments were stationed, everywhere they began to quarrel with one another.


2.4.23
722
ὅσοι μὲν γὰρ ἐπεποιήκεσάν τι βιαιότερον καὶ ἐφοβοῦντο , ἐντόνως ἔλεγον ὡς οὐ χρείη καθυφίεσθαι τοῖς ἐν Πειραιεῖ ·
For all those who had done any act of especial violence and were therefore fearful, urged strenuously that they ought not to yield to the men in Piraeus;


2.4.23
723
ὅσοι δὲ ἐπίστευον μηδὲν ἠδικηκέναι , αὐτοί τε ἀνελογίζοντο καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἐδίδασκον ὡς οὐδὲν δέοιντο τούτων τῶν κακῶν , καὶ τοῖς τριάκοντα οὐκ ἔφασαν χρῆναι πείθεσθαι οὐδ’ ἐπιτρέπειν ἀπολλύναι τὴν πόλιν .
while those who were confident that they had done no wrong, argued in their own minds and set forth to the others that there was no need of their suffering these evils, and they said that they ought not to obey the Thirty or allow them to ruin the state.


2.4.23
724
καὶ τὸ τελευταῖον ἐψηφίσαντο ἐκείνους μὲν καταπαῦσαι , ἄλλους δὲ ἑλέσθαι .
In the end they voted to depose the Thirty and choose others.


2.4.23
725
καὶ εἵλοντο δέκα , ἕνα ἀπὸ φυλῆς .
And they chose ten, one from each tribe.


2.4.24
726
καὶ οἱ μὲν τριάκοντα Ἐλευσῖνάδε ἀπῆλθον ·
The Thirty thereupon retired to Eleusis;


2.4.24
727
οἱ δὲ δέκα τῶν ἐν ἄστει καὶ μάλα τεταραγμένων καὶ ἀπιστούντων ἀλλήλοις σὺν τοῖς ἱππάρχοις ἐπεμέλοντο .
and the Ten, with the aid of the cavalry commanders, took care of the men in the city, who were in a state of great disquiet and distrust of one another.


2.4.24
728
ἐξεκάθευδον δὲ καὶ οἱ ἱππεῖς ἐν τῷ Ὠιδείῳ , τούς τε ἵππους καὶ τὰς ἀσπίδας ἔχοντες , καὶ δι’ ἀπιστίαν ἐφώδευον τὸ μὲν ἀφ’ ἑσπέρας σὺν ταῖς ἀσπίσι κατὰ τείχη , τὸ δὲ πρὸς ὄρθρον σὺν τοῖς ἵπποις , ἀεὶ φοβούμενοι μὴ ἐπεισπέσοιέν τινες αὐτοῖς τῶν ἐκ τοῦ Πειραιῶς .
In fact, even the cavalry did guard duty by night, being quartered in the Odeum and keeping with them both their horses and their shields; and such was the suspicion that prevailed, that they patrolled along the walls from evening onwards with their shields, and toward dawn with their horses, fearing continually that they might be attacked by parties of men from Piraeus.


2.4.25
729
οἱ δὲ πολλοί τε ἤδη ὄντες καὶ παντοδαποί , ὅπλα ἐποιοῦντο , οἱ μὲν ξύλινα , οἱ δὲ οἰσύινα , καὶ ταῦτα ἐλευκοῦντο .
The latter, who were now numerous and included all sorts of people, were engaged in making shields, some of wood, others of wicker-work, and in painting them.


2.4.25
730
πρὶν δὲ ἡμέρας δέκα γενέσθαι , πιστὰ δόντες , οἵτινες συμπολεμήσειαν , καὶ εἰ ξένοι εἶεν , ἰσοτέλειαν ἔσεσθαι , ἐξῇσαν πολλοὶ μὲν ὁπλῖται , πολλοὶ δὲ γυμνῆτες ·
And having given pledges that whoever fought with them should be accorded equality in taxation with citizens even if they were foreigners, they marched forth before ten days had passed, a large body of hoplites with numerous light troops;


2.4.25
731
ἐγένοντο δὲ αὐτοῖς καὶ ἱππεῖς ὡσεὶ ἑβδομήκοντα ·
they also got together about seventy horsemen;


2.4.25
732
προνομὰς δὲ ποιούμενοι , καὶ λαμβάνοντες ξύλα καὶ ὀπώραν , ἐκάθευδον πάλιν ἐν Πειραιεῖ .
and they made forays and collected wood and produce, and then came back to spend the night in Piraeus.


2.4.26
733
τῶν δ’ ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεως ἄλλος μὲν οὐδεὶς σὺν ὅπλοις ἐξῄει , οἱ δὲ ἱππεῖς ἔστιν ὅτε καὶ λῃστὰς ἐχειροῦντο τῶν ἐκ τοῦ Πειραιῶς , καὶ τὴν φάλαγγα αὐτῶν ἐκακούργουν .
As for the men in the city, none of them went forth from the walls under arms except the cavalry, who sometimes captured foraging parties made up of the men from Piraeus and inflicted losses upon their main body.


2.4.26
734
περιέτυχον δὲ καὶ τῶν Αἰξωνέων τισὶν εἰς τοὺς αὑτῶν ἀγροὺς ἐπὶ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια πορευομένοις ·
They also fell in with some people of Aexone who were going to their own farms after provisions;


2.4.26
735
καὶ τούτους Λυσίμαχος ὁ ἵππαρχος ἀπέσφαξε , πολλὰ λιτανεύοντας καὶ πολλῶν χαλεπῶς φερόντων ἱππέων .
and Lysimachus, the cavalry commander, put these men to the sword, although they pleaded earnestly and many of the cavalrymen were much opposed to the proceeding.


2.4.27
736
ἀνταπέκτειναν δὲ καὶ οἱ ἐν Πειραιεῖ τῶν ἱππέων ἐπ’ ἀγροῦ λαβόντες Καλλίστρατον φυλῆς Λεοντίδος .
In retaliation, the men in Piraeus killed one of the cavalrymen, Callistratus, of the tribe of Leontis, having captured him in the country.


2.4.27
737
καὶ γὰρ ἤδη μέγα ἐφρόνουν , ὥστε καὶ πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος τοῦ ἄστεως προσέβαλλον .
For by this time they were very confident, so that they even made attacks upon the wall of the city.


2.4.27
738
εἰ δὲ καὶ τοῦτο δεῖ εἰπεῖν τοῦ μηχανοποιοῦ τοῦ ἐν τῷ ἄστει , ὃς ἐπεὶ ἔγνω ὅτι κατὰ τὸν ἐκ Λυκείου δρόμον μέλλοιεν τὰς μηχανὰς προσάγειν , τὰ ζεύγη ἐκέλευσε πάντα ἁμαξιαίους λίθους ἄγειν καὶ καταβάλλειν ὅπου ἕκαστος βούλοιτο τοῦ δρόμου .
And perhaps it is proper to mention also the following device of the engineer in the city: when he learned that the enemy were intending to bring up their siege-engines by the race-course which leads from the Lyceum, he ordered all his teams to haul stones each large enough to load a wagon and drop them at whatever spot in the course each driver pleased.


2.4.27
739
ὡς δὲ τοῦτο ἐγένετο , πολλὰ εἷς ἕκαστος τῶν λίθων πράγματα παρεῖχε .
When this had been done, each single one of the stones caused the enemy a great deal of trouble.


2.4.28
740
πεμπόντων δὲ πρέσβεις εἰς Λακεδαίμονα τῶν μὲν τριάκοντα ἐξ Ἐλευσῖνος , τῶν δ’ ἐν τῷ καταλόγῳ ἐξ ἄστεως , καὶ βοηθεῖν κελευόντων , ὡς ἀφεστηκότος τοῦ δήμου ἀπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων , Λύσανδρος λογισάμενος ὅτι οἷόν τε εἴη ταχὺ ἐκπολιορκῆσαι τοὺς ἐν τῷ Πειραιεῖ κατά τε γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν , εἰ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων ἀποκλεισθείησαν , συνέπραξεν ἑκατόν τε τάλαντα αὐτοῖς δανεισθῆναι , καὶ αὐτὸν μὲν κατὰ γῆν ἁρμοστήν , Λίβυν δὲ τὸν ἀδελφὸν ναυαρχοῦντα ἐκπεμφθῆναι .
And now, when the Thirty in Eleusissent ambassadors to Lacedaemon, and likewise those in the city whowere on the roll, and asked for aid on the plea that the commons hadrevolted from the Lacedaemonians, Lysander, calculating that it waspossible to blockade the men in Piraeus both by land and by sea andto force them to a quick surrender if they were cut off fromprovisions, lent his assistance to the ambassadors, with the resultthat a hundred talents was loaned to the Athenian oligarchs and thatLysander himself was sent out as governor on land and his brotherLibys as admiral of the fleet.


2.4.29
741
καὶ ἐξελθὼν αὐτὸς μὲν Ἐλευσῖνάδε συνέλεγεν ὁπλίτας πολλοὺς Πελοποννησίους ·
Accordingly, Lysander proceeded to Eleusis and busied himself with gathering a large force of Peloponnesian hoplites;


2.4.29
742
ὁ δὲ ναύαρχος κατὰ θάλατταν ἐφύλαττεν ὅπως μηδὲν εἰσπλέοι αὐτοῖς τῶν ἐπιτηδείων ·
meanwhile the admiral kept guard on the sea, to prevent any supplies from coming in by water to the besieged;


2.4.29
743
ὥστε ταχὺ πάλιν ἐν ἀπορίᾳ ἦσαν οἱ ἐν Πειραιεῖ , οἱ δ’ ἐν τῷ ἄστει πάλιν αὖ μέγα ἐφρόνουν ἐπὶ τῷ Λυσάνδρῳ .
so that the men in Piraeus were soon in difficulties again, while the men in the city again had their turn of being confident, in reliance upon Lysander.


2.4.29
744
οὕτω δὲ προχωρούντων Παυσανίας ὁ βασιλεὺς φθονήσας Λυσάνδρῳ , εἰ κατειργασμένος ταῦτα ἅμα μὲν εὐδοκιμήσοι , ἅμα δὲ ἰδίας ποιήσοιτο τὰς Ἀθήνας , πείσας τῶν ἐφόρων τρεῖς ἐξάγει φρουράν .
While matters were proceeding in this way, Pausanias the king, seized with envy of Lysander because, by accomplishing this project, he would not only win fame but also make Athens his own, persuaded three of the five ephors and led forth a Lacedaemonian army.


2.4.30
745
συνείποντο δὲ καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι πάντες πλὴν Βοιωτῶν καὶ Κορινθίων ·
And all the allies likewise followed with him, excepting the Boeotians and the Corinthians;


2.4.30
746
οὗτοι δὲ ἔλεγον μὲν ὅτι οὐ νομίζοιεν εὐορκεῖν ἂν στρατευόμενοι ἐπ’ Ἀθηναίους μηδὲν παράσπονδον ποιοῦντας ·
and the plea of these was that they did not think they would be true to their oaths if they took the field against the Athenians when the latter were doing nothing in violation of the treaty;


2.4.30
747
ἔπραττον δὲ ταῦτα , ὅτι ἐγίγνωσκον Λακεδαιμονίους βουλομένους τὴν τῶν Ἀθηναίων χώραν οἰκείαν καὶ πιστὴν ποιήσασθαι .
in fact, however, they acted as they did because they supposed that the Lacedaemonians wanted to make the territory of the Athenians their own sure possession.


2.4.30
748
ὁ δὲ Παυσανίας ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο μὲν ἐν τῷ Ἁλιπέδῳ καλουμένῳ πρὸς τῷ Πειραιεῖ δεξιὸν ἔχων κέρας , Λύσανδρος δὲ σὺν τοῖς μισθοφόροις τὸ εὐώνυμον .
So Pausanias encamped on the plain which is called Halipedum, near Piraeus, himself commanding the right wing, while Lysander and his mercenaries formed the left.


2.4.31
749
πέμπων δὲ πρέσβεις ὁ Παυσανίας πρὸς τοὺς ἐν Πειραιεῖ ἐκέλευεν ἀπιέναι ἐπὶ τὰ ἑαυτῶν ·
Then, sending ambassadors to the men in Piraeus, Pausanias bade them disperse to their homes;


2.4.31
750
ἐπεὶ δ’ οὐκ ἐπείθοντο , προσέβαλλεν ὅσον ἀπὸ βοῆς ἕνεκεν , ὅπως μὴ δῆλος εἴη εὐμενὴς αὐτοῖς ὤν .
and when they refused to obey, he attacked them, at least so far as to raise the war-cry, in order that it might not be evident that he felt kindly toward them.


2.4.31
751
ἐπεὶ δ’ οὐδὲν ἀπὸ τῆς προσβολῆς πράξας ἀπῆλθε , τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ λαβὼν τῶν μὲν Λακεδαιμονίων δύο μόρας , τῶν δὲ Ἀθηναίων ἱππέων τρεῖς φυλάς , παρῆλθεν ἐπὶ τὸν κωφὸν λιμένα , σκοπῶν πῇ εὐαποτειχιστότατος εἴη ὁ Πειραιεύς .
And when he had retired without accomplishing anything by his attack, on the next day he took two regiments of the Lacedaemonians and three tribes of the Athenian cavalry and proceeded along the shore to the Still Harbour, looking to see where Piraeus could best be shut off by a wall.


2.4.32
752
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπιόντος αὐτοῦ προσέθεόν τινες καὶ πράγματα αὐτῷ παρεῖχον , ἀχθεσθεὶς παρήγγειλε τοὺς μὲν ἱππέας ἐλᾶν εἰς αὐτοὺς ἐνέντας , καὶ τοὺς τὰ δέκα ἀφ’ ἥβης συνέπεσθαι ·
As he was returning, some of the enemy attacked him and caused him trouble,


2.4.32
753
σὺν δὲ τοῖς ἄλλοις αὐτὸς ἐπηκολούθει .
whereupon, becoming angry, he ordered the cavalry to charge upon them at full speed, and the infantrymen within ten years of military age to follow the cavalry;


2.4.32
754
καὶ ἀπέκτειναν μὲν ἐγγὺς τριάκοντα τῶν ψιλῶν , τοὺς δ’ ἄλλους κατεδίωξαν πρὸς τὸ Πειραιοῖ θέατρον .
while he himself with the rest of his troops came along in the rear. And they killed nearly thirty of the enemy’s light troops and pursued the rest to the theatre in Piraeus.


2.4.33
755
ἐκεῖ δὲ ἔτυχον ἐξοπλιζόμενοι οἵ τε πελτασταὶ πάντες καὶ οἱ ὁπλῖται τῶν ἐκ Πειραιῶς .
There, as it chanced, the whole body of the light troops and likewise the hoplites of the men in Piraeus were arming themselves.


2.4.33
756
καὶ οἱ μὲν ψιλοὶ εὐθὺς ἐκδραμόντες ἠκόντιζον , ἔβαλλον , ἐτόξευον , ἐσφενδόνων ·
And the light troops, rushing forth at once, set to throwing javelins, hurling stones, shooting arrows, and discharging slings;


2.4.33
757
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ἐπεὶ αὐτῶν πολλοὶ ἐτιτρώσκοντο , μάλα πιεζόμενοι ἀνεχώρουν ἐπὶ πόδα ·
then the Lacedaemonians, since many of them were being wounded and they were hard pressed, gave ground, though still facing the enemy;


2.4.33
758
οἱ δ’ ἐν τούτῳ πολὺ μᾶλλον ἐπέκειντο .
and at this the latter attacked much more vigorously.


2.4.33
759
ἐνταῦθα καὶ ἀποθνῄσκει Χαίρων τε καὶ Θίβραχος , ἄμφω πολεμάρχω , καὶ Λακράτης ὁ Ὀλυμπιονίκης καὶ ἄλλοι οἱ τεθαμμένοι Λακεδαιμονίων πρὸ τῶν πυλῶν ἐν Κεραμεικῷ .
In this attack Chaeron and Thibrachus, both of them polemarchs, were slain, and Lacrates, the Olympic victor, and other Lacedaemonians who lie buried before the gates of Athens in the Cerameicus.


2.4.34
760
ὁρῶν δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Θρασύβουλος καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι ὁπλῖται , ἐβοήθουν , καὶ ταχὺ παρετάξαντο πρὸ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπ’ ὀκτώ .
Now Thrasybulus and the rest of his troops—that is, the hoplites—when they saw the situation, came running to lend aid, and quickly formed in line, eight deep, in front of their comrades.


2.4.34
761
ὁ δὲ Παυσανίας μάλα πιεσθεὶς καὶ ἀναχωρήσας ὅσον στάδια τέτταρα ἢ πέντε πρὸς λόφον τινά , παρήγγελλε τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις συμμάχοις ἐπιχωρεῖν πρὸς ἑαυτόν .
And Pausanias, being hard pressed and retreating about four or five stadia to a hill, sent orders to the Lacedaemonians and to the allies to join him.


2.4.34
762
ἐκεῖ δὲ συνταξάμενος παντελῶς βαθεῖαν τὴν φάλαγγα ἦγεν ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους .
There he formed an extremely deep phalanx and led the charge against the Athenians.


2.4.34
763
οἱ δ’ εἰς χεῖρας μὲν ἐδέξαντο , ἔπειτα δὲ οἱ μὲν ἐξεώσθησαν εἰς τὸν ἐν ταῖς Ἁλαῖς πηλόν , οἱ δὲ ἐνέκλιναν ·
The Athenians did indeed accept battle at close quarters; but in the end some of them were pushed into the mire of the marsh of Halae and others gave way;


2.4.34
764
καὶ ἀποθνῄσκουσιν αὐτῶν ὡς πεντήκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν .
and about one hundred and fifty of them were slain.


2.4.35
765
ὁ δὲ Παυσανίας τροπαῖον στησάμενος ἀνεχώρησε ·
Thereupon Pausanias set up a trophy and returned to his camp;


2.4.35
766
καὶ οὐδ’ ὣς ὠργίζετο αὐτοῖς , ἀλλὰ λάθρᾳ πέμπων ἐδίδασκε τοὺς ἐν Πειραιεῖ οἷα χρὴ λέγοντας πρέσβεις πέμπειν πρὸς ἑαυτὸν καὶ τοὺς παρόντας ἐφόρους .
and despite what had happened he was not angry with them, but sent secretly and instructed the men in Piraeus to send ambassadors to him and the ephors who were with him, telling them also what proposals these ambassadors should offer;


2.4.35
767
οἱ δ’ ἐπείθοντο .
and they obeyed him.


2.4.35
768
διίστη δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἐν τῷ ἄστει , καὶ ἐκέλευε πρὸς σφᾶς προσιέναι ὡς πλείστους συλλεγομένους , λέγοντας ὅτι οὐδὲν δέονται τοῖς ἐν τῷ Πειραιεῖ πολεμεῖν , ἀλλὰ διαλυθέντες κοινῇ ἀμφότεροι Λακεδαιμονίοις φίλοι εἶναι .
He also set about dividing the men in the city, and gave directions that as many of them as possible should gather together and come to him and the ephors and say that they had no desire to be waging war with the men in Piraeus, but rather to be reconciled with them and in common with them to be friends of the Lacedaemonians.


2.4.36
769
ἡδέως δὲ ταῦτα καὶ Ναυκλείδας ἔφορος ὢν συνήκουεν ·
Now Naucleidas also, who was an ephor, was pleased to hear this.


2.4.36
770
ὥσπερ γὰρ νομίζεται σὺν βασιλεῖ δύο τῶν ἐφόρων συστρατεύεσθαι , καὶ τότε παρῆν οὗτός τε καὶ ἄλλος , ἀμφότεροι τῆς μετὰ Παυσανίου γνώμης ὄντες μᾶλλον ἢ τῆς μετὰ Λυσάνδρου .
For, as it is customary for two of the ephors to be with a king on a campaign, so in this instance Naucleidas and one other were present, and both of them held to the policy of Pausanias rather than to that of Lysander.


2.4.36
771
διὰ ταῦτα οὖν καὶ εἰς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα προθύμως ἔπεμπον τούς τ’ ἐκ τοῦ Πειραιῶς ἔχοντας τὰς πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους σπονδὰς καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν ἐν τῷ ἄστει ἰδιώτας , καὶ Κηφισοφῶντά τε καὶ Μέλητον .
For this reason they eagerly sent to Lacedaemon both the envoys from Piraeus, having the proposals for peace with the Lacedaemonians, and the envoys from the city party as private individuals, namely, Cephisophon and Meletus.


2.4.37
772
ἐπεὶ μέντοι οὗτοι ᾤχοντο εἰς Λακεδαίμονα , ἔπεμπον δὴ καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ τοῦ κοινοῦ ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεως λέγοντας ὅτι αὐτοὶ μὲν παραδιδόασι καὶ τὰ τείχη ἃ ἔχουσι καὶ σφᾶς αὐτοὺς Λακεδαιμονίοις χρῆσθαι ὅ τι βούλονται ·
When, however, these men had departed for Lacedaemon, the authorities in the city also proceeded to send ambassadors, with the message that they surrendered both the walls which they possessed and themselves to the Lacedaemonians, to do with them as they wished;


2.4.37
773
ἀξιοῦν δ’ ἔφασαν καὶ τοὺς ἐν Πειραιεῖ , εἰ φίλοι φασὶν εἶναι Λακεδαιμονίοις , παραδιδόναι τόν τε Πειραιᾶ καὶ τὴν Μουνιχίαν .
and they said they counted it only fair that the men in Piraeus, if they claimed to be friends of the Lacedaemonians, should in like manner surrender Piraeus and Munichia.


2.4.38
774
ἀκούσαντες δὲ πάντων αὐτῶν οἱ ἔφοροι καὶ οἱ ἔκκλητοι , ἐξέπεμψαν πεντεκαίδεκα ἄνδρας εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας , καὶ ἐπέταξαν σὺν Παυσανίᾳ διαλλάξαι ὅπῃ δύναιντο κάλλιστα .
When the ephors and the members of the Lacedaemonian assembly had heard all the ambassadors, they dispatched fifteen men to Athens and commissioned them, in conjunction with Pausanias, to effect a reconciliation in the best way they could.


2.4.38
775
οἱ δὲ διήλλαξαν ἐφ’ ᾧτε εἰρήνην μὲν ἔχειν ὡς πρὸς ἀλλήλους , ἀπιέναι δὲ ἐπὶ τὰ ἑαυτῶν ἕκαστον πλὴν τῶν τριάκοντα καὶ τῶν ἕνδεκα καὶ τῶν ἐν Πειραιεῖ ἀρξάντων δέκα .
And they effected a reconciliation on these terms, that the two parties should be at peace with one another and that every man should depart to his home except the members of the Thirty, and of the Eleven, and of the Ten who had ruled in Piraeus.


2.4.38
776
εἰ δέ τινες φοβοῖντο τῶν ἐξ ἄστεως , ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς Ἐλευσῖνα κατοικεῖν .
They also decided that if any of the men in the city were afraid, they should settle at Eleusis.


2.4.39
777
τούτων δὲ περανθέντων Παυσανίας μὲν διῆκε τὸ στράτευμα , οἱ δ’ ἐκ τοῦ Πειραιῶς ἀνελθόντες σὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἔθυσαν τῇ Ἀθηνᾷ .
When these things had been accomplished, Pausanias disbanded his army and the men from Piraeus went up to the Acropolis under arms and offered sacrifice to Athena.


2.4.39
778
ἐπεὶ δὲ κατέβησαν οἱ στρατηγοί , ἔνθα δὴ ὁ Θρασύβουλος ἔλεξεν ·
When they had come down, the generals convened an Assembly. There Thrasybulus spoke as follows:


2.4.40
779
ὑμῖν , ἔφη , ὦ ἐκ τοῦ ἄστεως ἄνδρες , συμβουλεύω ἐγὼ γνῶναι ὑμᾶς αὐτούς .
I advise you, he said, men of the city, to know yourselves.


2.4.40
780
μάλιστα δ’ ἂν γνοίητε , εἰ ἀναλογίσαισθε ἐπὶ τίνι ὑμῖν μέγα φρονητέον ἐστίν , ὥστε ἡμῶν ἄρχειν ἐπιχειρεῖν .
And you would best learn to know yourselves were you to consider what grounds you have for arrogance, that you should undertake to rule over us.


2.4.40
781
πότερον δικαιότεροί ἐστε ;
Are you more just?


2.4.40
782
ἀλλ’ ὁ μὲν δῆμος πενέστερος ὑμῶν ὢν οὐδὲν πώποτε ἕνεκα χρημάτων ὑμᾶς ἠδίκηκεν ·
But the commons, though poorer than you, never did you any wrong for the sake of money;


2.4.40
783
ὑμεῖς δὲ πλουσιώτεροι πάντων ὄντες πολλὰ καὶ αἰσχρὰ ἕνεκα κερδέων πεποιήκατε .
while you, though richer than any of them, have done many disgraceful things for the sake of gain.


2.4.40
784
ἐπεὶ δὲ δικαιοσύνης οὐδὲν ὑμῖν προσήκει , σκέψασθε εἰ ἄρα ἐπ’ ἀνδρείᾳ ὑμῖν μέγα φρονητέον .
But since you can lay no claim to justice, consider then whether it is courage that you have a right to pride yourselves upon.


2.4.41
785
καὶ τίς ἂν καλλίων κρίσις τούτου γένοιτο ἢ ὡς ἐπολεμήσαμεν πρὸς ἀλλήλους ;
And what better test could there be of this than the way we made war upon one another?


2.4.41
786
ἀλλὰ γνώμῃ φαίητ’ ἂν προέχειν , οἳ ἔχοντες καὶ τεῖχος καὶ ὅπλα καὶ χρήματα καὶ συμμάχους Πελοποννησίους ὑπὸ τῶν οὐδὲν τούτων ἐχόντων περιείληφθε ;
Well then, would you say that you are superior in intelligence, you who having a wall, arms, money, and the Peloponnesians as allies, have been worsted by men who had none of these?


2.4.41
787
ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ Λακεδαιμονίοις δὴ οἴεσθε μέγα φρονητέον εἶναι ;
Is it the Lacedaemonians, then, think you, that you may pride yourselves upon?


2.4.41
788
πῶς , οἵγε ὥσπερ τοὺς δάκνοντας κύνας κλοιῷ δήσαντες παραδιδόασιν , οὕτω κ- ἐκεῖνοι ὑμᾶς παραδόντες τῷ ἠδικημένῳ τούτῳ δήμῳ οἴχονται ἀπιόντες ;
How so? Why, they have delivered you up to this outraged populace, just as men fasten a clog upon the necks of snapping dogs and deliver them up to keepers, and now have gone away and left you.


2.4.42
789
οὐ μέντοι γε ὑμᾶς , ὦ ἄνδρες , ἀξιῶ ἐγὼ ὧν ὀμωμόκατε παραβῆναι οὐδέν , ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦτο πρὸς τοῖς ἄλλοις καλοῖς ἐπιδεῖξαι , ὅτι καὶ εὔορκοι καὶ ὅσιοί ἐστε .
Nevertheless, my comrades, I am not the man to ask you to violate any one of the pledges to which you have sworn, but I ask you rather to show this virtue also, in addition to your other virtues,—that you are true to your oaths and are god-fearing men.


2.4.42
790
εἰπὼν δὲ ταῦτα καὶ ἄλλα τοιαῦτα , καὶ ὅτι οὐδὲν δέοι ταράττεσθαι , ἀλλὰ τοῖς νόμοις τοῖς ἀρχαίοις χρῆσθαι , ἀνέστησε τὴν ἐκκλησίαν .
When he had said this and more to the same effect, and had told them that there was no need of their being disturbed, but that they had only to live under the laws that had previously been in force, he dismissed the Assembly.


2.4.43
791
καὶ τότε μὲν ἀρχὰς καταστησάμενοι ἐπολιτεύοντο ·
So at that time they appointed their magistrates and proceeded to carry on their government;


2.4.43
792
ὑστέρῳ δὲ χρόνῳ ἀκούσαντες ξένους μισθοῦσθαι τοὺς Ἐλευσῖνι , στρατευσάμενοι πανδημεὶ ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς τοὺς μὲν στρατηγοὺς αὐτῶν εἰς λόγους ἐλθόντας ἀπέκτειναν , τοῖς δὲ ἄλλοις εἰσπέμψαντες τοὺς φίλους καὶ ἀναγκαίους ἔπεισαν συναλλαγῆναι .
but at a later period, on learning that the men at Eleusis were hiring mercenary troops, they took the field with their whole force against them, put to death their generals when they came for a conference, and then, by sending to the others their friends and kinsmen, persuaded them to become reconciled.


2.4.43
793
καὶ ὀμόσαντες ὅρκους ἦ μὴν μὴ μνησικακήσειν , ἔτι καὶ νῦν ὁμοῦ τε πολιτεύονται καὶ τοῖς ὅρκοις ἐμμένει ὁ δῆμος .
And, pledged as they were under oath, that in very truth they would not remember past grievances, the two parties even to this day live together as fellow-citizens and the commons abide by their oaths.



3.1.1
794
ἡ μὲν δὴ Ἀθήνησι στάσις οὕτως ἐτελεύτησεν .
So ended the civil strife at Athens.


3.1.1
795
ἐκ δὲ τούτου πέμψας Κῦρος ἀγγέλους εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἠξίου , οἷόσπερ αὐτὸς Λακεδαιμονίοις ἦν ἐν τῷ πρὸς Ἀθηναίους πολέμῳ , τοιούτους καὶ Λακεδαιμονίους αὐτῷ γίγνεσθαι .
Shortly after this Cyrus sent messengers to Lacedaemon and asked that the Lacedaemonians should show themselves as good friends to him as he was to them in the war against the Athenians.


3.1.1
796
οἱ δ’ ἔφοροι δίκαια νομίσαντες λέγειν αὐτόν , Σαμίῳ τῷ τότε ναυάρχῳ ἐπέστειλαν ὑπηρετεῖν Κύρῳ , εἴ τι δέοιτο .
And the ephors, thinking that what he said was fair, sent instructions to Samius, at that time their admiral, to hold himself under Cyrus’ orders, in case he had any request to make.


3.1.1
797
κ- ἐκεῖνος μέντοι προθύμως ὅπερ ἐδεήθη ὁ Κῦρος ἔπραξεν ·
And in fact Samius did zealously just what Cyrus asked of him:


3.1.1
798
ἔχων γὰρ τὸ ἑαυτοῦ ναυτικὸν σὺν τῷ Κύρου περιέπλευσεν εἰς Κιλικίαν , καὶ ἐποίησε τὸν τῆς Κιλικίας ἄρχοντα Συέννεσιν μὴ δύνασθαι κατὰ γῆν ἐναντιοῦσθαι Κύρῳ πορευομένῳ ἐπὶ βασιλέα .
he sailed round to Cilicia at the head of his fleet, in company with the fleet of Cyrus, and made it impossible for Syennesis, the ruler of Cilicia, to oppose Cyrus by land in his march against the Persian king.


3.1.2
799
ὡς μὲν οὖν Κῦρος στράτευμά τε συνέλεξε καὶ τοῦτ’ ἔχων ἀνέβη ἐπὶ τὸν ἀδελφόν , καὶ ὡς ἡ μάχη ἐγένετο , καὶ ὡς ἀπέθανε , καὶ ὡς ἐκ τούτου ἀπεσώθησαν οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐπὶ θάλατταν , Θεμιστογένει τῷ Συρακοσίῳ γέγραπται .
As to how Cyrus collected an army and with this army made the march up country against his brother, how the battle was fought, how Cyrus was slain, and how after that the Greeks effected their return in safety to the sea—all this has been written by Themistogenes the Syracusan.


3.1.3
800
ἐπεὶ μέντοι Τισσαφέρνης , πολλοῦ ἄξιος βασιλεῖ δόξας γεγενῆσθαι ἐν τῷ πρὸς τὸν ἀδελφὸν πολέμῳ , σατράπης κατεπέμφθη ὧν τε αὐτὸς πρόσθεν ἦρχε καὶ ὧν Κῦρος , εὐθὺς ἠξίου τὰς Ἰωνικὰς πόλεις ἁπάσας ἑαυτῷ ὑπηκόους εἶναι .
Now when Tissaphernes, who was thought to have proved himself very valuable to the King in the war against his brother, was sent down as satrap both of the provinces which he himself had previously ruled and of those which Cyrus had ruled, he straightway demanded that all the Ionian cities should be subject to him.


3.1.3
801
αἱ δὲ ἅμα μὲν ἐλεύθεραι βουλόμεναι εἶναι , ἅμα δὲ φοβούμεναι τὸν Τισσαφέρνην , ὅτι Κῦρον , ὅτ’ ἔζη , ἀντ’ ἐκείνου ᾑρημέναι ἦσαν , εἰς μὲν τὰς πόλεις οὐκ ἐδέχοντο αὐτόν , εἰς Λακεδαίμονα δὲ ἔπεμπον πρέσβεις , καὶ ἠξίουν , ἐπεὶ πάσης τῆς Ἑλλάδος προστάται εἰσίν , ἐπιμεληθῆναι καὶ σφῶν τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ Ἑλλήνων , ὅπως ἥ τε χώρα μὴ δῃοῖτο αὐτῶν καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐλεύθεροι εἶεν .
But they, both because they wanted to be free and because they feared Tissaphernes, inasmuch as they had chosen Cyrus, while he was living, instead of him, refused to admit him into their cities and sent ambassadors to Lacedaemon asking that the Lacedaemonians, since they were the leaders of all Hellas, should undertake to protect them also, the Greeks in Asia, in order that their land might not be laid waste and that they themselves might be free.


3.1.4
802
οἱ οὖν Λακεδαιμόνιοι πέμπουσιν αὐτοῖς Θίβρωνα ἁρμοστήν , δόντες στρατιώτας τῶν μὲν νεοδαμώδων εἰς χιλίους , τῶν δὲ ἄλλων Πελοποννησίων εἰς τετρακισχιλίους .
Accordingly, the Lacedaemonians sent them Thibron as governor, giving him an army made up of a thousand emancipated Helots and four thousand of the other Peloponnesians.


3.1.4
803
ᾐτήσατο δ’ ὁ Θίβρων καὶ παρ’ Ἀθηναίων τριακοσίους ἱππέας , εἰπὼν ὅτι αὐτὸς μισθὸν παρέξει .
Thibron also asked from the Athenians three hundred cavalrymen, saying that he would provide pay for them himself.


3.1.4
804
οἱ δ’ ἔπεμψαν τῶν ἐπὶ τῶν τριάκοντα ἱππευσάντων , νομίζοντες κέρδος τῷ δήμῳ , εἰ ἀποδημοῖεν καὶ ἐναπόλοιντο .
And the Athenians sent some of those who had served as cavalrymen in the time of the Thirty, thinking it would be a gain to the democracy if they should live in foreign lands and perish there.


3.1.5
805
ἐπεὶ δ’ εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν ἀφίκοντο , συνήγαγε μὲν στρατιώτας καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ Ἑλληνίδων πόλεων ·
Furthermore, when they arrived in Asia, Thibron also gathered troops from the Greek cities of the mainland;


3.1.5
806
πᾶσαι γὰρ τότε αἱ πόλεις ἐπείθοντο ὅ τι Λακεδαιμόνιος ἀνὴρ ἐπιτάττοι .
for at that time all the cities obeyed any command a Lacedaemonian might give.


3.1.5
807
καὶ σὺν μὲν ταύτῃ τῇ στρατιᾷ ὁρῶν Θίβρων τὸ ἱππικὸν εἰς τὸ πεδίον οὐ κατέβαινεν , ἠγάπα δὲ εἰ ὅπου τυγχάνοι ὤν , δύναιτο ταύτην τὴν χώραν ἀδῄωτον διαφυλάττειν .
Now while he was at the head of this army, Thibron did not venture to descend to level ground, because he saw the enemy’s cavalry, but was satisfied if he could keep the particular territory where he chanced to be from being ravaged.


3.1.6
808
ἐπεὶ δὲ σωθέντες οἱ ἀναβάντες μετὰ Κύρου συνέμειξαν αὐτῷ , ἐκ τούτου ἤδη καὶ ἐν τοῖς πεδίοις ἀντετάττετο τῷ Τισσαφέρνει , καὶ πόλεις Πέργαμον μὲν ἑκοῦσαν προσέλαβε καὶ Τευθρανίαν καὶ Ἁλίσαρναν , ὧν Εὐρυσθένης τε καὶ Προκλῆς ἦρχον οἱ ἀπὸ Δαμαράτου τοῦ Λακεδαιμονίου ·
When, however, the men who had made the march up country with Cyrus joined forces with him after their safe return, from that time on he would draw up his troops against Tissaphernes even on the plains,


3.1.6
809
ἐκείνῳ δ’ αὕτη ἡ χώρα δῶρον ἐκ βασιλέως ἐδόθη ἀντὶ τῆς ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα συστρατείας ·
and he got possession of cities, Pergamus by voluntary surrender, and likewise Teuthrania and Halisarna, two cities which were under the rule of Eurysthenes and Procles, the descendants of Demaratus the Lacedaemonian; and this territory had been given to Demaratus by the Persian king as a reward for accompanying him on his expedition against Greece.


3.1.6
810
προσεχώρησαν δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ Γοργίων καὶ Γογγύλος , ἀδελφοὶ ὄντες , ἔχοντες ὁ μὲν Γάμβριον καὶ Παλαιγάμβριον , ὁ δὲ Μύριναν καὶ Γρύνειον ·
Furthermore, Gorgion and Gongylus gave in their allegiance to Thibron, they being brothers, one of them the ruler of Gambrium and Palaegambrium, the other of Myrina and Grynium;


3.1.6
811
δῶρον δὲ καὶ αὗται αἱ πόλεις ἦσαν παρὰ βασιλέως Γογγύλῳ , ὅτι μόνος Ἐρετριέων μηδίσας ἔφυγεν .
and these cities also were a gift from the Persian king to the earlier Gongylus, because he espoused the Persian cause,—the only man among the Eretrians who did so,—and was therefore banished.


3.1.7
812
ἦν δὲ ἃς ἀσθενεῖς οὔσας καὶ κατὰ κράτος ὁ Θίβρων ἐλάμβανε ·
On the other hand, there were some weak cities which Thibron did actually capture by storm;


3.1.7
813
Λάρισάν γε μὴν τὴν Αἰγυπτίαν καλουμένην , ἐπεὶ οὐκ ἐπείθετο , περιστρατοπεδευσάμενος ἐπολιόρκει .
as for Larisa (Egyptian Larisa, as it is called), when it refused to yield he invested and besieged it.


3.1.7
814
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἄλλως οὐκ ἐδύνατο ἑλεῖν , φρεατίαν τεμόμενος ὑπόνομον ὤρυττεν , ὡς ἀφαιρησόμενος τὸ ὕδωρ αὐτῶν .
When he proved unable to capture it in any other way, he sunk a shaft and began to dig a tunnel therefrom, with the idea of cutting off their water supply.


3.1.7
815
ὡς δ’ ἐκ τοῦ τείχους ἐκθένοντες πολλάκις ἐνέβαλον εἰς τὸ ὄρυγμα καὶ ξύλα καὶ λίθους , ποιησάμενος αὖ χελώνην ξυλίνην ἐπέστησεν ἐπὶ τῇ φρεατίᾳ .
And when they made frequent sallies from within the wall and threw pieces of wood and stones into the shaft, he met this move by making a wooden shed and setting it over the shaft.


3.1.7
816
καὶ ταύτην μέντοι ἐκδραμόντες οἱ Λαρισαῖοι νύκτωρ κατέκαυσαν .
The Larisaeans, however, sallied forth by night and destroyed the shed also, by fire.


3.1.7
817
δοκοῦντος δ’ αὐτοῦ οὐδὲν ποιεῖν , πέμπουσιν οἱ ἔφοροι ἀπολιπόντα Λάρισαν στρατεύεσθαι ἐπὶ Καρίαν .
Then, since he seemed to be accomplishing nothing, the ephors sent him word to leave Larisa and undertake a campaign against Caria.


3.1.8
818
ἐν Ἐφέσῳ δὲ ἤδη ὄντος αὐτοῦ , ὡς ἐπὶ Καρίαν πορευομένου , Δερκυλίδας ἄρξων ἀφίκετο ἐπὶ τὸ στράτευμα , ἀνὴρ δοκῶν εἶναι μάλα μηχανητικός ·
When, in pursuance of his intention to march against Caria, he was already at Ephesus, Dercylidas arrived to take command of the army, a man who was reputed to be exceedingly resourceful;


3.1.8
819
καὶ ἐπεκαλεῖτο δὲ Σίσυφος .
indeed, he bore the nickname Sisyphus.


3.1.8
820
ὁ μὲν οὖν Θίβρων ἀπῆλθεν οἴκαδε καὶ ζημιωθεὶς ἔφυγε ·
Thibron accordingly went back home, and was condemned and banished;


3.1.8
821
κατηγόρουν γὰρ αὐτοῦ οἱ σύμμαχοι ὡς ἐφείη ἁρπάζειν τῷ στρατεύματι τοὺς φίλους .
for the allies accused him of allowing his soldiers to plunder their friends.


3.1.9
822
ὁ δὲ Δερκυλίδας ἐπεὶ παρέλαβε τὸ στράτευμα , γνοὺς ὑπόπτους ὄντας ἀλλήλοις τὸν Τισσαφέρνην καὶ τὸν Φαρνάβαζον , κοινολογησάμενος τῷ Τισσαφέρνει ἀπήγαγεν εἰς τὴν Φαρναβάζου χώραν τὸ στράτευμα , ἑλόμενος θατέρῳ μᾶλλον ἢ ἅμα ἀμφοτέροις πολεμεῖν .
And when Dercylidas took over the command of the army, being aware that Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus were suspicious of each other, he came to an understanding with Tissaphernes and led away his army into the territory of Pharnabazus, preferring to make war against one of the two rather than against both together.


3.1.9
823
ἦν δὲ καὶ πρόσθεν ὁ Δερκυλίδας πολέμιος τῷ Φαρναβάζῳ ·
Besides, Dercylidas was an enemy of Pharnabazus from earlier days;


3.1.9
824
ἁρμοστὴς γὰρ γενόμενος ἐν Ἀβύδῳ ἐπὶ Λυσάνδρου ναυαρχοῦντος , διαβληθεὶς ὑπὸ Φαρναβάζου , ἐστάθη τὴν ἀσπίδα ἔχων , ὃ δοκεῖ κηλὶς εἶναι τοῖς σπουδαίοις Λακεδαιμονίων ·
for after he had become governor at Abydus at the time when Lysander was admiral, he was compelled, as a result of his being slandered by Pharnabazus, to stand sentry, carrying his shield—a thing which is regarded by Lacedaemonians of character as a disgrace;


3.1.9
825
ἀταξίας γὰρ ζημίωμά ἐστι .
for it is a punishment for insubordination.


3.1.9
826
καὶ διὰ ταῦτα δὴ πολὺ ἥδιον ἐπὶ τὸν Φαρνάβαζον ᾔει .
On this account, then, he was all the more pleased to proceed against Pharnabazus.


3.1.10
827
καὶ εὐθὺς μὲν τοσούτῳ διέφερεν εἰς τὸ ἄρχειν τοῦ Θίβρωνος ὥστε παρήγαγε τὸ στράτευμα διὰ τῆς φιλίας χώρας μέχρι τῆς Φαρναβάζου Αἰολίδος οὐδὲν βλάψας τοὺς συμμάχους .
And from the outset he was so superior to Thibron in the exercise of command that he led his troops through the country of friends all the way to the Aeolis, in the territory of Pharnabazus, without doing any harm whatever to his allies.


3.1.10
828
ἡ δὲ Αἰολὶς αὕτη ἦν μὲν Φαρναβάζου , ἐσατράπευε δ’ αὐτῷ ταύτης τῆς χώρας , ἕως μὲν ἔζη , Ζῆνις Δαρδανεύς ·
This Aeolis belonged, indeed, to Pharnabazus, but Zenis of Dardanus had, while he lived, acted as satrap of this territory for him;


3.1.10
829
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἐκεῖνος νόσῳ ἀπέθανε , παρασκευαζομένου τοῦ Φαρναβάζου ἄλλῳ δοῦναι τὴν σατραπείαν , Μανία ἡ τοῦ Ζήνιος γυνή , Δαρδανὶς καὶ αὐτή , ἀναζεύξασα στόλον καὶ δῶρα λαβοῦσα ὥστε καὶ αὐτῷ Φαρναβάζῳ δοῦναι καὶ παλλακίσιν αὐτοῦ χαρίσασθαι καὶ τοῖς δυναμένοις μάλιστα παρὰ Φαρναβάζῳ , ἐπορεύετο .
when Zenis fell ill and died, and Pharnabazus was preparing to give the satrapy to another man, Mania, the wife of Zenis, who was also a Dardanian, fitted out a great retinue, took presents with her to give to Pharnabazus himself and to use for winning the favour of his concubines and the men who had the greatest influence at the court of Pharnabazus, and set forth to visit him.


3.1.11
830
ἐλθοῦσα δ’ εἰς λόγους εἶπεν ·
When she had gained an audience with him, she said:


3.1.11
831
ὦ Φαρνάβαζε , ὁ ἀνήρ σοι ὁ ἐμὸς καὶ τ- ἄλλα φίλος ἦν καὶ τοὺς φόρους ἀπεδίδου ὥστε σὺ ἐπαινῶν αὐτὸν ἐτίμας .
Pharnabazus, my husband was not only a friend to you in all other ways, but he also paid over the tributes which were your due, so that you commended and honoured him.


3.1.11
832
ἂν οὖν ἐγώ σοι μηδὲν χεῖρον ἐκείνου ὑπηρετῶ , τί σε δεῖ ἄλλον σατράπην καθιστάναι ;
Now, therefore, if I serve you no less faithfully than he, why should you appoint another as satrap?


3.1.11
833
ἂν δέ τί σοι μὴ ἀρέσκω , ἐπὶ σοὶ δήπου ἔσται ἀφελομένῳ ἐμὲ ἄλλῳ δοῦναι τὴν ἀρχήν .
And if I fail to please you in any point, surely it will be within your power to deprive me of my office and give it to another.


3.1.12
834
ἀκούσας ταῦτα ὁ Φαρνάβαζος ἔγνω δεῖν τὴν γυναῖκα σατραπεύειν .
When Pharnabazus heard this, he decided that the woman should be satrap.


3.1.12
835
ἡ δ’ ἐπεὶ κυρία τῆς χώρας ἐγένετο , τούς τε φόρους οὐδὲν ἧττον τ- ἀνδρὸς ἀπεδίδου , καὶ πρὸς τούτοις , ὁπότε ἀφικνοῖτο πρὸς Φαρνάβαζον , ἀεὶ ἦγε δῶρα αὐτῷ , καὶ ὁπότε ἐκεῖνος εἰς τὴν χώραν καταβαίνοι , πολὺ πάντων τῶν ὑπάρχων κάλλιστα καὶ ἥδιστα ἐδέχετο αὐτόν , καὶ ἅς τε παρέλαβε πόλεις διεφύλαττεν αὐτῷ καὶ τῶν οὐχ ὑπηκόων προσέλαβεν ἐπιθαλαττιδίας Λάρισάν τε καὶ Ἁμαξιτὸν καὶ Κολωνάς , ξενικῷ μὲν Ἑλληνικῷ προσβαλοῦσα τοῖς τείχεσιν , αὐτὴ δὲ ἐφ’ ἁρμαμάξης θεωμένη ·
And when she had become mistress of the province, she not only paid over the tributes no less faithfully than had her husband, but besides this, whenever she went to the court of Pharnabazus she always carried him gifts, and whenever he came down to her province she received him with far more magnificence and courtesy than any of his other governors;


3.1.13
836
ὃν δ’ ἐπαινέσειε , τούτῳ δῶρα ἀμέμπτως ἐδίδου , ὥστε λαμπρότατα τὸ ξενικὸν κατεσκευάσατο .
and she not only kept securely for Pharnabazus the cities which she had received from her husband, but also gained possession of cities on the coast which had not been subject to him, Larisa, Hamaxitus, and Colonae—attacking their walls with a Greek mercenary force, while she herself looked on from a carriage;


3.1.13
837
συνεστρατεύετο δὲ τῷ Φαρναβάζῳ καὶ ὁπότε εἰς Μυσοὺς ἢ Πισίδας ἐμβάλοι , ὅτι τὴν βασιλέως χώραν κακουργοῦσιν .
and when a man won her approval she would bestow bounteous gifts upon him, so that she equipped her mercenary force in the most splendid fashion.


3.1.13
838
ὥστε καὶ ἀντετίμα αὐτὴν μεγαλοπρεπῶς ὁ Φαρνάβαζος καὶ σύμβουλον ἔστιν ὅτε παρεκάλει .
She also accompanied Pharnabazus in the field, even when he invaded the land of the Mysians or the Pisidians because of their continually ravaging the King’s territory. In return for these services Pharnabazus paid her magnificent honours, and sometimes asked her to aid him as a counsellor.


3.1.14
839
ἤδη δ’ οὔσης αὐτῆς ἐτῶν πλέον ἢ τετταράκοντα , Μειδίας , θυγατρὸς ἀνὴρ αὐτῆς ὤν , ἀναπτερωθεὶς ὑπό τινων ὡς αἰσχρὸν εἴη γυναῖκα μὲν ἄρχειν , αὐτὸν δ’ ἰδιώτην εἶναι , τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους μάλα φυλαττομένης αὐτῆς , ὥσπερ ἐν τυραννίδι προσῆκεν , ἐκείνῳ δὲ πιστευούσης καὶ ἀσπαζομένης ὥσπερ ἂν γυνὴ γαμβρὸν ἀσπάζοιτο , εἰσελθὼν ἀποπνῖξαι αὐτὴν λέγεται .
Now when she was more than forty years old, Meidias, who was the husband of her daughter, was disturbed by certain people saying that it was a disgraceful thing for a woman to be the ruler while he was in private station, and since, although she guarded herself carefully against all other people, as was proper for an absolute ruler, she trusted him and gave him her affection, as a woman naturally would to a son-in-law,


3.1.14
840
ἀπέκτεινε δὲ καὶ τὸν υἱὸν αὐτῆς , τό τε εἶδος ὄντα πάγκαλον καὶ ἐτῶν ὄντα ὡς ἑπτακαίδεκα .
he made his way into her presence, as the story goes, and strangled her. He also killed her son, a youth of very great beauty about seventeen years old.


3.1.15
841
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας Σκῆψιν καὶ Γέργιθα ἐχυρὰς πόλεις κατέσχεν , ἔνθα καὶ τὰ χρήματα μάλιστα ἦν τῇ Μανίᾳ .
When he had done these things, he seized the strong cities of Scepsis and Gergis, where Mania had kept the most of her treasure.


3.1.15
842
αἱ δ’ ἄλλαι πόλεις οὐκ ἐδέχοντο αὐτόν , ἀλλὰ Φαρναβάζῳ ἔσῳζον αὐτὰς οἱ ἐνόντες φρουροί .
The other cities, however, would not admit him into their walls, but the garrisons that were in them kept them safe for Pharnabazus.


3.1.15
843
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ὁ Μειδίας πέμψας δῶρα τῷ Φαρναβάζῳ ἠξίου ἔχειν τὴν χώραν ὥσπερ ἡ Μανία .
Then Meidias sent gifts to Pharnabazus and claimed the right to be ruler of the province, even as Mania had been.


3.1.15
844
ὁ δ’ ἀπεκρίνατο φυλάττειν αὐτά , ἔστ’ ἂν αὐτὸς ἐλθὼν σὺν αὐτῷ ἐκείνῳ λάβῃ τὰ δῶρα ·
And Pharnabazus in reply told him to take good care of his gifts until he came in person and took possession of them and of him too;


3.1.15
845
οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἔφη ζῆν βούλεσθαι μὴ τιμωρήσας Μανίᾳ .
for he said that he would not wish to live if he failed to avenge Mania.


3.1.16
846
ὁ δὲ Δερκυλίδας ἐν τούτῳ τῷ καιρῷ ἀφικνεῖται , καὶ εὐθὺς μὲν ἐν μιᾷ ἡμέρᾳ Λάρισαν καὶ Ἁμαξιτὸν καὶ Κολωνὰς τὰς ἐπιθαλαττίους πόλεις ἑκούσας παρέλαβε ·
It was at this juncture that Dercylidas arrived, and he forthwith took possession in a single day of Larisa, Hamaxitus, and Colonae, the cities on the coast, by their voluntary act;


3.1.16
847
πέμπων δὲ καὶ πρὸς τὰς Αἰολίδας πόλεις ἠξίου ἐλευθεροῦσθαί τε αὐτὰς καὶ εἰς τὰ τείχη δέχεσθαι καὶ συμμάχους γίγνεσθαι .
then he sent to the cities of Aeolis also and urged them to free themselves, admit him into their walls, and become allies.


3.1.16
848
οἱ μὲν οὖν Νεανδρεῖς καὶ Ἰλιεῖς καὶ Κοκυλῖται ἐπείθοντο ·
Now the people of Neandria, Ilium, and Cocylium obeyed him,


3.1.16
849
καὶ γὰρ οἱ φρουροῦντες Ἕλληνες ἐν αὐταῖς , ἐπεὶ ἡ Μανία ἀπέθανεν , οὐ πάνυ τι καλῶς περιείποντο ·
for the Greek garrisons of those cities had been by no means well treated since the death of Mania;


3.1.17
850
ὁ δ’ ἐν Κεβρῆνι , μάλα ἰσχυρῷ χωρίῳ , τὴν φυλακὴν ἔχων , νομίσας , εἰ διαφυλάξειε Φαρναβάζῳ τὴν πόλιν , τιμηθῆναι ἂν ὑπ’ ἐκείνου , οὐκ ἐδέχετο τὸν Δερκυλίδαν .
but the man who commanded the garrison in Cebren, a very strong place, thinking that if he succeeded in keeping the city for Pharnabazus he would receive honours at his hands, refused to admit Dercylidas.


3.1.17
851
ὁ δὲ ὀργιζόμενος παρεσκευάζετο προσβάλλειν .
Thereupon the latter, in anger, made preparations for attack.


3.1.17
852
ἐπεὶ δὲ θυομένῳ αὐτῷ οὐκ ἐγίγνετο τὰ ἱερὰ τῇ πρώτῃ , τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ πάλιν ἐθύετο .
And when the sacrifices that he offered did not prove favourable on the first day, he sacrificed again on the following day.


3.1.17
853
ὡς δὲ οὐδὲ ταῦτα ἐκαλλιερεῖτο , πάλιν τῇ τρίτῃ ·
And when these sacrifices also did not prove favourable, he tried again on the third day;


3.1.17
854
καὶ μέχρι τεττάρων ἡμερῶν ἐκαρτέρει θυόμενος , μάλα χαλεπῶς φέρων ·
and for four days he kept persistently on with his sacrificing, though greatly disturbed by the delay;


3.1.17
855
ἔσπευδε γὰρ πρὶν Φαρνάβαζον βοηθῆσαι ἐγκρατὴς γενέσθαι πάσης τῆς Αἰολίδος .
for he was in haste to make himself master of all Aeolis before Pharnabazus came to the rescue.


3.1.18
856
Ἀθηνάδας δέ τις Σικυώνιος λοχαγός , νομίσας τὸν μὲν Δερκυλίδαν φλυαρεῖν διατρίβοντα , αὐτὸς δ’ ἱκανὸς εἶναι τὸ ὕδωρ ἀφελέσθαι τοὺς Κεβρηνίους , προσδραμὼν σὺν τῇ ἑαυτοῦ τάξει ἐπειρᾶτο τὴν κρήνην συγχοῦν .
Now a certain Athenadas, a Sicyonian captain, thinking that Dercylidas was acting foolishly in delaying, and that he was strong enough of himself to deprive the Cebrenians of their water supply, rushed forward with his own company and tried to choke up their spring.


3.1.18
857
οἱ δὲ ἔνδοθεν ἐπεξελθόντες αὐτόν τε συνέτρωσαν καὶ δύο ἀπέκτειναν , καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους παίοντες καὶ βάλλοντες ἀπήλασαν .
And the people within the walls, sallying forth against him, inflicted many wounds upon him, killed two of his men, and drove back the rest with blows and missiles.


3.1.18
858
ἀχθομένου δὲ τοῦ Δερκυλίδου , καὶ νομίζοντος ἀθυμοτέραν καὶ τὴν προσβολὴν ἔσεσθαι , ἔρχονται ἐκ τοῦ τείχους παρὰ τῶν Ἑλλήνων κήρυκες , καὶ εἶπον ὅτι ἃ μὲν ὁ ἄρχων ποιοίη οὐκ ἀρέσκοι σφίσιν , αὐτοὶ δὲ βούλοιντο σὺν τοῖς Ἕλλησι μᾶλλον ἢ σὺν τῷ βαρβάρῳ εἶναι .
But while Dercylidas was in a state of vexation and was thinking that his attack would thus be made less spirited, heralds came forth from the wall, sent by the Greeks in the city, and said that what their commander was doing was not to their liking, but that for their part they preferred to be on the side of the Greeks rather than of the barbarian.


3.1.19
859
ἔτι δὲ διαλεγομένων αὐτῶν ταῦτα , παρὰ τοῦ ἄρχοντος αὐτῶν ἧκε λέγων ὅτι ὅσα λέγοιεν οἱ πρόσθεν καὶ αὐτῷ δοκοῦντα λέγοιεν .
While they were still talking about this, there came a messenger from their commander, who sent word that he agreed with all that the first party were saying.


3.1.19
860
ὁ οὖν Δερκυλίδας εὐθὺς ὥσπερ ἔτυχε κεκαλλιερηκὼς ταύτῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ , ἀναλαβὼν τὰ ὅπλα ἡγεῖτο πρὸς τὰς πύλας ·
Accordingly Dercylidas, whose sacrifices on that day, as it chanced, had just proved favourable, immediately had his troops take up their arms and led them toward the gates;


3.1.19
861
οἱ δ’ ἀναπετάσαντες ἐδέξαντο .
and the people threw them open and admitted him.


3.1.19
862
καταστήσας δὲ καὶ ἐνταῦθα φρουροὺς εὐθὺς ᾔει ἐπὶ τὴν Σκῆψιν καὶ τὴν Γέργιθα .
And after stationing a garrison in this city also, he marched at once against Scepsis and Gergis.


3.1.20
863
ὁ δὲ Μειδίας προσδοκῶν μὲν τὸν Φαρνάβαζον , ὀκνῶν δ’ ἤδη τοὺς πολίτας , πέμψας πρὸς τὸν Δερκυλίδαν εἶπεν ὅτι ἔλθοι ἂν εἰς λόγους , εἰ ὁμήρους λάβοι .
Now Meidias, who was expecting the coming of Pharnabazus and on the other hand was by this time afraid of his own citizens, sent to Dercylidas and said that he would come to a conference with him if he should first receive hostages.


3.1.20
864
ὁ δὲ πέμψας αὐτῷ ἀπὸ πόλεως ἑκάστης τῶν συμμάχων ἕνα ἐκέλευσε λαβεῖν τούτων ὁπόσους τε καὶ ὁποίους βούλοιτο .
And Dercylidas sent him one man from each of the cities of the allies, and bade him take as many and whoever he pleased.


3.1.20
865
ὁ δὲ λαβὼν δέκα ἐξῆλθε , καὶ συμμείξας τῷ Δερκυλίδᾳ ἠρώτα ἐπὶ τίσιν ἂν σύμμαχος γένοιτο .
Meidias took ten and came forth from the city, and when he met Dercylidas asked him on what conditions he could be an ally of the Lacedaemonians.


3.1.20
866
ὁ δ’ ἀπεκρίνατο ἐφ’ ᾧτε τοὺς πολίτας ἐλευθέρους τε καὶ αὐτονόμους ἐᾶν .
Dercylidas replied, on condition of allowing his citizens to be free and independent;


3.1.20
867
καὶ ἅμα ταῦτα λέγων ᾔει πρὸς τὴν Σκῆψιν .
and as he said this he proceeded to advance upon Scepsis.


3.1.21
868
γνοὺς δὲ ὁ Μειδίας ὅτι οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο κωλύειν βίᾳ τῶν πολιτῶν , εἴασεν αὐτὸν εἰσιέναι .
Then Meidias, realizing that he would not be able, against the will of the citizens, to prevent his doing so, allowed him to enter the city.


3.1.21
869
ὁ δὲ Δερκυλίδας θύσας τῇ Ἀθηνᾷ ἐν τῇ τῶν Σκηψίων ἀκροπόλει τοὺς μὲν τοῦ Μειδίου φρουροὺς ἐξήγαγε , παραδοὺς δὲ τοῖς πολίταις τὴν πόλιν , καὶ παρακελευσάμενος , ὥσπερ Ἕλληνας καὶ ἐλευθέρους χρή , οὕτω πολιτεύειν , ἐξελθὼν ἡγεῖτο ἐπὶ τὴν Γέργιθα .
And Dercylidas, when he had sacrificed to Athena on the acropolis of Scepsis, led forth Meidias’ garrison, gave over the city to the citizens, and then, after exhorting them to order their public life as Greeks and freemen should, departed from the city and led his army against Gergis.


3.1.21
870
συμπρούπεμπον δὲ πολλοὶ αὐτὸν καὶ τῶν Σκηψίων , τιμῶντές τε καὶ ἡδόμενοι τοῖς πεπραγμένοις .
And many of the Scepsians took part in the escort which accompanied him on his way, paying him honour and being well pleased at what had been done,


3.1.22
871
ὁ δὲ Μειδίας παρεπόμενος αὐτῷ ἠξίου τὴν τῶν Γεργιθίων πόλιν παραδοῦναι αὑτῷ .
and Meidias also followed along with him and urged him to give over the city of the Gergithians to him.


3.1.22
872
καὶ ὁ Δερκυλίδας μέντοι ἔλεγεν ὡς τῶν δικαίων οὐδενὸς ἀτυχήσοι ·
And Dercylidas told him only that he would not fail to obtain any of his rights;


3.1.22
873
ἅμα δὲ ταῦτα λέγων ᾔει πρὸς τὰς πύλας σὺν τῷ Μειδίᾳ , καὶ τὸ στράτευμα ἠκολούθει αὐτῷ εἰρηνικῶς εἰς δύο .
and as he said this, he was approaching the gates of the city together with Meidias, and the army was following him in double file as though on a peaceful mission.


3.1.22
874
οἱ δ’ ἀπὸ τῶν πύργων καὶ μάλα ὑψηλῶν ὄντων ὁρῶντες τὸν Μειδίαν σὺν αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔβαλλον ·
Now the men on the towers of Gergis, which were extremely high, did not throw their missiles because they saw Meidias with him;


3.1.22
875
εἰπόντος δὲ τοῦ Δερκυλίδα ·
and when Dercylidas said: "Bid them open the gates, Meidias, so that you may lead the way and I may go with you to the temple and there sacrifice to Athena,"


3.1.22
876
κέλευσον , ὦ Μειδία , ἀνοῖξαι τὰς πύλας , ἵνα ἡγῇ μὲν σύ , ἐγὼ δὲ σὺν σοὶ εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν ἔλθω κ- ἐνταῦθα θύσω τῇ Ἀθηνᾷ , ὁ Μειδίας ὤκνει μὲν ἀνοίγειν τὰς πύλας , φοβούμενος δὲ μὴ παραχρῆμα συλληφθῇ , ἐκέλευεν ἀνοῖξαι .
Meidias, although he shrank from opening the gates, nevertheless out of fear that he might be seized on the spot, gave the order to open them.


3.1.23
877
ὁ δ’ ἐπεὶ εἰσῆλθεν , ἔχων αὖ τὸν Μειδίαν ἐπορεύετο πρὸς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ·
When Dercylidas entered he proceeded to the acropolis, keeping Meidias with him as before;


3.1.23
878
καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους στρατιώτας ἐκέλευε θέσθαι περὶ τὰ τείχη τὰ ὅπλα , αὐτὸς δὲ σὺν τοῖς περὶ αὐτὸν ἔθυε τῇ Ἀθηνᾷ .
and he ordered the rest of his soldiers to take their positions along the walls while he, with those about him, sacrificed to Athena.


3.1.23
879
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐτέθυτο , ἀνεῖπε καὶ τοὺς Μειδίου δορυφόρους θέσθαι τὰ ὅπλα ἐπὶ τῷ στόματι τοῦ ἑαυτοῦ στρατεύματος , ὡς μισθοφορήσοντας ·
When the sacrifice had been completed he made proclamation that the spearmen of Meidias’ bodyguard should take their positions at the van of his own army, saying that they were to serve him as mercenaries;


3.1.23
880
Μειδίᾳ γὰρ οὐδὲν ἔτι δεινὸν εἶναι .
for Meidias, he said, no longer had anything to fear.


3.1.24
881
ὁ μέντοι Μειδίας ἀπορῶν ὅ τι ποιοίη , εἶπεν ·
Then Meidias, not knowing what to do, said:


3.1.24
882
ἐγὼ μὲν τοίνυν ἄπειμι , ἔφη , ξένιά σοι παρασκευάσων .
"Well as for me," said he, "I will go away to prepare hospitality for you."


3.1.24
883
ὁ δέ , Οὔ , μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη , ἐπεὶ αἰσχρὸν ἐμὲ τεθυκότα ξενίζεσθαι ὑπὸ σοῦ , ἀλλὰ μὴ ξενίζειν σέ .
And Dercylidas replied: "No, by Zeus, for it would be shameful for me, who have just sacrificed, to be entertained by you instead of entertaining you."


3.1.24
884
μένε οὖν παρ’ ἡμῖν ·
"Stay, therefore, with us.


3.1.24
885
ἐν ᾧ δ’ ἂν τὸ δεῖπνον παρασκευάζηται , ἐγὼ καὶ σὺ τὰ δίκαια πρὸς ἀλλήλους καὶ διασκεψώμεθα καὶ ποιήσωμεν .
While the dinner is preparing you and I will think out what is fair toward one another and act accordingly."


3.1.25
886
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐκαθέζοντο , ἠρώτα ὁ Δερκυλίδας ·
When they were seated Dercylidas began asking questions:


3.1.25
887
εἰπέ μοι , ὦ Μειδία , ὁ πατήρ σε ἄρχοντα τοῦ οἴκου κατέλιπε ;
"Tell me, Meidias, did your father leave you master of his property?"


3.1.25
888
μάλιστα , ἔφη .
"Yes, indeed," he said.


3.1.25
889
καὶ πόσαι σοι οἰκίαι ἦσαν ;
"And how many houses had you?


3.1.25
890
πόσοι δὲ χῶροι ;
How many farms?


3.1.25
891
πόσαι δὲ νομαί ;
How many pastures?"


3.1.25
892
ἀπογράφοντος δ’ αὐτοῦ οἱ παρόντες τῶν Σκηψίων εἶπον ·
As Meidias began to make a list, the Scepsians who were present said:


3.1.25
893
ψεύδεταί σε οὗτος , ὦ Δερκυλίδα .
"He is deceiving you, Dercylidas."


3.1.26
894
ὑμεῖς δέ γ’ , ἔφη , μὴ λίαν μικρολογεῖσθε .
"Now don’t you," said he, "be too petty about the details."


3.1.26
895
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἀπεγέγραπτο τὰ πατρῷα ·
When the list of the inheritance of Meidias had been made Dercylidas said:


3.1.26
896
εἰπέ μοι , ἔφη , Μανία δὲ τίνος ἦν ;
"Tell me, to whom did Mania belong?"


3.1.26
897
οἱ δὲ πάντες εἶπον ὅτι Φαρναβάζου .
They all said that she belonged to Pharnabazus.


3.1.26
898
οὐκοῦν καὶ τὰ ἐκείνης , ἔφη , Φαρναβάζου ;
"Then," said he, "do not her possessions belong to Pharnabazus too?"


3.1.26
899
μάλιστα , ἔφασαν .
"Yes, indeed," they said.


3.1.26
900
ἡμέτερ’ ἂν εἴη , ἔφη , ἐπεὶ κρατοῦμεν ·
"Then they must be ours," he said, "since we are victorious;


3.1.26
901
πολέμιος γὰρ ἡμῖν Φαρνάβαζος .
for Pharnabazus is our enemy.


3.1.26
902
ἀλλ’ ἡγείσθω τις , ἔφη , ὅπου κεῖται τὰ Μανίας καὶ τὰ Φαρναβάζου .
Let some one, then," said he, "lead the way to the place where the possessions of Mania—or rather of Pharnabazus—are stored."


3.1.27
903
ἡγουμένων δὲ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπὶ τὴν Μανίας οἴκησιν , ἣν παρειλήφει ὁ Μειδίας , ἠκολούθει κ- ἐκεῖνος .
Now when the rest led the way to the dwelling of Mania, to which Meidias had succeeded, the latter also followed.


3.1.27
904
ἐπεὶ δ’ εἰσῆλθεν , ἐκάλει ὁ Δερκυλίδας τοὺς ταμίας , φράσας δὲ τοῖς ὑπηρέταις λαβεῖν αὐτοὺς προεῖπεν αὐτοῖς ὡς εἴ τι κλέπτοντες ἁλώσοιντο τῶν Μανίας , παραχρῆμα ἀποσφαγήσοιντο .
And when Dercylidas entered he called the stewards, told his servants to seize them, and announced to them that if they were caught concealing any of Mania’s property they should have their throats cut on the spot;


3.1.27
905
οἱ δ’ ἐδείκνυσαν .
so they showed it to him.


3.1.27
906
ὁ δ’ ἐπεὶ εἶδε πάντα , κατέκλεισεν αὐτὰ καὶ κατεσημήνατο καὶ φύλακας κατέστησεν .
When he had seen all, he shut it up, sealed it, and set a guard upon it.


3.1.28
907
ἐξιὼν δὲ οὓς ηὗρεν ἐπὶ ταῖς θύραις τῶν ταξιάρχων καὶ λοχαγῶν , εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ·
As he came out he said to some of the commanders of divisions and captains whom he found at the doors:


3.1.28
908
μισθὸς μὲν ἡμῖν , ὦ ἄνδρες , εἴργασται τῇ στρατιᾷ ἐγγὺς ἐνιαυτοῦ ὀκτακισχιλίοις ἀνδράσιν ·
"Gentlemen, we have earned pay for the army—eight thousand men—for almost a year;


3.1.28
909
ἂν δέ τι προσεργασώμεθα , καὶ ταῦτα προσέσται .
and if we earn anything more, that, too, shall be added."


3.1.28
910
ταῦτα δ’ εἶπε γιγνώσκων ὅτι ἀκούσαντες πολὺ εὐτακτότεροι καὶ θεραπευτικώτεροι ἔσοιντο .
He said this because he knew that upon hearing it the soldiers would be far more orderly and obedient.


3.1.28
911
ἐρομένου δὲ τοῦ Μειδίου ·
And when Meidias asked:


3.1.28
912
ἐμὲ δὲ ποῦ χρὴ οἰκεῖν , ὦ Δερκυλίδα ;
"But as for me, Dercylidas, where am I to dwell?"


3.1.28
913
ἀπεκρίνατο ·
he replied:


3.1.28
914
ἔνθαπερ καὶ δικαιότατον , ὦ Μειδία , ἐν τῇ πατρίδι τῇ σαυτοῦ Σκήψει καὶ ἐν τῇ πατρῴᾳ οἰκίᾳ .
"Just where it is most proper that you should dwell, Meidias, —in your native city, Scepsis, and in your father’s house."


3.2.1
915
ὁ μὲν δὴ Δερκυλίδας ταῦτα διαπραξάμενος καὶ λαβὼν ἐν ὀκτὼ ἡμέραις ἐννέα πόλεις , ἐβουλεύετο ὅπως ἂν μὴ ἐν τῇ φιλίᾳ χειμάζων βαρὺς εἴη τοῖς συμμάχοις , ὥσπερ Θίβρων , μηδ’ αὖ Φαρνάβαζος καταφρονῶν τῇ ἵππῳ κακουργῇ τὰς Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις .
After Dercylidas had accomplished these things and gained possession of nine cities in eight days, he set about planning how he might avoid being a burden to his allies, as Thibron had been, by wintering in a friendly country, and how, on the other hand, Pharnabazus might not, despising the Lacedaemonian army because of his superiority in cavalry, harm the Greek cities.


3.2.1
916
πέμπει οὖν πρὸς αὐτὸν καὶ ἐρωτᾷ πότερον βούλεται εἰρήνην ἢ πόλεμον ἔχειν .
So he sent to Pharnabazus and asked him whether he preferred to have peace or war.


3.2.1
917
ὁ μέντοι Φαρνάβαζος νομίσας τὴν Αἰολίδα ἐπιτετειχίσθαι τῇ ἑαυτοῦ οἰκήσει Φρυγίᾳ , σπονδὰς εἵλετο .
And Pharnabazus, thinking that Aeolis had been made a strong base of attack upon his own dwelling-place, Phrygia, chose a truce.


3.2.2
918
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ἐγένετο , ἐλθὼν ὁ Δερκυλίδας εἰς τὴν Βιθυνίδα Θρᾴκην ἐκεῖ διεχείμαζεν , οὐδὲ τοῦ Φαρναβάζου πάνυ τι ἀχθομένου ·
When these things had taken place, Dercylidas went to Bithynian Thrace and there passed the winter, by no means to the displeasure of Pharnabazus, for the Bithynians were often at war with him.


3.2.2
919
πολλάκις γὰρ οἱ Βιθυνοὶ αὐτῷ ἐπολέμουν .
And during most of the time Dercylidas was plundering Bithynia in safety and had provisions in abundance;


3.2.2
920
καὶ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα ὁ Δερκυλίδας ἀσφαλῶς φέρων καὶ ἄγων τὴν Βιθυνίδα καὶ ἄφθονα ἔχων τὰ ἐπιτήδεια διετέλει ·
when, however, a force of Odrysians, about two hundred horsemen and about three hundred peltasts, came to him as allies from Seuthes across the strait, these troops, after making a camp about twenty stadia from the Greek army and enclosing it with a palisade,


3.2.2
921
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἦλθον αὐτῷ παρὰ τοῦ Σεύθου πέραθεν σύμμαχοι τῶν Ὀδρυσῶν ἱππεῖς τε ὡς διακόσιοι καὶ πελτασταὶ ὡς τριακόσιοι , οὗτοι στρατοπεδευσάμενοι καὶ περισταυρωσάμενοι ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἑλληνικοῦ ὡς εἴκοσι στάδια , αἰτοῦντες φύλακας τοῦ στρατοπέδου τὸν Δερκυλίδαν τῶν ὁπλιτῶν , ἐξῇσαν ἐπὶ λείαν , καὶ πολλὰ ἐλάμβανον ἀνδράποδά τε καὶ χρήματα .
asked Dercylidas for some of his hoplites as a guard for their camp and then sallied forth for booty, and seized many slaves and much property.


3.2.3
922
ἤδη δ’ ὄντος μεστοῦ τοῦ στρατοπέδου αὐτοῖς πολλῶν αἰχμαλώτων , καταμαθόντες οἱ Βιθυνοὶ ὅσοι τ’ ἐξῇσαν καὶ ὅσους κατέλιπον Ἕλληνας φύλακας , συλλεγέντες παμπλήθεις πελτασταὶ καὶ ἱππεῖς ἅμ’ ἡμέρᾳ προσπίπτουσι τοῖς ὁπλίταις ὡς διακοσίοις οὖσιν .
When their camp was already full of a great deal of plunder, the Bithynians, learning how many went out on the raids and how many Greeks they had left behind as a guard, gathered together in great numbers, peltasts and horsemen, and at daybreak made an attack upon the Greek hoplites, who numbered about two hundred.


3.2.3
923
ἐπειδὴ δ’ ἐγγὺς ἐγένοντο , οἱ μὲν ἔβαλλον , οἱ δ’ ἠκόντιζον εἰς αὐτούς .
When the attacking party came near, some of them hurled spears and others threw javelins at the Greeks.


3.2.3
924
οἱ δ’ ἐπεὶ ἐτιτρώσκοντο μὲν καὶ ἀπέθνῃσκον , ἐποίουν δ’ οὐδὲν κατειργμένοι ἐν τῷ σταυρώματι ὡς ἀνδρομήκει ὄντι , διασπάσαντες τὸ αὑτῶν ὀχύρωμα ἐφέροντο εἰς αὐτούς ·
And the latter, wounded and slain one after another, and unable to do the enemy any harm because of being shut up in the palisade, which was about the height of a man, finally broke through their own fortification and charged upon them.


3.2.4
925
οἱ δὲ ᾗ μὲν ἐκθέοιεν ὑπεχώρουν , καὶ ῥᾳδίως ἀπέφευγον πελτασταὶ ὁπλίτας , ἔνθεν δὲ καὶ ἔνθεν ἠκόντιζον , καὶ πολλοὺς αὐτῶν ἐφ’ ἑκάστῃ ἐκδρομῇ κατέβαλλον ·
Then the Bithynians, while they gave way at whatever point the Greeks rushed forth, and easily made their escape, since they were peltasts fleeing from hoplites, kept throwing javelins upon them from the one side and the other and struck down many of them at every sally;


3.2.4
926
τέλος δὲ ὥσπερ ἐν αὐλίῳ σηκασθέντες κατηκοντίσθησαν .
and in the end the Greeks were shot down like cattle shut up in a pen.


3.2.4
927
ἐσώθησαν μέντοι αὐτῶν ἀμφὶ τοὺς πεντεκαίδεκα εἰς τὸ Ἑλληνικόν , καὶ οὗτοι , ἐπεὶ εὐθέως ᾔσθοντο τὸ πρᾶγμα , ἀποχωρήσαντες , ἐν τῇ μάχῃ διαπεσόντες ἀμελησάντων τῶν Βιθυνῶν .
About fifteen of them, however, made their escape to the main Greek camp, and these fifteen only because, as soon as they perceived the situation, they had slipped away in the course of the battle unheeded by the Bithynians.


3.2.5
928
ταχὺ δὲ ταῦτα διαπραξάμενοι οἱ Βιθυνοὶ καὶ τοὺς σκηνοφύλακας τῶν Ὀδρυσῶν Θρᾳκῶν ἀποκτείναντες , ἀπολαβόντες πάντα τὰ αἰχμάλωτα ἀπῆλθον ·
As for the latter, when they had accomplished this speedy victory, had slain the Odrysian Thracians who guarded the tents, and recovered all the booty, they departed;


3.2.5
929
ὥστε οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐπεὶ ᾔσθοντο , βοηθοῦντες οὐδὲν ἄλλο ηὗρον ἢ νεκροὺς γυμνοὺς ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ .
so that the Greeks, on coming to the rescue when they learned of the affair, found nothing in the camp except dead bodies stripped bare.


3.2.5
930
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἐπανῆλθον οἱ Ὀδρύσαι , θάψαντες τοὺς ἑαυτῶν καὶ πολὺν οἶνον ἐκπιόντες ἐπ’ αὐτοῖς καὶ ἱπποδρομίαν ποιήσαντες , ὁμοῦ δὴ τὸ λοιπὸν τοῖς Ἕλλησι στρατοπεδευσάμενοι ἦγον καὶ ἔκαον τὴν Βιθυνίδα .
But when the Odrysians returned, they first buried their dead, drank a great deal of wine in their honour, and held a horse-race; and then, from that time on making common camp with the Greeks, they continued to plunder Bithynia and lay it waste with fire.


3.2.6
931
ἅμα δὲ τῷ ἦρι ἀποπορευόμενος ὁ Δερκυλίδας ἐκ τῶν Βιθυνῶν ἀφικνεῖται εἰς Λάμψακον .
At the opening of the spring Dercylidas departed from Bithynia and came to Lampsacus.


3.2.6
932
ἐνταῦθα δ’ ὄντος αὐτοῦ ἔρχονται ἀπὸ τῶν οἴκοι τελῶν Ἄρακός τε καὶ Ναυβάτης καὶ Ἀντισθένης .
While he was there, Aracus, Naubates, and Antisthenes arrived under commission of the authorities at home.


3.2.6
933
οὗτοι δ’ ἦλθον ἐπισκεψόμενοι τά τε ἄλλα ὅπως ἔχοι τὰ ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ , καὶ Δερκυλίδᾳ ἐροῦντες μένοντι ἄρχειν καὶ τὸν ἐπιόντα ἐνιαυτόν ·
They came to observe how matters stood in general in Asia, and to tell Dercylidas to remain there and continue in command for the ensuing year;


3.2.6
934
ἐπιστεῖλαι δὲ σφίσιν αὐτοῖς τοὺς ἐφόρους καὶ συγκαλέσαντας τοὺς στρατιώτας εἰπεῖν ὡς ὧν μὲν πρόσθεν ἐποίουν μέμφοιντο αὐτοῖς , ὅτι δὲ νῦν οὐδὲν ἠδίκουν , ἐπαινοῖεν ·
also to tell him that the ephors had given them instructions to call together the soldiers and say that while the ephors censured them for what they had done in former days, they commended them because now they were doing no wrong;


3.2.6
935
καὶ περὶ τοῦ λοιποῦ χρόνου εἰπεῖν ὅτι ἂν μὲν ἀδικῶσιν , οὐκ ἐπιτρέψουσιν , ἂν δὲ δίκαια περὶ τοὺς συμμάχους ποιῶσιν , ἐπαινέσονται αὐτούς .
they were also to say in regard to the future that if the soldiers were guilty of wrong-doing the ephors would not tolerate it, but if they dealt justly by the allies they would commend them.


3.2.7
936
ἐπεὶ μέντοι συγκαλέσαντες τοὺς στρατιώτας ταῦτ’ ἔλεγον , ὁ τῶν Κυρείων προεστηκὼς ἀπεκρίνατο ·
When, however, they called together the soldiers and told them these things, the leader of Cyrus’ former troops replied:


3.2.7
937
ἀλλ’ , ὦ ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ἡμεῖς μέν ἐσμεν οἱ αὐτοὶ νῦν τε καὶ πέρυσιν ·
"But, men of Lacedaemon, we are the same men now as we were last year;


3.2.7
938
ἄρχων δὲ ἄλλος μὲν νῦν , ἄλλος δὲ τὸ παρελθόν .
but our commander now is one man, and in the past was another.


3.2.7
939
τὸ οὖν αἴτιον τοῦ νῦν μὲν μὴ ἐξαμαρτάνειν , τότε δέ , αὐτοὶ ἤδη ἱκανοί ἐστε γιγνώσκειν .
Therefore you are at once able to judge for yourselves the reason why we are not at fault now, although we were then."


3.2.8
940
συσκηνούντων δὲ τῶν τε οἴκοθεν πρέσβεων καὶ τοῦ Δερκυλίδα , ἐπεμνήσθη τις τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἄρακον ὅτι καταλελοίποιεν πρέσβεις τῶν Χερρονησιτῶν ἐν Λακεδαίμονι .
While the ambassadors from home and Dercylidas were quartered together, one of Aracus’ party mentioned the fact that they had left ambassadors from the Chersonesians at Lacedaemon.


3.2.8
941
τούτους δὲ λέγειν ἔφασαν ὡς νῦν μὲν οὐ δύναιντο τὴν Χερρόνησον ἐργάζεσθαι ·
And they said that these ambassadors stated that now they were unable to till their land in the Chersonese,


3.2.8
942
φέρεσθαι γὰρ καὶ ἄγεσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν Θρᾳκῶν ·
for it was being continually pillaged by the Thracians;


3.2.8
943
εἰ δ’ ἀποτειχισθείη ἐκ θαλάττης εἰς θάλατταν , καὶ σφίσιν ἂν γῆν πολλὴν καὶ ἀγαθὴν εἶναι ἐργάζεσθαι καὶ ἄλλοις ὁπόσοι βούλοιντο Λακεδαιμονίων ·
but if it were protected by a wall extending from sea to sea, they and likewise all of the Lacedaemonians who so desired would have an abundance of good, tillable land.


3.2.8
944
ὥστ’ ἔφασαν οὐκ ἂν θαυμάζειν εἰ καὶ πεμφθείη τις Λακεδαιμονίων ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως σὺν δυνάμει ταῦτα πράξων .
Consequently, they said, they would not be surprised if some Lacedaemonian were in fact sent out by the state with an army to perform this task.


3.2.9
945
ὁ οὖν Δερκυλίδας πρὸς μὲν ἐκείνους οὐκ εἶπεν ἣν ἔχοι γνώμην ταῦτ’ ἀκούσας , ἀλλ’ ἔπεμψεν αὐτοὺς ἐπ’ Ἐφέσου διὰ τῶν Ἑλληνίδων πόλεων , ἡδόμενος ὅτι ἔμελλον ὄψεσθαι τὰς πόλεις ἐν εἰρήνῃ εὐδαιμονικῶς διαγούσας .
Now Dercylidas, when he heard this, did not make known to them the purpose which he cherished, but dismissed them on their journey through the Greek cities to Ephesus, being well pleased that they were going to see the cities enjoying a state of peace and prosperity.


3.2.9
946
οἱ μὲν δὴ ἐπορεύοντο .
So they departed.


3.2.9
947
ὁ δὲ Δερκυλίδας ἐπειδὴ ἔγνω μενετέον ὄν , πάλιν πέμψας πρὸς τὸν Φαρνάβαζον ἐπήρετο πότερα βούλοιτο σπονδὰς ἔχειν καθάπερ διὰ τοῦ χειμῶνος ἢ πόλεμον .
But Dercylidas, having now found out that he was to remain in Asia, sent to Pharnabazus again and asked whether he preferred to have a truce, as during the winter, or war.


3.2.9
948
ἑλομένου δὲ τοῦ Φαρναβάζου καὶ τότε σπονδάς , οὕτω καταλιπὼν καὶ τὰς περὶ ἐκεῖνον πόλεις φιλίας ἐν εἰρήνῃ διαβαίνει τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον σὺν τῷ στρατεύματι εἰς τὴν Εὐρώπην , καὶ διὰ φιλίας τῆς Θρᾴκης πορευθεὶς καὶ ξενισθεὶς ὑπὸ Σεύθου ἀφικνεῖται εἰς Χερρόνησον .
Since Pharnabazus on this occasion again chose a truce, under these circumstances Dercylidas, leaving the cities of that region also in peace, crossed the Hellespont with his army to Europe, and after marching through a portion of Thrace which was friendly and being entertained by Seuthes, arrived at the Chersonese.


3.2.10
949
ἣν καταμαθὼν πόλεις μὲν ἕνδεκα ἢ δώδεκα ἔχουσαν , χώραν δὲ παμφορωτάτην καὶ ἀρίστην οὖσαν , κεκακωμένην δέ , ὥσπερ ἐλέγετο , ὑπὸ τῶν Θρᾳκῶν , ἐπεὶ μετρῶν ηὗρε τοῦ ἰσθμοῦ ἑπτὰ καὶ τριάκοντα στάδια , οὐκ ἐμέλλησεν , ἀλλὰ θυσάμενος ἐτείχιζε , κατὰ μέρη διελὼν τοῖς στρατιώταις τὸ χωρίον ·
And when he learned that this Chersonese contained eleven or twelve towns and was an extremely productive and rich land, but had been ravaged, even as was stated, by the Thracians, and found also that the width of the isthmus was thirty-seven stadia, he did not delay,


3.2.10
950
καὶ ἆθλα ὑποσχόμενος δώσειν τοῖς πρώτοις ἐκτειχίσασι , καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ὡς ἕκαστοι ἄξιοι εἶεν , ἀπετέλεσε τὸ τεῖχος ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ ἠρινοῦ χρόνου πρὸ ὀπώρας .
but after offering sacrifices proceeded to build a wall, dividing the whole distance part by part among the soldiers; and by promising them that he would give prizes to the first who finished their part, and also to the others as they severally might deserve, he completed the wall, although he had not begun upon it until the spring, before the time of harvest.


3.2.10
951
καὶ ἐποίησεν ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχους ἕνδεκα μὲν πόλεις , πολλοὺς δὲ λιμένας , πολλὴν δὲ κ- ἀγαθὴν σπόριμον , πολλὴν δὲ πεφυτευμένην , παμπλήθεις δὲ καὶ παγκάλας νομὰς παντοδαποῖς κτήνεσι .
And he brought under the protection of the wall eleven towns, many harbours, a great deal of good land suited for raising grain and fruit, and a vast amount of splendid pasture-land for all kinds of cattle.


3.2.11
952
ταῦτα δὲ πράξας διέβαινε πάλιν εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν .
When he had done this, he crossed back again to Asia.


3.2.11
953
ἐπισκοπῶν δὲ τὰς πόλεις ἑώρα τὰ μὲν ἄλλα καλῶς ἐχούσας , Χίων δὲ φυγάδας ηὗρεν Ἀταρνέα ἔχοντας χωρίον ἰσχυρόν , καὶ ἐκ τούτου ὁρμωμένους φέροντας καὶ ἄγοντας τὴν Ἰωνίαν , καὶ ζῶντας ἀπὸ τούτου .
As he was now inspecting the cities of Asia, he saw that in general they were in good condition, but found that exiles from Chios held possession of Atarneus, a strong place, and from this as a base were pillaging Ionia and making their living thereby.


3.2.11
954
πυθόμενος δὲ ὅτι πολὺς σῖτος ἐνῆν αὐτοῖς , περιστρατοπεδευσάμενος ἐπολιόρκει ·
When he learned further that they had a large stock of grain in the city, he invested and besieged them;


3.2.11
955
καὶ ἐν ὀκτὼ μησὶ παραστησάμενος αὐτούς , καταστήσας ἐν αὐτῷ Δράκοντα Πελληνέα ἐπιμελητήν , καὶ κατασκευάσας ἐν τῷ χωρίῳ ἔκπλεω πάντα τὰ ἐπιτήδεια , ἵνα εἴη αὐτῷ καταγωγή , ὁπότε ἀφικνοῖτο , ἀπῆλθεν εἰς Ἔφεσον , ἣ ἀπέχει ἀπὸ Σάρδεων τριῶν ἡμερῶν ὁδόν .
and in eight months he brought them to terms, appointed Dracon of Pellene to have charge of the city, and after storing in the place all kinds of supplies in abundance, so that he might have it as a halting-place whenever he came there, departed to Ephesus, which is distant from Sardis a three days’ journey.


3.2.12
956
καὶ μέχρι τούτου τοῦ χρόνου ἐν εἰρήνῃ διῆγον Τισσαφέρνης τε καὶ Δερκυλίδας καὶ οἱ ταύτῃ Ἕλληνες καὶ οἱ βάρβαροι .
Up to this time Tissaphernes and Dercylidas, and the Greeks of this region and the barbarians, continued at peace with one another.


3.2.12
957
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφικνούμενοι πρέσβεις εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἀπὸ τῶν Ἰωνίδων πόλεων ἐδίδασκον ὅτι εἴη ἐπὶ Τισσαφέρνει , εἰ βούλοιτο , ἀφιέναι αὐτονόμους τὰς Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις ·
Now, however, embassies came to Lacedaemon from the Ionian cities and set forth that it was in the power of Tissaphernes, if he chose, to leave the Greek cities independent;


3.2.12
958
εἰ οὖν κακῶς πάσχοι Καρία , ἔνθαπερ ὁ Τισσαφέρνους οἶκος , οὕτως ἂν ἔφασαν τάχιστα νομίζειν αὐτὸν συγχωρῆσαι αὐτονόμους σφᾶς ἀφεῖναι ·
therefore they expressed the belief that if Caria, the particular province where the residence of Tissaphernes was, should suffer harm, under these circumstances he would very quickly leave them independent.


3.2.12
959
ἀκούσαντες ταῦτα οἱ ἔφοροι ἔπεμψαν πρὸς Δερκυλίδαν , καὶ ἐκέλευον αὐτὸν διαβαίνειν σὺν τῷ στρατεύματι ἐπὶ Καρίαν καὶ Φάρακα τὸν ναύαρχον σὺν ταῖς ναυσὶ παραπλεῖν .
When the ephors heard this, they sent to Dercylidas and gave orders that he should cross the river into Caria, and that Pharax, the admiral, should coast along with his ships to the same place.


3.2.13
960
οἱ μὲν δὴ ταῦτ’ ἐποίουν .
They accordingly did so.


3.2.13
961
ἐτύγχανε δὲ κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον καὶ Φαρνάβαζος πρὸς Τισσαφέρνην ἀφιγμένος , ἅμα μὲν ὅτι στρατηγὸς τῶν πάντων ἀπεδέδεικτο Τισσαφέρνης , ἅμα δὲ διαμαρτυρόμενος ὅτι ἕτοιμος εἴη κοινῇ πολεμεῖν καὶ συμμάχεσθαι καὶ συνεκβάλλειν τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐκ τῆς βασιλέως ·
Now it chanced that at this time Pharnabazus had come to visit Tissaphernes, not only because Tissaphernes had been appointed general-in-chief, but also for the purpose of assuring him that he was ready to make war together with him, to be his ally, and to aid him in driving the Greeks out of the territory of the King;


3.2.13
962
ἄλλως τε γὰρ ὑπεφθόνει τῆς στρατηγίας τῷ Τισσαφέρνει καὶ τῆς Αἰολίδος χαλεπῶς ἔφερεν ἀπεστερημένος .
for he secretly envied Tissaphernes his position as general for various reasons, but in particular he took it hardly that he had been deprived of Aeolis.


3.2.13
963
ὁ δ’ ἀκούων , Πρῶτον μὲν τοίνυν , ἔφη , διάβηθι σὺν ἐμοὶ ἐπὶ Καρίαν , ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ περὶ τούτων βουλευσόμεθα .
Now when Tissaphernes heard his words, he said: "First, then, cross over with me into Caria, and then we will consult about these matters."


3.2.14
964
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐκεῖ ἦσαν , ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς ἱκανὰς φυλακὰς εἰς τὰ ἐρύματα καταστήσαντας διαβαίνειν πάλιν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἰωνίαν .
But when they were there, they decided to station adequate garrisons in the fortresses and to cross back again to Ionia.


3.2.14
965
ὡς δ’ ἤκουσεν ὁ Δερκυλίδας ὅτι πάλιν πεπερακότες εἰσὶ τὸν Μαίανδρον , εἰπὼν τῷ Φάρακι ὡς ὀκνοίη μὴ ὁ Τισσαφέρνης καὶ ὁ Φαρνάβαζος ἐρήμην οὖσαν καταθέοντες φέρωσι καὶ ἄγωσι τὴν χώραν , διέβαινε καὶ αὐτός .
And when Dercylidas heard that they had crossed the Maeander again, he told Pharax that he was afraid Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus might overrun and pillage the land, unprotected as it was, and so crossed over himself to Ionia.


3.2.14
966
πορευόμενοι δὲ οὗτοι οὐδέν τι συντεταγμένῳ τῷ στρατεύματι , ὡς προεληλυθότων τῶν πολεμίων εἰς τὴν Ἐφεσίαν , ἐξαίφνης ὁρῶσιν ἐκ τοῦ ἀντιπέρας σκοποὺς ἐπὶ τῶν μνημάτων ·
Now while they were on the march, the army being by no means in battle formation, since they supposed that the enemy had gone on ahead into the territory of the Ephesians, on a sudden they saw scouts on the burial-mounds in front of them;


3.2.15
967
καὶ ἀνταναβιβάσαντες εἰς τὰ παρ’ ἑαυτοῖς μνημεῖα καὶ τύρσεις τινὰς καθορῶσι παρατεταγμένους ᾗ αὐτοῖς ἦν ἡ ὁδὸς Κᾶράς τε λευκάσπιδας καὶ τὸ Περσικὸν ὅσον ἐτύγχανε παρὸν στράτευμα καὶ τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν ὅσον εἶχεν ἑκάτερος αὐτῶν καὶ τὸ ἱππικὸν μάλα πολύ , τὸ μὲν Τισσαφέρνους ἐπὶ τῷ δεξιῷ κέρατι , τὸ δὲ Φαρναβάζου ἐπὶ τῷ εὐωνύμῳ .
and when they also sent men to the tops of the mounds and towers in their neighbourhood, they made out an army drawn up in line of battle where their own road ran—Carians with white shields, the entire Persian force which chanced to be at hand, all the Greek troops which each of the two satraps had, and horsemen in great numbers, those of Tissaphernes upon the right wing and those of Pharnabazus upon the left.


3.2.16
968
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ᾔσθετο ὁ Δερκυλίδας , τοῖς μὲν ταξιάρχοις καὶ τοῖς λοχαγοῖς εἶπε παρατάττεσθαι τὴν ταχίστην εἰς ὀκτώ , τοὺς δὲ πελταστὰς ἐπὶ τὰ κράσπεδα ἑκατέρωθεν καθίστασθαι καὶ τοὺς ἱππέας , ὅσους γε δὴ καὶ οἵους ἐτύγχανεν ἔχων ·
When Dercylidas learned of all this, he told the commanders of divisions and the captains to form their men in line, eight deep, as quickly as possible, and to station the peltasts on either wing and likewise the cavalry—all that he chanced to have and such as it was;


3.2.16
969
αὐτὸς δὲ ἐθύετο .
meanwhile he himself offered sacrifice.


3.2.17
970
ὅσον μὲν δὴ ἦν ἐκ Πελοποννήσου στράτευμα , ἡσυχίαν εἶχε καὶ παρεσκευάζετο ὡς μαχούμενον ·
Now all that part of the army which was from Peloponnesus kept quiet and prepared for battle;


3.2.17
971
ὅσοι δὲ ἦσαν ἀπὸ Πριήνης τε καὶ Ἀχιλλείου καὶ ἀπὸ νήσων καὶ τῶν Ἰωνικῶν πόλεων , οἱ μέν τινες καταλιπόντες ἐν τῷ σίτῳ τὰ ὅπλα ἀπεδίδρασκον ·
but as for the men from Priene and Achilleium, from the islands and the Ionian cities, some of them left their arms in the standing grain and ran away,


3.2.17
972
καὶ γὰρ ἦν βαθὺς ὁ σῖτος ἐν τῷ Μαιάνδρου πεδίῳ ·
(for the grain was tall in the plain of the Maeander)


3.2.17
973
ὅσοι δὲ καὶ ἔμενον , δῆλοι ἦσαν οὐ μενοῦντες .
while all those who did stand showed clearly that they would not stand very long.


3.2.18
974
τὸν μὲν οὖν Φαρνάβαζον ἐξηγγέλλετο μάχεσθαι κελεύειν ·
On the other side Pharnabazus, it was reported, was urging an engagement.


3.2.18
975
ὁ μέντοι Τισσαφέρνης τό τε Κύρειον στράτευμα καταλογιζόμενος ὡς ἐπολέμησεν αὐτοῖς καὶ τούτῳ πάντας νομίζων ὁμοίους εἶναι τοὺς Ἕλληνας , οὐκ ἐβούλετο μάχεσθαι , ἀλλὰ πέμψας πρὸς Δερκυλίδαν εἶπεν ὅτι εἰς λόγους βούλοιτο αὐτῷ ἀφικέσθαι .
But Tissaphernes, remembering the way Cyrus’ troops had made war with the Persians and believing that the Greeks were all like them, did not wish to fight, but sent to Dercylidas and said that he wanted to come to a conference with him.


3.2.18
976
καὶ ὁ Δερκυλίδας λαβὼν τοὺς κρατίστους τὰ εἴδη τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν καὶ ἱππέων καὶ πεζῶν προῆλθε πρὸς τοὺς ἀγγέλους , καὶ εἶπεν ·
And Dercylidas, taking the best-looking of the troops he had, both cavalry and infantry, came forward to meet the messengers and said:


3.2.18
977
ἀλλὰ παρεσκευάσμην μὲν ἔγωγε μάχεσθαι , ὡς ὁρᾶτε ·
For my part I had prepared to fight, as you see;


3.2.18
978
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἐκεῖνος βούλεται εἰς λόγους ἀφικέσθαι , οὐδ’ ἐγὼ ἀντιλέγω .
however, since he wishes to come to a conference, I have no objection myself.


3.2.18
979
ἂν μέντοι ταῦτα δέῃ ποιεῖν , πιστὰ καὶ ὁμήρους δοτέον καὶ ληπτέον .
But if this is to be done, pledges and hostages must be given and received.


3.2.19
980
δόξαντα δὲ ταῦτα καὶ περανθέντα , τὰ μὲν στρατεύματα ἀπῆλθε , τὸ μὲν βαρβαρικὸν εἰς Τράλλεις τῆς Καρίας , τὸ δ’ Ἑλληνικὸν εἰς Λεύκοφρυν , ἔνθα ἦν Ἀρτέμιδός τε ἱερὸν μάλα ἅγιον καὶ λίμνη πλέον ἢ σταδίου ὑπόψαμμος ἀέναος ποτίμου καὶ θερμοῦ ὕδατος .
When this plan had been decided upon and carried out, the armies went away, the barbarians to Tralles in Caria, and the Greeks to Leucophrys, where there was a very holy shrine of Artemis and a lake more than a stadium in length, with a sandy bottom and an unfailing supply of drinkable, warm water.


3.2.19
981
καὶ τότε μὲν ταῦτα ἐπράχθη ·
This, then, was what was done at that time;


3.2.19
982
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ εἰς τὸ συγκείμενον χωρίον ἦλθον , καὶ ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς πυθέσθαι ἀλλήλων ἐπὶ τίσιν ἂν τὴν εἰρήνην ποιήσαιντο .
but on the following day the commanders came to the place agreed upon, and it seemed best to them to learn from one another on what terms each would make peace.


3.2.20
983
ὁ μὲν δὴ Δερκυλίδας εἶπεν , εἰ αὐτονόμους ἐῴη βασιλεὺς τὰς Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις , ὁ δὲ Τισσαφέρνης καὶ Φαρνάβαζος εἶπαν ὅτι , εἰ ἐξέλθοι τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν στράτευμα ἐκ τῆς χώρας καὶ οἱ Λακεδαιμονίων ἁρμοσταὶ ἐκ τῶν πόλεων .
Dercylidas accordingly stated his condition, that the King should leave the Greek cities independent;


3.2.20
984
ταῦτα δὲ εἰπόντες ἀλλήλοις σπονδὰς ἐποιήσαντο , ἕως ἀπαγγελθείη τὰ λεχθέντα Δερκυλίδᾳ μὲν εἰς Λακεδαίμονα , Τισσαφέρνει δὲ ἐπὶ βασιλέα .
and Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus stated theirs, that the Greek army should depart from the country and the Lacedaemonian governors from the cities.


3.2.20
985
τούτων δὲ πραττομένων ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ ὑπὸ Δερκυλίδα , Λακεδαιμόνιοι κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον , πάλαι ὀργιζόμενοι τοῖς Ἠλείοις καὶ ὅτι ἐποιήσαντο συμμαχίαν πρὸς Ἀθηναίους καὶ Ἀργείους καὶ Μαντινέας , καὶ ὅτι δίκην φάσκοντες καταδεδικάσθαι αὐτῶν ἐκώλυον καὶ τοῦ ἱππικοῦ καὶ τοῦ γυμνικοῦ ἀγῶνος , καὶ οὐ μόνον ταῦτ’ ἤρκει , ἀλλὰ καὶ Λίχα παραδόντος Θηβαίοις τὸ ἅρμα , ἐπεὶ ἐκηρύττοντο νικῶντες , ὅτε εἰσῆλθε Λίχας στεφανώσων τὸν ἡνίοχον , μαστιγοῦντες αὐτόν , ἄνδρα γέροντα , ἐξήλασαν ·
When they had stated these terms to one another, they concluded a truce, to continue until the proposals should be reported by Dercylidas to Lacedaemon, and by Tissaphernes to the King.


3.2.22
986
τούτων δ’ ὕστερον καὶ Ἄγιδος πεμφθέντος θῦσαι τῷ Διὶ κατὰ μαντείαν τινὰ ἐκώλυον οἱ Ἠλεῖοι μὴ προσεύχεσθαι νίκην πολέμου , λέγοντες ὡς καὶ τὸ ἀρχαῖον εἴη οὕτω νόμιμον , μὴ χρηστηριάζεσθαι τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐφ’ Ἑλλήνων πολέμῳ ·
And again, at a later time, when Agis was sent to sacrifice to Zeus in accordance with an oracle, the Eleans would not allow him to pray for victory in war, saying that even from ancient times it was an established principle that Greeks should not consult the oracle about a war with Greeks;


3.2.22
987
ὥστε ἄθυτος ἀπῆλθεν .
so that Agis went away without sacrificing.


3.2.23
988
ἐκ τούτων οὖν πάντων ὀργιζομένοις ἔδοξε τοῖς ἐφόροις καὶ τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ σωφρονίσαι αὐτούς .
It was in consequence of all these things that the ephors and the assembly were angry, and they determined to bring the Eleans to their senses.


3.2.23
989
πέμψαντες οὖν πρέσβεις εἰς Ἦλιν εἶπον ὅτι τοῖς τέλεσι τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων δίκαιον δοκοίη εἶναι ἀφιέναι αὐτοὺς τὰς περιοικίδας πόλεις αὐτονόμους .
Accordingly, they sent ambassadors to Elis and said that it seemed to the authorities of Lacedaemon to be just that they should leave their outlying towns independent.


3.2.23
990
ἀποκριναμένων δὲ τῶν Ἠλείων ὅτι οὐ ποιήσοιεν ταῦτα , ἐπιληίδας γὰρ ἔχοιεν τὰς πόλεις , φρουρὰν ἔφηναν οἱ ἔφοροι .
And when the Eleans replied that they would not do so, for the reason that they held the towns as prizes of war, the ephors called out the ban.


3.2.23
991
ἄγων δὲ τὸ στράτευμα Ἆγις ἐνέβαλε διὰ τῆς Ἀχαΐας εἰς τὴν Ἠλείαν κατὰ Λάρισον .
And Agis, at the head of the army, made his entrance into the territory of Elis through Achaea, along the Larisus.


3.2.24
992
ἄρτι δὲ τοῦ στρατεύματος ὄντος ἐν τῇ πολεμίᾳ καὶ κοπτομένης τῆς χώρας , σεισμὸς ἐπιγίγνεται ·
Now when the army had but just arrived in the enemy’s country and the land was being laid waste, an earthquake took place.


3.2.24
993
ὁ δ’ Ἆγις θεῖον ἡγησάμενος ἐξελθὼν πάλιν ἐκ τῆς χώρας διαφῆκε τὸ στράτευμα .
Then Agis, thinking that this was a heaven-sent sign, departed again from the country and disbanded his army.


3.2.24
994
ἐκ δὲ τούτου οἱ Ἠλεῖοι πολὺ θρασύτεροι ἦσαν , καὶ διεπρεσβεύοντο εἰς τὰς πόλεις , ὅσας ᾔδεσαν δυσμενεῖς τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις οὔσας .
As a result of this the Eleans were much bolder, and sent around embassies to all the states which they knew to be unfriendly to the Lacedaemonians.


3.2.25
995
περιόντι δὲ τῷ ἐνιαυτῷ φαίνουσι πάλιν οἱ ἔφοροι φρουρὰν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἦλιν , καὶ συνεστρατεύοντο τῷ Ἄγιδι πλὴν Βοιωτῶν καὶ Κορινθίων οἵ τε ἄλλοι πάντες σύμμαχοι καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι .
In the course of the year, however, the ephors again called out the ban against Elis, and with the exception of the Boeotians and the Corinthians all the allies, including the Athenians, took part with Agis in the campaign.


3.2.25
996
ἐμβαλόντος δὲ τοῦ Ἄγιδος δι’ Αὐλῶνος , εὐθὺς μὲν Λεπρεᾶται ἀποστάντες τῶν Ἠλείων προσεχώρησαν αὐτῷ , εὐθὺς δὲ Μακίστιοι , ἐχόμενοι δ’ Ἐπιταλιεῖς .
Now when Agis entered Elis by way of Aulon, the Lepreans at once revolted from the Eleans and came over to him, the Macistians likewise at once, and after them the Epitalians.


3.2.25
997
διαβαίνοντι δὲ τὸν ποταμὸν προσεχώρουν Λετρῖνοι καὶ Ἀμφίδολοι καὶ Μαργανεῖς .
And while he was crossing the river, the Letrinians, Amphidolians, and Marganians came over to him.


3.2.26
998
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἐλθὼν εἰς Ὀλυμπίαν ἔθυε τῷ Διὶ τῷ Ὀλυμπίῳ ·
Thereupon he went to Olympia and offered sacrifices to Olympian Zeus,


3.2.26
999
κωλύειν δὲ οὐδεὶς ἔτι ἐπειρᾶτο .
and this time no one undertook to prevent him.


3.2.26
1000
θύσας δὲ πρὸς τὸ ἄστυ ἐπορεύετο , κόπτων καὶ κάων τὴν χώραν , καὶ ὑπέρπολλα μὲν κτήνη , ὑπέρπολλα δὲ ἀνδράποδα ἡλίσκετο ἐκ τῆς χώρας ·
After his sacrifices he marched upon the city of Elis, laying the land waste with axe and fire as he went, and vast numbers of cattle and vast numbers of slaves were captured in the country;


3.2.26
1001
ὥστε ἀκούοντες καὶ ἄλλοι πολλοὶ τῶν Ἀρκάδων καὶ Ἀχαιῶν ἑκόντες ᾖσαν συστρατευσόμενοι καὶ μετεῖχον τῆς ἁρπαγῆς .
insomuch that many more of the Arcadians and Achaeans, on hearing the news, came of their own accord to join the expedition and shared in the plunder.


3.2.26
1002
καὶ ἐγένετο αὕτη ἡ στρατεία ὥσπερ ἐπισιτισμὸς τῇ Πελοποννήσῳ .
In fact this campaign proved to be a harvest, as it were, for Peloponnesus.


3.2.27
1003
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφίκετο πρὸς τὴν πόλιν , τὰ μὲν προάστια καὶ τὰ γυμνάσια καλὰ ὄντα ἐλυμαίνετο , τὴν δὲ πόλιν ( ἀτείχιστος γὰρ ἦν ) ἐνόμισαν αὐτὸν μὴ βούλεσθαι μᾶλλον ἢ μὴ δύνασθαι ἑλεῖν .
When Agis reached the city he did some harm to the suburbs and the gymnasia, which were beautiful, but as for the city itself (for it was unwalled) the Lacedaemonians thought that he was unwilling, rather than unable, to capture it.


3.2.27
1004
δῃουμένης δὲ τῆς χώρας , καὶ οὔσης τῆς στρατιᾶς περὶ Κυλλήνην , βουλόμενοι οἱ περὶ Ξενίαν τὸν λεγόμενον μεδίμνῳ ἀπομετρήσασθαι τὸ παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς ἀργύριον δι’ αὐτῶν προσχωρῆσαι τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις , ἐκπεσόντες ἐξ οἰκίας ξίφη ἔχοντες σφαγὰς ποιοῦσι , καὶ ἄλλους τέ τινας ἀποκτείνουσι καὶ ὅμοιόν τινα Θρασυδαίῳ ἀποκτείναντες τῷ τοῦ δήμου προστάτῃ ᾤοντο Θρασυδαῖον ἀπεκτονέναι , ὥστε ὁ μὲν δῆμος παντελῶς κατηθύμησε καὶ ἡσυχίαν εἶχεν , οἱ δὲ σφαγεῖς πάντ’ ᾤοντο πεπραγμένα εἶναι , καὶ οἱ ὁμογνώμονες αὐτοῖς ἐξεφέροντο τὰ ὅπλα εἰς τὴν ἀγοράν .
Now while the country was being ravaged and the Lacedaemonian army was in the neighbourhood of Cyllene, the party of Xenias—the man of whom it was said that he measured out with a bushel measure the money he received from his father—wishing to have their city go over to the Lacedaemonians and to receive the credit for this, rushed out of a house, armed with swords, and began a slaughter; and having killed, among others, a man who resembled Thrasydaeus, the leader of the commons, they supposed that they had killed Thrasydaeus himself, so that the commons lost heart entirely and kept quiet,


3.2.28
1005
ὁ δὲ Θρασυδαῖος ἔτι καθεύδων ἐτύγχανεν οὗπερ ἐμεθύσθη .
while the men engaged in the slaughter supposed that everything was already accomplished and their sympathizers gathered under arms in the market-place.


3.2.28
1006
ὡς δὲ ᾔσθετο ὁ δῆμος ὅτι οὐ τέθνηκεν ὁ Θρασυδαῖος , περιεπλήσθη ἡ οἰκία ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν , ὥσπερ ὑπὸ ἑσμοῦ μελιττῶν ὁ ἡγεμών .
But it chanced that Thrasydaeus was still asleep at the very place where he had become drunk. And when the commons learned that he was not dead, they gathered round his house on all sides, as a swarm of bees around its leader.


3.2.29
1007
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἡγεῖτο ὁ Θρασυδαῖος ἀναλαβὼν τὸν δῆμον , γενομένης μάχης ἐκράτησεν ὁ δῆμος , ἐξέπεσον δὲ πρὸς τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους οἱ ἐγχειρήσαντες ταῖς σφαγαῖς .
And when Thrasydaeus put himself at their head and led the way, a battle took place in which the commons were victorious, and those who had undertaken the slaughter were forced to flee to the Lacedaemonians.


3.2.29
1008
ἐπεὶ δ’ αὖ ὁ Ἆγις ἀπιὼν διέβη πάλιν τὸν Ἀλφειόν , φρουροὺς καταλιπὼν ἐν Ἐπιταλίῳ πλησίον τοῦ Ἀλφειοῦ καὶ Λύσιππον ἁρμοστὴν καὶ τοὺς ἐξ Ἤλιδος φυγάδας , τὸ μὲν στράτευμα διῆκεν , αὐτὸς δὲ οἴκαδε ἀπῆλθε .
As for Agis, when he departed and crossed the Alpheus again, after leaving a garrison in Epitalium near the Alpheus, with Lysippus as governor, and also leaving there the exiles from Elis, he disbanded his army and returned home himself.


3.2.30
1009
καὶ τὸ μὲν λοιπὸν θέρος καὶ τὸν ἐπιόντα χειμῶνα ὑπὸ τοῦ Λυσίππου καὶ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν ἐφέρετο καὶ ἤγετο ἡ τῶν Ἠλείων χώρα .
During the rest of the summer and the ensuing winter the country of the Eleans was plundered by Lysippus and the men with him.


3.2.30
1010
τοῦ δ’ ἐπιόντος θέρους πέμψας Θρασυδαῖος εἰς Λακεδαίμονα συνεχώρησε Φέας τε τὸ τεῖχος περιελεῖν καὶ Κυλλήνης καὶ τὰς Τριφυλίδας πόλεις ἀφεῖναι Φρίξαν καὶ Ἐπιτάλιον καὶ Λετρίνους καὶ Ἀμφιδόλους καὶ Μαργανέας , πρὸς δὲ ταύταις καὶ Ἀκρωρείους καὶ Λασιῶνα τὸν ὑπ’ Ἀρκάδων ἀντιλεγόμενον .
But in the course of the following summer Thrasydaeus sent to Lacedaemon and agreed to tear down the walls of Phea and Cyllene, to leave the Triphylian towns of Phrixa and Epitalium independent, likewise the Letrinians, Amphidolians, and Marganians, and besides these the Acrorians and the town of Lasion, which was claimed by the Arcadians.


3.2.30
1011
Ἤπειον μέντοι τὴν μεταξὺ πόλιν Ἡραίας καὶ Μακίστου ἠξίουν οἱ Ἠλεῖοι ἔχειν ·
The Eleans, however, claimed the right to hold Epeum, the town between Heraea and Macistus;


3.2.30
1012
πρίασθαι γὰρ ἔφησαν τὴν χώραν ἅπασαν παρὰ τῶν τότε ἐχόντων τὴν πόλιν τριάκοντα ταλάντων , καὶ τὸ ἀργύριον δεδωκέναι .
for they said that they had bought the whole territory for thirty talents from the people to whom the town at that time belonged, and had paid the money.


3.2.31
1013
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι γνόντες μηδὲν δικαιότερον εἶναι βίᾳ πριαμένους ἢ βίᾳ ἀφελομένους παρὰ τῶν ἡττόνων λαμβάνειν , ἀφιέναι καὶ ταύτην ἠνάγκασαν ·
But the Lacedaemonians, deciding that it was no more just to get property from the weaker by a forced purchase than by a forcible seizure, compelled them to leave this town also independent;


3.2.31
1014
τοῦ μέντοι προεστάναι τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ Ὀλυμπίου ἱεροῦ , καίπερ οὐκ ἀρχαίου Ἠλείοις ὄντος , οὐκ ἀπήλασαν αὐτούς , νομίζοντες τοὺς ἀντιποιουμένους χωρίτας εἶναι καὶ οὐχ ἱκανοὺς προεστάναι .
they did not, however, dispossess them of the presidency of the shrine of Olympian Zeus, even though it did not belong to the Eleans in ancient times, for they thought that the rival claimants were country people and not competent to hold the presidency.


3.2.31
1015
τούτων δὲ συγχωρηθέντων εἰρήνη τε γίγνεται καὶ συμμαχία Ἠλείων πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους .
When these things had been agreed upon, a peace and an alliance were concluded between the Eleans and the Lacedaemonians.


3.2.31
1016
καὶ οὕτω μὲν δὴ ὁ Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ Ἠλείων πόλεμος ἔληξε .
And so the war between the Lacedaemonians and the Eleans ended.


3.3.1
1017
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο Ἆγις ἀφικόμενος εἰς Δελφοὺς καὶ τὴν δεκάτην ἀποθύσας , πάλιν ἀπιὼν ἔκαμεν ἐν Ἡραίᾳ , γέρων ἤδη ὤν , καὶ ἀπηνέχθη μὲν εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἔτι ζῶν , ἐκεῖ δὲ ταχὺ ἐτελεύτησε ·
After this Agis, having gone to Delphi and offered to the god the appointed tithe of his booty, on his way back fell sick at Heraea, being now an old man, and although he was still living when brought home to Lacedaemon, once there he very soon died;


3.3.1
1018
καὶ ἔτυχε σεμνοτέρας ἢ κατὰ ἄνθρωπον ταφῆς .
and he received a burial more splendid than belongs to man.


3.3.1
1019
ἐπεὶ δὲ ὡσιώθησαν αἱ ἡμέραι , καὶ ἔδει βασιλέα καθίστασθαι , ἀντέλεγον περὶ βασιλείας Λεωτυχίδης , υἱὸς φάσκων Ἄγιδος εἶναι , Ἀγησίλαος δὲ ἀδελφός .
When the prescribed days of mourning had been religiously observed and it was necessary to appoint a king, Leotychides, who claimed to be a son of Agis, and Agesilaus, a brother of Agis, contended for the kingship.


3.3.2
1020
εἰπόντος δὲ τοῦ Λεωτυχίδου ·
And Leotychides said:


3.3.2
1021
ἀλλ’ ὁ νόμος , ὦ Ἀγησίλαε , οὐκ ἀδελφὸν ἀλλ’ υἱὸν βασιλέως βασιλεύειν κελεύει ·
But, Agesilaus, the law directs, not that a brother, but that a son of a king, should be king;


3.3.2
1022
εἰ δὲ υἱὸς ὢν μὴ τυγχάνοι , ὁ ἀδελφός κα ὣς βασιλεύοι .
if, however, there should chance to be no son, in that case the brother would be king.


3.3.2
1023
ἐμὲ ἂν δέοι βασιλεύειν .
It is I, then, who should be king.


3.3.2
1024
πῶς , ἐμοῦ γε ὄντος ;
How so, when I am alive?


3.3.2
1025
ὅτι ὃν τὺ καλεῖς πατέρα , οὐκ ἔφη σε εἶναι ἑαυτοῦ .
Because he whom you call your father said that you were not his son.


3.3.2
1026
ἀλλ’ ἡ πολὺ κάλλιον ἐκείνου εἰδυῖα μήτηρ καὶ νῦν ἔτι φησίν .
Nay, but my mother, who knows far better than he did, says even to this day that I am.


3.3.2
1027
ἀλλὰ ὁ Ποτειδὰν ὡς μάλα σευ ψευδομένω κατεμήνυσεν ἐκ τοῦ θαλάμου ἐξελάσας σεισμῷ εἰς τὸ φανερὸν τὸν σὸν πατέρα .
But Poseidon showed that you are entirely in the wrong, for he drove your father out of her chamber into the open by an earthquake.


3.3.2
1028
συνεμαρτύρησε δὲ ταῦτ’ αὐτῷ καὶ ὁ ἀληθέστατος λεγόμενος χρόνος εἶναι ·
And time also, which is said to be the truest witness, gave testimony that the god was right;


3.3.2
1029
ἀφ’ οὗ γάρ τοι ἔφυσέ σε καὶ ἐφάνη ἐν τῷ θαλάμῳ , δεκάτῳ μηνὶ ἐγένου .
for you were born in the tenth month from the time when he fled from the chamber.


3.3.3
1030
οἱ μὲν τοιαῦτ’ ἔλεγον .
Such were the words which passed between these two.


3.3.3
1031
Διοπείθης δέ , μάλα χρησμολόγος ἀνήρ , Λεωτυχίδῃ συναγορεύων εἶπεν ὡς καὶ Ἀπόλλωνος χρησμὸς εἴη φυλάξασθαι τὴν χωλὴν βασιλείαν .
But Diopeithes, a man very well versed in oracles, said in support of Leotychides that there was also an oracle of Apollo which bade the Lacedaemonians beware of the lame kingship.


3.3.3
1032
Λύσανδρος δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν ὑπὲρ Ἀγησιλάου ἀντεῖπεν ὡς οὐκ οἴοιτο τὸν θεὸν τοῦτο κελεύειν φυλάξασθαι , μὴ προσπταίσας τις χωλεύσαι , ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον μὴ οὐκ ὢν τοῦ γένους βασιλεύσειε .
Lysander, however, made reply to him, on behalf of Agesilaus, that he did not suppose the god was bidding them beware lest a king of theirs should get a sprain and become lame, but rather lest one who was not of the royal stock should become king.


3.3.3
1033
παντάπασι γὰρ ἂν χωλὴν εἶναι τὴν βασιλείαν ὁπότε μὴ οἱ ἀφ’ Ἡρακλέους τῆς πόλεως ἡγοῖντο .
For the kingship would be lame in very truth when it was not the descendants of Heracles who were at the head of the state.


3.3.4
1034
τοιαῦτα δὲ ἀκούσασα ἡ πόλις ἀμφοτέρων Ἀγησίλαον εἵλοντο βασιλέα .
After hearing such arguments from both claimants the state chose Agesilaus king.


3.3.4
1035
οὔπω δ’ ἐνιαυτὸν ὄντος ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ Ἀγησιλάου , θύοντος αὐτοῦ τῶν τεταγμένων τινὰ θυσιῶν ὑπὲρ τῆς πόλεως εἶπεν ὁ μάντις ὅτι ἐπιβουλήν τινα τῶν δεινοτάτων φαίνοιεν οἱ θεοί .
When Agesilaus had been not yet a year in the kingly office, once while he was offering one of the appointed sacrifices in behalf of the state, the seer said that the gods revealed a conspiracy of the most terrible sort.


3.3.4
1036
ἐπεὶ δὲ πάλιν ἔθυεν , ἔτι δεινότερα ἔφη τὰ ἱερὰ φαίνεσθαι .
And when he sacrificed again, the seer said that the signs appeared still more terrible.


3.3.4
1037
τὸ τρίτον δὲ θύοντος , εἶπεν ·
And upon his sacrificing for the third time, he said:


3.3.4
1038
ὦ Ἀγησίλαε , ὥσπερ εἰ ἐν αὐτοῖς εἴημεν τοῖς πολεμίοις , οὕτω μοι σημαίνεται .
"Agesilaus, just such a sign is given me as would be given if we were in the very midst of the enemy."


3.3.4
1039
ἐκ δὲ τούτου θύοντες καὶ τοῖς ἀποτροπαίοις καὶ τοῖς σωτῆρσι , καὶ μόλις καλλιερήσαντες , ἐπαύσαντο .
There-upon they made offerings to the gods who avert evil and to those who grant safety, and having with difficulty obtained favourable omens, ceased sacrificing.


3.3.4
1040
ληγούσης δὲ τῆς θυσίας ἐντὸς πένθ’ ἡμερῶν καταγορεύει τις πρὸς τοὺς ἐφόρους ἐπιβουλὴν καὶ τὸν ἀρχηγὸν τοῦ πράγματος Κινάδωνα .
And within five days after the sacrifice was ended a man reported to the ephors a conspiracy, and Cinadon as the head of the affair.


3.3.5
1041
οὗτος δ’ ἦν καὶ τὸ εἶδος νεανίσκος καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν εὔρωστος , οὐ μέντοι τῶν ὁμοίων .
This Cinadon was a young man, sturdy of body and stout of heart, but not one of the peers.


3.3.5
1042
ἐρομένων δὲ τῶν ἐφόρων πῶς φαίη τὴν πρᾶξιν ἔσεσθαι , εἶπεν ὁ εἰσαγγείλας ὅτι ὁ Κινάδων ἀγαγὼν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὸ ἔσχατον τῆς ἀγορᾶς ἀριθμῆσαι κελεύοι ὁπόσοι εἶεν Σπαρτιᾶται ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ .
And when the ephors asked how he had said that the plan would be carried out, the informer replied that Cinadon had taken him to the edge of the market-place and directed him to count how many Spartiatae there were in the market-place.


3.3.5
1043
καὶ ἐγώ , ἔφη , ἀριθμήσας βασιλέα τε καὶ ἐφόρους καὶ γέροντας καὶ ἄλλους ὡς τετταράκοντα , ἠρόμην ·
"And I," he said, "after counting king and ephors and senators and about forty others, asked"


3.3.5
1044
τί δή με τούτους , ὦ Κινάδων , ἐκέλευσας ἀριθμῆσαι ;
"Why, Cinadon, did you bid me count these men?"


3.3.5
1045
ὁ δὲ εἶπε ·
And he replied:


3.3.5
1046
τούτους , ἔφη , νόμιζέ σοι πολεμίους εἶναι , τοὺς δ’ ἄλλους πάντας συμμάχους πλέον ἢ τετρακισχιλίους ὄντας τοὺς ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ .
"Believe," said he, "that these men are your enemies, and that all the others who are in the market-place, more than four thousand in number, are your allies."


3.3.5
1047
ἐπιδεικνύναι δ’ αὐτὸν ἔφη ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς ἔνθα μὲν ἕνα , ἔνθα δὲ δύο πολεμίους ἀπαντῶντας , τοὺς δ’ ἄλλους ἅπαντας συμμάχους ·
"In the streets also," the informer said, "Cinadon pointed out as enemies here one and there two who met them, and all the rest as allies;


3.3.5
1048
καὶ ὅσοι δὴ ἐν τοῖς χωρίοις Σπαρτιατῶν τύχοιεν ὄντες , ἕνα μὲν πολέμιον τὸν δεσπότην , συμμάχους δ’ ἐν ἑκάστῳ πολλούς .
and of all who chanced to be on the country estates belonging to Spartiatae, while there would be one whom he would point out as an enemy, namely the master, yet there would be many on each estate named as allies."


3.3.6
1049
ἐρωτώντων δὲ τῶν ἐφόρων πόσους φαίη καὶ τοὺς συνειδότας τὴν πρᾶξιν εἶναι , λέγειν καὶ περὶ τούτου ἔφη αὐτὸν ὡς σφίσι μὲν τοῖς προστατεύουσιν οὐ πάνυ πολλοί , ἀξιόπιστοι δὲ συνειδεῖεν ·
When the ephors asked how many Cinadon said there really were who were in the secret of this affair, the informer replied that he said in regard to this point that those who were in the secret with himself and the other leaders were by no means many, though trustworthy;


3.3.6
1050
αὐτοὶ μέντοι πᾶσιν ἔφασαν συνειδέναι καὶ εἵλωσι καὶ νεοδαμώδεσι καὶ τοῖς ὑπομείοσι καὶ τοῖς περιοίκοις ·
the leaders, however, put it this way, that it was they who knew the secret of all the others—Helots, freedmen, lesser Spartiatae, and Perioeci;


3.3.6
1051
ὅπου γὰρ ἐν τούτοις τις λόγος γένοιτο περὶ Σπαρτιατῶν , οὐδένα δύνασθαι κρύπτειν τὸ μὴ οὐχ ἡδέως ἂν καὶ ὠμῶν ἐσθίειν αὐτῶν .
for whenever among these classes any mention was made of Spartiatae, no one was able to conceal the fact that he would be glad to eat them raw.


3.3.7
1052
πάλιν οὖν ἐρωτώντων ·
When the ephors asked again:


3.3.7
1053
ὅπλα δὲ πόθεν ἔφασαν λήψεσθαι ;
"And where did they say they would get weapons?"


3.3.7
1054
τὸν δ’ εἰπεῖν ὅτι οἱ μὲν δήπου συντεταγμένοι ἡμῶν αὐτοὶ ἔφασάν γε ὅπλα κεκτήμεθα , τῷ δ’ ὄχλῳ , ἀγαγόντα εἰς τὸν σίδηρον ἐπιδεῖξαι αὐτὸν ἔφη πολλὰς μὲν μαχαίρας , πολλὰ δὲ ξίφη , πολλοὺς δὲ ὀβελίσκους , πολλοὺς δὲ πελέκεις καὶ ἀξίνας , πολλὰ δὲ δρέπανα .
the informer replied that Cinadon said: "Of course those of us who are in the army have weapons of our own, and as for the masses —he led him, he said, to the iron market, and showed him great quantities of knives, swords, spits, axes, hatchets, and sickles.


3.3.7
1055
λέγειν δ’ αὐτὸν ἔφη ὅτι καὶ ταῦτα ὅπλα πάντ’ εἴη ὁπόσοις ἄνθρωποι καὶ γῆν καὶ ξύλα καὶ λίθους ἐργάζονται , καὶ τῶν ἄλλων δὲ τεχνῶν τὰς πλείστας τὰ ὄργανα ὅπλα ἔχειν ἀρκοῦντα , ἄλλως τε καὶ πρὸς ἀόπλους .
And he said, the informer continued, that all those tools with which men work the land and timber and stone were likewise weapons, and that most of the other industries also had in their implements adequate weapons, especially against unarmed men."


3.3.7
1056
πάλιν αὖ ἐρωτώμενος ἐν τίνι χρόνῳ μέλλοι ταῦτα πράττεσθαι , εἶπεν ὅτι ἐπιδημεῖν οἱ παρηγγελμένον εἴη .
When he was asked again at what time this thing was to be done, he said that orders had been given him to stay in the city.


3.3.8
1057
ἀκούσαντες ταῦτα οἱ ἔφοροι ἐσκεμμένα τε λέγειν ἡγήσαντο αὐτὸν καὶ ἐξεπλάγησαν , καὶ οὐδὲ τὴν μικρὰν καλουμένην ἐκκλησίαν συλλέξαντες , ἀλλὰ συλλεγόμενοι τῶν γερόντων ἄλλος ἄλλοθι ἐβουλεύσαντο πέμψαι τὸν Κινάδωνα εἰς Αὐλῶνα σὺν ἄλλοις τῶν νεωτέρων καὶ κελεῦσαι ἥκειν ἄγοντα τῶν Αὐλωνιτῶν τέ τινας καὶ τῶν εἱλώτων τοὺς ἐν τῇ σκυτάλῃ γεγραμμένους .
Upon hearing these statements the ephors came to the conclusion that he was describing a well-considered plan, and were greatly alarmed;


3.3.8
1058
ἀγαγεῖν δὲ ἐκέλευον καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα , ἣ καλλίστη μὲν αὐτόθι ἐλέγετο εἶναι , λυμαίνεσθαι δ’ ἐῴκει τοὺς ἀφικνουμένους Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ πρεσβυτέρους καὶ νεωτέρους .
and without even convening the Little Assembly, as it was called, but merely gathering about them—one ephor here and another there—some of the senators, they decided to send Cinadon to Aulon along with others of the younger men, and to order him to bring back with him certain of the Aulonians and Helots whose names were written in the official dispatch. And they ordered him to bring also the woman who was said to be the most beautiful woman in Aulon and was thought to be corrupting the Lacedaemonians who came there, older and younger alike.


3.3.9
1059
ὑπηρετήκει δὲ καὶ ἄλλ’ ἤδη ὁ Κινάδων τοῖς ἐφόροις τοιαῦτα .
Now Cinadon had performed other services of a like sort for the ephors in the past;


3.3.9
1060
καὶ τότε δὴ ἔδοσαν τὴν σκυτάλην ἐκείνῳ , ἐν ᾗ γεγραμμένοι ἦσαν οὓς ἔδει συλληφθῆναι .
so this time they gave him the dispatch in which were written the names of those who were to be arrested.


3.3.9
1061
ἐρομένου δὲ τίνας ἄγοι μεθ’ ἑαυτοῦ τῶν νέων , Ἴθι , ἔφασαν , καὶ τὸν πρεσβύτατον τῶν ἱππαγρετῶν κέλευέ σοι συμπέμψαι ἓξ ἢ ἑπτὰ οἳ ἂν τύχωσι παρόντες .
And when he asked which of the young men he should take with him, they said:


3.3.9
1062
ἐμεμελήκει δὲ αὐτοῖς ὅπως ὁ ἱππαγρέτης εἰδείη οὓς δέοι πέμπειν , καὶ οἱ πεμπόμενοι εἰδεῖεν ὅτι Κινάδωνα δέοι συλλαβεῖν .
"Go and bid the eldest of the commanders of the guard to send with you six or seven of those who may chance to be at hand."


3.3.9
1063
εἶπον δὲ καὶ τοῦτο τῷ Κινάδωνι , ὅτι πέμψοιεν τρεῖς ἁμάξας , ἵνα μὴ πεζοὺς ἄγωσι τοὺς ληφθέντας , ἀφανίζοντες ὡς ἐδύναντο μάλιστα ὅτι ἐφ’ ἕνα ἐκεῖνον ἔπεμπον .
In fact they had taken care that the commander should know whom he was to send, and that those who were sent should know that it was Cinadon whom they were to arrest. The ephors said this thing besides to Cinadon, that they would send three wagons, so that they would not have to bring back the prisoners on foot—trying to conceal, as far as they could, the fact that they were sending after one man—himself.


3.3.10
1064
ἐν δὲ τῇ πόλει οὐ συνελάμβανον αὐτόν , ὅτι τὸ πρᾶγμα οὐκ ᾔδεσαν ὁπόσον τὸ μέγεθος εἴη , καὶ ἀκοῦσαι πρῶτον ἐβούλοντο τοῦ Κινάδωνος οἵτινες εἶεν οἱ συμπράττοντες , πρὶν αἰσθέσθαι αὐτοὺς ὅτι μεμήνυνται , ἵνα μὴ ἀποδρῶσιν .
The reason they did not plan to arrest him in the city was that they did not know how great was the extent of the plot, and they wished to hear from Cinadon who his accomplices were before these should learn that they had been informed against, in order to prevent their escaping.


3.3.10
1065
ἔμελλον δὲ οἱ συλλαβόντες αὐτὸν μὲν κατέχειν , τοὺς δὲ συνειδότας πυθόμενοι αὐτοῦ γράψαντες ἀποπέμπειν τὴν ταχίστην τοῖς ἐφόροις .
Accordingly, those who made the arrest were to detain Cinadon, and after learning from him the names of his confederates, to write them down and send them back as quickly as possible to the ephors.


3.3.10
1066
οὕτω δ’ ἔσχον οἱ ἔφοροι πρὸς τὸ πρᾶγμα , ὥστε καὶ μόραν ἱππέων ἔπεμψαν τοῖς ἐπ’ Αὐλῶνος .
And so seriously did the ephors regard the matter that they even sent a regiment of cavalry to support the men who had set out for Aulon.


3.3.11
1067
ἐπεὶ δ’ εἰλημμένου τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἧκεν ἱππεὺς φέρων τὰ ὀνόματα ὧν ὁ Κινάδων ἀπέγραψε , παραχρῆμα τόν τε μάντιν Τισαμενὸν καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς ἐπικαιριωτάτους συνελάμβανον .
When the man had been seized and a horseman had returned with the names of those whom Cinadon had listed, the ephors immediately proceeded to arrest the seer Tisamenus and the most influential of the others.


3.3.11
1068
ὡς δ’ ἀνήχθη ὁ Κινάδων καὶ ἠλέγχετο , καὶ ὡμολόγει πάντα καὶ τοὺς συνειδότας ἔλεγε , τέλος αὐτὸν ἤροντο τί καὶ βουλόμενος ταῦτα πράττοι .
And when Cinadon was brought back and questioned, and confessed everything and told the names of his confederates, they asked him finally what in the world was his object in undertaking this thing.


3.3.11
1069
ὁ δ’ ἀπεκρίνατο , μηδενὸς ἥττων εἶναι ἐν Λακεδαίμονι .
He replied: I wished to be inferior to no one in Lacedaemon.


3.3.11
1070
ἐκ τούτου μέντοι ἤδη δεδεμένος καὶ τὼ χεῖρε καὶ τὸν τράχηλον ἐν κλοιῷ μαστιγούμενος καὶ κεντούμενος αὐτός τε καὶ οἱ μετ’ αὐτοῦ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν περιήγοντο .
Thereupon he was straightway bound fast, neck and arms, in a collar, and under scourge and goad was dragged about through the city, he and those with him.


3.3.11
1071
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν δὴ τῆς δίκης ἔτυχον .
And so they met their punishment.


3.4.1
1072
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Ἡρώδας τις Συρακόσιος ἐν Φοινίκῃ ὢν μετὰ ναυκλήρου τινός , καὶ ἰδὼν τριήρεις Φοινίσσας , τὰς μὲν καταπλεούσας ἄλλοθεν , τὰς δὲ καὶ αὐτοῦ πεπληρωμένας , τὰς δὲ καὶ ἔτι κατασκευαζομένας , προσακούσας δὲ καὶ τοῦτο , ὅτι τριακοσίας αὐτὰς δέοι γενέσθαι , ἐπιβὰς ἐπὶ τὸ πρῶτον ἀναγόμενον πλοῖον εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἐξήγγειλε τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ὡς βασιλέως καὶ Τισσαφέρνους τὸν στόλον τοῦτον παρασκευαζομένων ·
After this a Syracusan named Herodas, being in Phoenicia with a certain shipowner, and seeing Phoenician war-ships—some of them sailing in from other places, others lying there fully manned, and yet others still making ready for sea—and hearing, besides, that there were to be three hundred of them, embarked on the first boat that sailed to Greece and reported to the Lacedaemonians that the King and Tissaphernes were preparing this expedition;


3.4.1
1073
ὅποι δὲ οὐδὲν ἔφη εἰδέναι .
but whither it was bound he said he did not know.


3.4.2
1074
ἀνεπτερωμένων δὲ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ τοὺς συμμάχους συναγόντων καὶ βουλευομένων τί χρὴ ποιεῖν , Λύσανδρος νομίζων καὶ τῷ ναυτικῷ πολὺ περιέσεσθαι τοὺς Ἕλληνας καὶ τὸ πεζὸν λογιζόμενος ὡς ἐσώθη τὸ μετὰ Κύρου ἀναβάν , πείθει τὸν Ἀγησίλαον ὑποστῆναι , ἂν αὐτῷ δῶσι τριάκοντα μὲν Σπαρτιατῶν , εἰς δισχιλίους δὲ τῶν νεοδαμώδων , εἰς ἑξακισχιλίους δὲ τὸ σύνταγμα τῶν συμμάχων , στρατεύεσθαι εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν .
Now while the Lacedaemonians were in a state of great excitement, and were gathering together their allies and taking counsel as to what they should do, Lysander, thinking that the Greeks would be far superior on the sea, and reflecting that the land force which went up country with Cyrus had returned safely, persuaded Agesilaus to promise, in case the Lacedaemonians would give him thirty Spartiatae, two thousand emancipated Helots, and a contingent of six thousand of the allies, to make an expedition to Asia.


3.4.2
1075
πρὸς δὲ τούτῳ τῷ λογισμῷ καὶ αὐτὸς συνεξελθεῖν αὐτῷ ἐβούλετο , ὅπως τὰς δεκαρχίας τὰς κατασταθείσας ὑπ’ ἐκείνου ἐν ταῖς πόλεσιν , ἐκπεπτωκυίας δὲ διὰ τοὺς ἐφόρους , οἳ τὰς πατρίους πολιτείας παρήγγειλαν , πάλιν καταστήσειε μετ’ Ἀγησιλάου .
Such were the motives which actuated Lysander, but, in addition, he wanted to make the expedition with Agesilaus on his own account also, in order that with the aid of Agesilaus he might re-establish the decarchies which had been set up by him in the cities, but had been overthrown through the ephors, who had issued a proclamation restoring to the cities their ancient form of government.


3.4.3
1076
ἐπαγγειλαμένου δὲ τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου τὴν στρατείαν , διδόασί τε οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὅσαπερ ᾔτησε καὶ ἑξαμήνου σῖτον .
When Agesilaus offered to undertake the campaign, the Lacedaemonians gave him everything he asked for and provisions for six months.


3.4.3
1077
ἐπεὶ δὲ θυσάμενος ὅσα ἔδει καὶ τ- ἄλλα καὶ τὰ διαβατήρια ἐξῆλθε , ταῖς μὲν πόλεσι διαπέμψας ἀγγέλους προεῖπεν ὅσους τε δέοι ἑκασταχόθεν πέμπεσθαι καὶ ὅπου παρεῖναι , αὐτὸς δ’ ἐβουλήθη ἐλθὼν θῦσαι ἐν Αὐλίδι , ἔνθαπερ ὁ Ἀγαμέμνων ὅτ’ εἰς Τροίαν ἔπλει ἐθύετο .
And when he marched forth from the country after offering all the sacrifices which were required, including that at the frontier, he dispatched messengers to the various cities and announced how many men were to be sent from each city, and where they were to report; while as for himself, he desired to go and offer sacrifice at Aulis, the place where Agamemnon had sacrificed before he sailed to Troy.


3.4.4
1078
ὡς δ’ ἐκεῖ ἐγένετο , πυθόμενοι οἱ βοιώταρχοι ὅτι θύοι , πέμψαντες ἱππέας τοῦ τε λοιποῦ εἶπαν μὴ θύειν καὶ οἷς ἐνέτυχον ἱεροῖς τεθυμένοις διέρριψαν ἀπὸ τοῦ βωμοῦ .
When he had reached Aulis, however, the Boeotarchs, on learning that he was sacrificing, sent horsemen and bade him discontinue his sacrificing, and they threw from the altar the victims which they found already offered.


3.4.4
1079
ὁ δ’ ἐπιμαρτυράμενος τοὺς θεοὺς καὶ ὀργιζόμενος , ἀναβὰς ἐπὶ τὴν τριήρη ἀπέπλει .
Then Agesilaus, calling the gods to witness, and full of anger, embarked upon his trireme and sailed away.


3.4.4
1080
ἀφικόμενος δὲ ἐπὶ Γεραστόν , καὶ συλλέξας ἐκεῖ ὅσον ἐδύνατο τοῦ στρατεύματος πλεῖστον , εἰς Ἔφεσον τὸν στόλον ἐποιεῖτο .
And when he arrived at Gerastus and had collected there as large a part of his army as he could, he directed his course to Ephesus.


3.4.5
1081
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐκεῖσε ἀφίκετο , πρῶτον μὲν Τισσαφέρνης πέμψας ἤρετο αὐτὸν τίνος δεόμενος ἥκοι .
When he reached Ephesus, Tissaphernes at once sent and asked him with what intent he had come.


3.4.5
1082
ὁ δ’ εἶπεν αὐτονόμους καὶ τὰς ἐν τῇ Ἀσία πόλεις εἶναι , ὥσπερ καὶ τὰς ἐν τῇ παρ’ ἡμῖν Ἑλλάδι .
And he answered: That the cities in Asia shall be independent, as are those in our part of Greece.


3.4.5
1083
πρὸς ταῦτ’ εἶπεν ὁ Τισσαφέρνης ·
In reply to this Tissaphernes said:


3.4.5
1084
εἰ τοίνυν θέλεις σπείσασθαι ἕως ἂν ἐγὼ πρὸς βασιλέα πέμψω , οἶμαι ἄν σε ταῦτα διαπραξάμενον ἀποπλεῖν , εἰ βούλοιο .
Then if you are willing to make a truce until I can send to the King, I think you could accomplish this object and, if you should so desire, sail back home.


3.4.5
1085
ἀλλὰ βουλοίμην ἄν , ἔφη , εἰ μὴ οἰοίμην γε ὑπὸ σοῦ ἐξαπατᾶσθαι .
Indeed I should so desire, said he, if I could but think that I was not being deceived by you.


3.4.5
1086
ἀλλ’ ἔξεστιν , ἔφη , σοὶ τούτων πίστιν λαβεῖν ἦ μὴν ἀδόλως G? σοῦ πράττοντος ταῦτα ἡμᾶς μηδὲν τῆς σῆς ἀρχῆς ἀδικήσειν ἐν ταῖς σπονδαῖς .
But, said he, it is possible for you to receive a guarantee on this point, that in very truth and without guile, if you follow this course, we will do no harm to any part of your domain during the truce.


3.4.6
1087
ἐπὶ τούτοις ῥηθεῖσι Τισσαφέρνης μὲν ὤμοσε τοῖς πεμφθεῖσι πρὸς αὐτὸν Ἡριππίδᾳ καὶ Δερκυλίδᾳ καὶ Μεγίλλῳ ἦ μὴν πράξειν ἀδόλως τὴν εἰρήνην , ἐκεῖνοι δὲ ἀντώμοσαν ὑπὲρ Ἀγησιλάου Τισσαφέρνει ἦ μὴν ταῦτα πράττοντος αὐτοῦ ἐμπεδώσειν τὰς σπονδάς .
After this agreement had been reached, Tissaphernes made oath to the commissioners who were sent to him, Herippidas, Dercylidas, and Megillus, that in very truth and without guile he would negotiate the peace, and they in turn made oath on behalf of Agesilaus to Tissaphernes that in very truth, if he did this, Agesilaus would steadfastly observe the truce.


3.4.6
1088
ὁ μὲν δὴ Τισσαφέρνης ἃ ὤμοσεν εὐθὺς ἐψεύσατο ·
Now Tissaphernes straightway violated the oaths which he had sworn;


3.4.6
1089
ἀντὶ γὰρ τοῦ εἰρήνην ἔχειν στράτευμα πολὺ παρὰ βασιλέως πρὸς ᾧ εἶχε πρόσθεν μετεπέμπετο .
for instead of keeping peace he sent to the King for a large army in addition to that which he had before.


3.4.6
1090
Ἀγησίλαος δέ , καίπερ αἰσθανόμενος ταῦτα , ὅμως ἐπέμενε ταῖς σπονδαῖς .
But Agesilaus, though he was aware of this, nevertheless continued to abide by the truce.


3.4.7
1091
ὡς δὲ ἡσυχίαν τε καὶ σχολὴν ἔχων ὁ Ἀγησίλαος διέτριβεν ἐν τῇ Ἐφέσῳ , ἅτε συντεταραγμένων ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι τῶν πολιτειῶν , καὶ οὔτε δημοκρατίας ἔτι οὔσης , ὥσπερ ἐπ’ Ἀθηναίων , οὔτε δεκαρχίας , ὥσπερ ἐπὶ Λυσάνδρου , ἅτε γιγνώσκοντες πάντες τὸν Λύσανδρον , προσέκειντο αὐτῷ ἀξιοῦντες διαπράττεσθαι αὐτὸν παρ’ Ἀγησιλάου ὧν ἐδέοντο ·
Meanwhile, during the time that Agesilaus was spending in quiet and leisure at Ephesus, since the governments in the cities were in a state of confusion—for it was no longer democracy, as in the time of Athenian rule, nor decarchy, as in the time of Lysander—and since the people all knew Lysander, they beset him with requests that he should obtain from Agesilaus the granting of their petitions;


3.4.7
1092
καὶ διὰ ταῦτα ἀεὶ παμπλήθης ὄχλος θεραπεύων αὐτὸν ἠκολούθει , ὥστε ὁ μὲν Ἀγησίλαος ἰδιώτης ἐφαίνετο , ὁ δὲ Λύσανδρος βασιλεύς .
and for this reason a very great crowd was continually courting and following him, so that Agesilaus appeared to be a man in private station and Lysander king.


3.4.8
1093
ὅτι μὲν οὖν ἔμηνε καὶ τὸν Ἀγησίλαον ταῦτα ἐδήλωσεν ὕστερον ·
Now Agesilaus showed afterwards that he also was enraged by these things;


3.4.8
1094
οἵ γε μὴν ἄλλοι τριάκοντα ὑπὸ τοῦ φθόνου οὐκ ἐσίγων , ἀλλ’ ἔλεγον πρὸς τὸν Ἀγησίλαον ὡς παράνομα ποιοίη Λύσανδρος τῆς βασιλείας ὀγκηρότερον διάγων .
but the thirty Spartiatae with him were so jealous that they could not keep silence, but said to Agesilaus that Lysander was doing an unlawful thing in conducting himself more pompously than royalty.


3.4.8
1095
ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ ἤρξατο προσάγειν τινὰς τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ ὁ Λύσανδρος , πάντας οἷς γνοίη αὐτὸν συμπράττοντά τι ἡττωμένους ἀπέπεμπεν .
When, however, Lysander now began to introduce people to Agesilaus, the king would in every case dismiss, without granting their petitions, those who were known by him to be supported in any way by Lysander.


3.4.8
1096
ὡς δ’ ἀεὶ τὰ ἐναντία ὧν ἐβούλετο ἀπέβαινε τῷ Λυσάνδρῳ , ἔγνω δὴ τὸ γιγνόμενον ·
And when Lysander found that the outcome was invariably the opposite of what he desired, he realized how the matter stood;


3.4.8
1097
καὶ οὔτε ἕπεσθαι ἑαυτῷ ἔτι εἴα ὄχλον τοῖς τε συμπρᾶξαί τι δεομένοις σαφῶς ἔλεγεν ὅτι ἔλαττον ἕξοιεν , εἰ αὐτὸς παρείη .
and he no longer allowed a crowd to follow him, while he plainly told those who wanted him to give them any help that they would fare worse if he supported them.


3.4.9
1098
βαρέως δὲ φέρων τῇ ἀτιμίᾳ , προσελθὼν εἶπεν ·
But being distressed at his disgrace, he went to Agesilaus and said:


3.4.9
1099
ὦ Ἀγησίλαε , μειοῦν μὲν ἄρα σύγε τοὺς φίλους ἠπίστω .
Agesilaus, it seems that you, at least, understand how to humiliate your friends.


3.4.9
1100
ναὶ μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη , τούς γε βουλομένους ἐμοῦ μείζους φαίνεσθαι ·
Yes, by Zeus, I do, said he, at any rate those who wish to appear greater than I;


3.4.9
1101
τοὺς δέ γε αὔξοντας εἰ μὴ ἐπισταίμην ἀντιτιμᾶν , αἰσχυνοίμην ἄν .
but as for those who exalt me, if I should prove not to know how to honour them in return, I should be ashamed.


3.4.9
1102
καὶ ὁ Λύσανδρος εἶπεν ·
And Lysander said:


3.4.9
1103
ἀλλ’ ἴσως καὶ μᾶλλον εἰκότα σὺ ποιεῖς ἢ ἐγὼ ἔπραττον .
Well, perhaps it is indeed true that you are acting more properly than I acted.


3.4.9
1104
τάδε οὖν μοι ἐκ τοῦ λοιποῦ χάρισαι , ὅπως ἂν μήτ’ αἰσχύνωμαι ἀδυνατῶν παρὰ σοὶ μήτ’ ἐμποδών σοι ὦ , ἀπόπεμψόν ποί με .
Therefore grant me this favour at least: in order that I may not be shamed by having no influence with you, and may not be in your way, send me off somewhere.


3.4.10
1105
ὅπου γὰρ ἂν ὦ , πειράσομαι ἐν καιρῷ σοι εἶναι .
For, wherever I may be, I shall endeavour to be useful to you.


3.4.10
1106
εἰπόντος δὲ ταῦτα ἔδοξε καὶ τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ οὕτω ποιῆσαι , καὶ πέμπει αὐτὸν ἐφ’ Ἑλλησπόντου .
When he had thus spoken, Agesilaus also thought it best to follow this course, and he sent him to the Hellespont.


3.4.10
1107
ἐκεῖ δὲ ὁ Λύσανδρος αἰσθόμενος Σπιθριδάτην τὸν Πέρσην ἐλαττούμενόν τι ὑπὸ Φαρναβάζου , διαλέγεται αὐτῷ καὶ πείθει ἀποστῆναι ἔχοντα τούς τε παῖδας καὶ τὰ περὶ αὑτὸν χρήματα καὶ ἱππέας ὡς διακοσίους .
There Lysander, upon learning that Spithridates the Persian had suffered a slight at the hands of Pharnabazus, had a conference with him and persuaded him to revolt, taking with him his children and the money he had at hand and about two hundred horsemen.


3.4.10
1108
καὶ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα κατέλιπεν ἐν Κυζίκῳ , αὐτὸν δὲ καὶ τὸν υἱὸν ἀναβιβασάμενος ἧκεν ἄγων πρὸς Ἀγησίλαον .
And Lysander left everything else at Cyzicus, but put Spithridates himself and his son on board ship and brought them with him to Agesilaus.


3.4.10
1109
ἰδὼν δὲ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ἥσθη τε τῇ πράξει καὶ εὐθὺς ἀνεπυνθάνετο περὶ τῆς Φαρναβάζου χώρας τε καὶ ἀρχῆς .
And when Agesilaus saw them, he was pleased with the exploit, and immediately inquired about the territory and government of Pharnabazus.


3.4.11
1110
ἐπεὶ δὲ μέγα φρονήσας ὁ Τισσαφέρνης ἐπὶ τῷ καταβάντι στρατεύματι παρὰ βασιλέως προεῖπεν Ἀγησιλάῳ πόλεμον , εἰ μὴ ἀπίοι ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας , οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι σύμμαχοι καὶ Λακεδαιμονίων οἱ παρόντες μάλα ἀχθεσθέντες φανεροὶ ἐγένοντο , νομίζοντες ἐλάττω τὴν παροῦσαν εἶναι δύναμιν Ἀγησιλάῳ τῆς βασιλέως παρασκευῆς , Ἀγησίλαος δὲ μάλα φαιδρῷ τῷ προσώπῳ ἀπαγγεῖλαι Τισσαφέρνει τοὺς πρέσβεις ἐκέλευσεν ὡς πολλὴν χάριν αὐτῷ ἔχοι , ὅτι ἐπιορκήσας αὐτὸς μὲν πολεμίους τοὺς θεοὺς ἐκτήσατο , τοῖς δ’ Ἕλλησι συμμάχους ἐποίησεν .
Now when Tissaphernes, growing confident because of the army which had come down from the King, declared war upon Agesilaus if he did not depart from Asia, the allies and the Lacedaemonians who were present showed that they were greatly disturbed, thinking that the force which Agesilaus had was inferior to the King’s array; but Agesilaus, his countenance radiant, ordered the ambassadors to carry back word to Tissaphernes that he felt very grateful to him because, by violating his oath, he had made the gods enemies of his side and allies of the Greeks.


3.4.11
1111
ἐκ δὲ τούτου εὐθὺς τοῖς μὲν στρατιώταις παρήγγειλε συσκευάζεσθαι ὡς εἰς στρατείαν , ταῖς δὲ πόλεσιν εἰς ἃς ἀνάγκη ἦν ἀφικνεῖσθαι στρατευομένῳ ἐπὶ Καρίαν προεῖπεν ἀγορὰν παρασκευάζειν .
Then he straightway gave orders to the soldiers to pack up for a campaign, and sent word to the cities which had to be visited by anyone who marched upon Caria, that they should make ready a market.


3.4.11
1112
ἐπέστειλε δὲ καὶ Ἴωσι καὶ Αἰολεῦσι καὶ Ἑλλησποντίοις πέμπειν πρὸς ἑαυτὸν εἰς Ἔφεσον τοὺς συστρατευσομένους .
He also dispatched orders to the Ionians, Aeolians, and Hellespontines to send to him at Ephesus troops which should take part in the campaign.


3.4.12
1113
ὁ δὲ Τισσαφέρνης , καὶ ὅτι ἱππικὸν οὐκ εἶχεν ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , ἡ δὲ Καρία ἄφιππος ἦν , καὶ ὅτι ἡγεῖτο αὐτὸν ὀργίζεσθαι αὐτῷ διὰ τὴν ἀπάτην , τῷ ὄντι νομίσας ἐπὶ τὸν αὑτοῦ οἶκον εἰς Καρίαν αὐτὸν ὁρμήσειν , τὸ μὲν πεζὸν ἅπαν διεβίβασεν ἐκεῖσε , τὸ δ’ ἱππικὸν εἰς τὸ Μαιάνδρου πεδίον περιῆγε , νομίζων ἱκανὸς εἶναι καταπατῆσαι τῇ ἵππῳ τοὺς Ἕλληνας , πρὶν εἰς τὰ δύσιππα ἀφικέσθαι .
Now Tissaphernes, both because Agesilaus had no cavalry (and Caria was unsuited for cavalry), and because he believed that he was angry with him on account of his treachery, made up his mind that he was really going to march against his own residence in Caria, and accordingly sent all his infantry across into that province, and as for his cavalry, he led it round into the plain of the Maeander, thinking that he was strong enough to trample the Greeks under foot with his horsemen before they should reach the regions which were unfit for cavalry.


3.4.12
1114
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος ἀντὶ τοῦ ἐπὶ Καρίαν ἰέναι εὐθὺς τ- ἐναντία ἀποστρέψας ἐπὶ Φρυγίας ἐπορεύετο , καὶ τάς τ’ ἐν τῇ πορείᾳ πόλεις κατεστρέφετο καὶ ἐμβαλὼν ἀπροσδοκήτοις παμπλήθη χρήματα ἐλάμβανε .
Agesilaus, however, instead of proceeding against Caria, straightway turned in the opposite direction and marched towards Phrygia, and he picked up and led along with him the contingents which met him on the march, subdued the cities, and, since he fell upon them unexpectedly, obtained great quantities of booty.


3.4.13
1115
καὶ τὸν μὲν ἄλλον χρόνον ἀσφαλῶς διεπορεύετο ·
Most of the time he pursued his march through the country in safety;


3.4.13
1116
οὐ πόρρω δ’ ὄντος Δασκυλείου , προϊόντος αὐτοῦ οἱ ἱππεῖς ἤλαυνον ἐπὶ λόφον τινά , ὡς προΐδοιεν τί τ- ἔμπροσθεν εἴη .
but when he was not far from Dascyleium, his horsemen, who were going on ahead of him, rode to the top of a hill so as to see what was in front.


3.4.13
1117
κατὰ τύχην δέ τινα καὶ οἱ τοῦ Φαρναβάζου ἱππεῖς οἱ περὶ Ῥαθίνην καὶ Βαγαῖον τὸν νόθον ἀδελφόν , ὄντες παρόμοιοι τοῖς Ἕλλησι τὸν ἀριθμόν , πεμφθέντες ὑπὸ Φαρναβάζου ἤλαυνον καὶ οὗτοι ἐπὶ τὸν αὐτὸν τοῦτον λόφον .
And by chance the horsemen of Pharnabazus, under the command of Rhathines and Bagaeus, his bastard brother, just about equal to the Greek cavalry in number, had been sent out by Pharnabazus and likewise rode to the top of this same hill.


3.4.13
1118
ἰδόντες δὲ ἀλλήλους οὐδὲ τέτταρα πλέθρα ἀπέχοντας , τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἔστησαν ἀμφότεροι , οἱ μὲν Ἕλληνες ἱππεῖς ὥσπερ φάλαγξ ἐπὶ τεττάρων παρατεταγμένοι , οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι τοὺς πρώτους οὐ πλέον ἢ εἰς δώδεκα ποιήσαντες , τὸ βάθος δ’ ἐπὶ πολλῶν .
And when the two squadrons saw one another, not so much as four plethra apart, at first both halted, the Greek horsemen being drawn up four deep like a phalanx, and the barbarians with a front of not more than twelve, but many men deep.


3.4.13
1119
ἔπειτα μέντοι πρόσθεν ὥρμησαν οἱ βάρβαροι .
Then, however, the barbarians charged.


3.4.14
1120
ὡς δ’ εἰς χεῖρας ἦλθον , ὅσοι μὲν τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἔπαισάν τινας , πάντες συνέτριψαν τὰ δόρατα , οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι κρανέϊνα παλτὰ ἔχοντες ταχὺ δώδεκα μὲν ἱππέας , δύο δ’ ἵππους ἀπέκτειναν .
When they came to a hand-to-hand encounter, all of the Greeks who struck anyone broke their spears, while the barbarians, being armed with javelins of cornel-wood, speedily killed twelve men and two horses.


3.4.14
1121
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἐτρέφθησαν οἱ Ἕλληνες ἱππεῖς .
Thereupon the Greeks were turned to flight.


3.4.14
1122
βοηθήσαντος δὲ Ἀγησιλάου σὺν τοῖς ὁπλίταις , πάλιν ἀπεχώρουν οἱ βάρβαροι , καὶ Περσῶν εἷς αὐτῶν ἀποθνῄσκει .
But when Agesilaus came to the rescue with the hoplites, the barbarians withdrew again and one of them was killed.


3.4.15
1123
γενομένης δὲ ταύτης τῆς ἱππομαχίας , θυομένῳ τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐπὶ προόδῳ ἄλοβα γίγνεται τὰ ἱερά .
After this cavalry battle had taken place and Agesilaus on the next day was offering sacrifices with a view to an advance, the livers of the victims were found to be lacking a lobe.


3.4.15
1124
τούτου μέντοι φανέντος στρέψας ἐπορεύετο ἐπὶ θάλατταν .
This sign having presented itself, he turned and marched to the sea.


3.4.15
1125
γιγνώσκων δὲ ὅτι εἰ μὴ ἱππικὸν ἱκανὸν κτήσαιτο , οὐ δυνήσοιτο κατὰ τὰ πεδία στρατεύεσθαι , ἔγνω τοῦτο κατασκευαστέον εἶναι , ὡς μὴ δραπετεύοντα πολεμεῖν δέοι .
And perceiving that, unless he obtained an adequate cavalry force, he would not be able to campaign in the plains, he resolved that this must be provided, so that he might not have to carry on a skulking warfare.


3.4.15
1126
καὶ τοὺς μὲν πλουσιωτάτους ἐκ πασῶν τῶν ἐκεῖ πόλεων ἱπποτροφεῖν κατέλεξε ·
Accordingly he assigned the richest men of all the cities in that region to the duty of raising horses;


3.4.15
1127
προειπὼν δέ , ὅστις παρέχοιτο ἵππον καὶ ὅπλα καὶ ἄνδρα δόκιμον , ὅτι ἐξέσται αὐτῷ μὴ στρατεύεσθαι , ἐποίησεν οὕτω ταῦτα συντόμως πράττεσθαι ὥσπερ ἄν τις τὸν ὑπὲρ αὑτοῦ ἀποθανούμενον προθύμως ζητοίη .
and by proclaiming that whoever supplied a horse and arms and a competent man would not have to serve himself, he caused these arrangements to be carried out with all the expedition that was to be expected when men were eagerly looking for substitutes to die in their stead.


3.4.16
1128
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἐπειδὴ ἔαρ ὑπέφαινε , συνήγαγε μὲν ἅπαν τὸ στράτευμα εἰς Ἔφεσον ·
After this, when spring was just coming on, he gathered his whole army at Ephesus;


3.4.16
1129
ἀσκῆσαι δ’ αὐτὸ βουλόμενος ἆθλα προύθηκε ταῖς τε ὁπλιτικαῖς τάξεσιν , ἥτις ἄριστα σωμάτων ἔχοι , καὶ ταῖς ἱππικαῖς , ἥτις κράτιστα ἱππεύοι ·
and desiring to train the army, he offered prizes both to the heavy-armed divisions, for the division which should be in the best physical condition, and to the cavalry divisions, for the one which should show the best horsemanship;


3.4.16
1130
καὶ πελτασταῖς δὲ καὶ τοξόταις ἆθλα προύθηκεν , ὅσοι κράτιστοι πρὸς τὰ προσήκοντα ἔργα φανεῖεν .
and he also offered prizes to peltasts and bowmen, for all who should prove themselves best in their respective duties.


3.4.16
1131
ἐκ τούτου δὲ παρῆν ὁρᾶν τὰ μὲν γυμνάσια πάντα μεστὰ ἀνδρῶν τῶν γυμναζομένων , τὸν δ’ ἱππόδρομον τῶν ἱππαζομένων , τοὺς δὲ ἀκοντιστὰς καὶ τοὺς τοξότας μελετῶντας .
Thereupon one might have seen all the gymnasia full of men exercising, the hippodrome full of riders, and the javelin-men and bowmen practising.


3.4.17
1132
ἀξίαν δὲ καὶ ὅλην τὴν πόλιν ἐν ᾗ ἦν τὴν Ἔφεσον θέας ἐποίησεν ·
In fact, he made the entire city, where he was staying, a sight worth seeing;


3.4.17
1133
ἥ τε γὰρ ἀγορὰ ἦν μεστὴ παντοδαπῶν καὶ ἵππων καὶ ὅπλων ὠνίων , οἵ τε χαλκοτύποι καὶ οἱ τέκτονες καὶ οἱ χαλκεῖς καὶ οἱ σκυτοτόμοι καὶ οἱ ζωγράφοι πάντες πολεμικὰ ὅπλα κατεσκεύαζον , ὥστε τὴν πόλιν ὄντως οἴεσθαι πολέμου ἐργαστήριον εἶναι .
for the market was full of all sorts of horses and weapons, offered for sale, and the copper-workers, carpenters, smiths, leather-cutters, and painters were all engaged in making martial weapons, so that one might have thought that the city was really a workshop of war.


3.4.18
1134
ἐπερρώσθη δ’ ἄν τις κ- ἐκεῖνο ἰδών , Ἀγησίλαον μὲν πρῶτον , ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους στρατιώτας ἐστεφανωμένους ἀπὸ τῶν γυμνασίων ἀπιόντας καὶ ἀνατιθέντας τοὺς στεφάνους τῇ Ἀρτέμιδι .
And one would have been encouraged at another sight also—Agesilaus in the van, and after him the rest of the soldiers, returning garlanded from the gymnasia and dedicating their garlands to Artemis.


3.4.18
1135
ὅπου γὰρ ἄνδρες θεοὺς μὲν σέβοιντο , τὰ δὲ πολεμικὰ ἀσκοῖεν , πειθαρχεῖν δὲ μελετῷεν , πῶς οὐκ εἰκὸς ἐνταῦθα πάντα μεστὰ ἐλπίδων ἀγαθῶν εἶναι ;
For where men reverence the gods, train themselves in deeds of war, and practise obedience to authority, may we not reasonably suppose that such a place abounds in high hopes?


3.4.19
1136
ἡγούμενος δὲ καὶ τὸ καταφρονεῖν τῶν πολεμίων ῥώμην τινὰ ἐμβάλλειν πρὸς τὸ μάχεσθαι , προεῖπε τοῖς κήρυξι τοὺς ὑπὸ τῶν λῃστῶν ἁλισκομένους βαρβάρους γυμνοὺς πωλεῖν .
And again, believing that to feel contempt for one’s enemies infuses a certain courage for the fight, Agesilaus gave orders to his heralds that the barbarians who were captured by the Greek raiding parties should be exposed for sale naked.


3.4.19
1137
ὁρῶντες οὖν οἱ στρατιῶται λευκοὺς μὲν διὰ τὸ μηδέποτε ἐκδύεσθαι , μαλακοὺς δὲ καὶ ἀπόνους διὰ τὸ ἀεὶ ἐπ’ ὀχημάτων εἶναι , ἐνόμισαν οὐδὲν διοίσειν τὸν πόλεμον ἢ εἰ γυναιξὶ δέοι μάχεσθαι .
Thus the soldiers, seeing that these men were white-skinned because they never were without their clothing, and soft and unused to toil because they always rode in carriages, came to the conclusion that the war would be in no way different from having to fight with women.


3.4.20
1138
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ καὶ ὁ ἐνιαυτὸς ἤδη ἀφ’ οὗ ἐξέπλευσεν ὁ Ἀγησίλαος διεληλύθει , ὥστε οἱ μὲν περὶ Λύσανδρον τριάκοντα οἴκαδε ἀπέπλεον , διάδοχοι δ’ αὐτοῖς οἱ περὶ Ἡριππίδαν παρῆσαν .
Meanwhile the year had now ended since the time when Agesilaus had set sail from Greece, so that Lysander and the thirty Spartiatae sailed back home, and Herippidas with his thirty came as their successors.


3.4.20
1139
τούτων Ξενοκλέα μὲν καὶ ἄλλον ἔταξεν ἐπὶ τοὺς ἱππέας , Σκύθην δὲ ἐπὶ τοὺς νεοδαμώδεις ὁπλίτας , Ἡριππίδαν δ’ ἐπὶ τοὺς Κυρείους , Μύγδωνα δὲ ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν πόλεων στρατιώτας , καὶ προεῖπεν αὐτοῖς ὡς εὐθὺς ἡγήσοιτο τὴν συντομωτάτην ἐπὶ τὰ κράτιστα τῆς χώρας , ὅπως αὐτόθεν οὕτω τὰ σώματα καὶ τὴν γνώμην παρασκευάζοιντο ὡς ἀγωνιούμενοι .
Of these, Agesilaus assigned Xenocles and one other to the command of the cavalry, Scythes to the command of the Helot hoplites, Herippidas to the Cyreans, and Mygdon to the troops from the allied cities, and he announced to them that he would immediately lead them by the shortest route to the best parts of the country, his object being to have them begin at once to prepare their bodies and spirits for the fray.


3.4.21
1140
ὁ μέντοι Τισσαφέρνης ταῦτα μὲν ἐνόμισε λέγειν αὐτὸν πάλιν βουλόμενον ἐξαπατῆσαι , εἰς Καρίαν δὲ νῦν τῷ ὄντι ἐμβαλεῖν , καὶ τό τε πεζὸν καθάπερ τὸ πρόσθεν εἰς Καρίαν διεβίβασε καὶ τὸ ἱππικὸν εἰς τὸ Μαιάνδρου πεδίον κατέστησεν .
Tissaphernes, however, thought that he was saying this from a desire to deceive him again, and that this time he would really invade Caria, and accordingly he sent his infantry across into Caria, just as before, and stationed his cavalry in the plain of the Maeander.


3.4.21
1141
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος οὐκ ἐψεύσατο , ἀλλ’ ὥσπερ προεῖπεν εὐθὺς εἰς τὸν Σαρδιανὸν τόπον ἐνέβαλε .
Agesilaus, however, did not belie his words, but, even as he had announced, marched straight to the neighbourhood of Sardis.


3.4.21
1142
καὶ τρεῖς μὲν ἡμέρας δι’ ἐρημίας πολεμίων πορευόμενος πολλὰ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια τῇ στρατιᾷ εἶχε , τῇ δὲ τετάρτῃ ἧκον οἱ τῶν πολεμίων ἱππεῖς .
For three days he proceeded through a country bare of enemies, and had provisions for the army in abundance, but on the fourth day the cavalry of the enemy came up.


3.4.22
1143
καὶ τῷ μὲν ἄρχοντι τῶν σκευοφόρων εἶπε διαβάντι τὸν Πακτωλὸν ποταμὸν στρατοπεδεύεσθαι , αὐτοὶ δὲ κατιδόντες τοὺς τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἀκολούθους ἐσπαρμένους εἰς ἁρπαγὴν πολλοὺς αὐτῶν ἀπέκτειναν .
And their commander told the leader of the baggage-train to cross the Pactolus river and encamp, while the horsemen themselves, getting sight of the camp-followers on the side of the Greeks, scattered for plunder, killed a large number of them.


3.4.22
1144
αἰσθόμενος δὲ Ἀγησίλαος , βοηθεῖν ἐκέλευσε τοὺς ἱππέας .
On perceiving this Agesilaus ordered his horsemen to go to their aid.


3.4.22
1145
οἱ δ’ αὖ Πέρσαι ὡς εἶδον τὴν βοήθειαν , ἡθροίσθησαν καὶ ἀντιπαρετάξαντο παμπλήθεσι τῶν ἱππέων τάξεσιν .
And the Persians, in their turn, when they saw this movement, gathered together and formed an opposing line, with very many companies of their horsemen.


3.4.23
1146
ἔνθα δὴ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος γιγνώσκων ὅτι τοῖς μὲν πολεμίοις οὔπω παρείη τὸ πεζόν , αὐτῷ δὲ οὐδὲν ἀπείη τῶν παρεσκευασμένων , καιρὸν ἡγήσατο μάχην συνάψαι , εἰ δύναιτο .
Then Agesilaus, aware that the infantry of the enemy was not yet at hand, while on his side none of the arms which had been made ready was missing, deemed it a fit time to join battle if he could.


3.4.23
1147
σφαγιασάμενος οὖν τὴν μὲν φάλαγγα εὐθὺς ἦγεν ἐπὶ τοὺς παρατεταγμένους ἱππέας , ἐκ δὲ τῶν ὁπλιτῶν ἐκέλευσε τὰ δέκα ἀφ’ ἥβης θεῖν ὁμόσε αὐτοῖς , τοῖς δὲ πελτασταῖς εἶπε δρόμῳ ὑφηγεῖσθαι .
Therefore, after offering sacrifice, he at once led his phalanx against the opposing line of horsemen, ordering the first ten year-classes of the hoplites to run to close quarters with the enemy, and bidding the peltasts lead the way at a double-quick.


3.4.23
1148
παρήγγειλε δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν ἐμβάλλειν , ὡς αὐτοῦ τε καὶ παντὸς τοῦ στρατεύματος ἑπομένου .
He also sent word to his cavalry to attack, in the assurance that he and the whole army were following them.


3.4.24
1149
τοὺς μὲν δὴ ἱππέας ἐδέξαντο οἱ Πέρσαι ·
Now the Persians met the attack of the cavalry;


3.4.24
1150
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἅμα πάντα τὰ δεινὰ παρῆν , ἐνέκλιναν , καὶ οἱ μὲν αὐτῶν εὐθὺς ἐν τῷ ποταμῷ ἔπεσον , οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι ἔφευγον .
but when the whole formidable array together was upon them, they gave way, and some of them were struck down at once in crossing the river, while the rest fled on.


3.4.24
1151
οἱ δ’ Ἕλληνες ἐπακολουθοῦντες αἱροῦσι καὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον αὐτῶν .
And the Greeks, pursuing them, captured their camp as well.


3.4.24
1152
καὶ οἱ μὲν πελτασταί , ὥσπερ εἰκός , εἰς ἁρπαγὴν ἐτράποντο ·
Then the peltasts, as was natural, betook themselves to plundering;


3.4.24
1153
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος κύκλῳ πάντα καὶ φίλια καὶ πολέμια περιεστρατοπεδεύσατο .
but Agesilaus enclosed all alike, friends as well as foes, within the circle of his camp.


3.4.24
1154
καὶ ἄλλα τε πολλὰ χρήματα ἐλήφθη , ἃ ηὗρε πλέον ἢ ἑβδομήκοντα τάλαντα , καὶ αἱ κάμηλοι δὲ τότε ἐλήφθησαν , ἃς Ἀγησίλαος εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἀπήγαγεν .
And not only was much other property captured, which fetched more than seventy talents, but it was at this time that the camels also were captured which Agesilaus brought back with him to Greece.


3.4.25
1155
ὅτε δ’ αὕτη ἡ μάχη ἐγένετο , Τισσαφέρνης ἐν Σάρδεσιν ἔτυχεν ὤν ·
When this battle took place Tissaphernes chanced to be at Sardis,


3.4.25
1156
ὥστε ᾐτιῶντο οἱ Πέρσαι προδεδόσθαι ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ .
so that the Persians charged him with having betrayed them.


3.4.25
1157
γνοὺς δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ Περσῶν βασιλεὺς Τισσαφέρνην αἴτιον εἶναι τοῦ κακῶς φέρεσθαι τὰ ἑαυτοῦ , Τιθραύστην καταπέμψας ἀποτέμνει αὐτοῦ τὴν κεφαλήν .
Furthermore, the Persian King himself concluded that Tissaphernes was responsible for the bad turn his affairs were taking, and accordingly sent down Tithraustes and cut off his head.


3.4.25
1158
τοῦτο δὲ ποιήσας ὁ Τιθραύστης πέμπει πρὸς τὸν Ἀγησίλαον πρέσβεις λέγοντας ·
After he had done this, Tithraustes sent ambassadors to Agesilaus with this message:


3.4.25
1159
ὦ Ἀγησίλαε , ὁ μὲν αἴτιος τῶν πραγμάτων καὶ ὑμῖν καὶ ἡμῖν ἔχει τὴν δίκην ·
Agesilaus, the man who was responsible for the trouble in your eyes and ours has received his punishment;


3.4.25
1160
βασιλεὺς δὲ ἀξιοῖ σὲ μὲν ἀποπλεῖν οἴκαδε , τὰς δ’ ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ πόλεις αὐτονόμους οὔσας τὸν ἀρχαῖον δασμὸν αὐτῷ ἀποφέρειν .
and the King deems it fitting that you should sail back home, and that the cities in Asia, retaining their independence, should render him the ancient tribute.


3.4.26
1161
ἀποκριναμένου δὲ τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου ὅτι οὐκ ἂν ποιήσειε ταῦτα ἄνευ τῶν οἴκοι τελῶν , Σὺ δ’ ἀλλά , ἕως ἂν πύθῃ τὰ παρὰ τῆς πόλεως , μεταχώρησον , ἔφη , εἰς τὴν Φαρναβάζου , ἐπειδὴ καὶ ἐγὼ τὸν σὸν ἐχθρὸν τετιμώρημαι .
When Agesilaus replied that he could not do this without the sanction of the authorities at home, Tithraustes said, But at least, until you receive word from the city, go over into the territory of Pharnabazus, since it is I who have taken vengeance upon your enemy.


3.4.26
1162
ἕως ἂν τοίνυν , ἔφη ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , ἐκεῖσε πορεύωμαι , δίδου δὴ τῇ στρατιᾷ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια .
Then, until I go there, said Agesilaus, give me provisions for the army.


3.4.26
1163
ἐκείνῳ μὲν δὴ ὁ Τιθραύστης δίδωσι τριάκοντα τάλαντα ·
Tithraustes accordingly gave him thirty talents;


3.4.26
1164
ὁ δὲ λαβὼν ᾔει ἐπὶ τὴν Φαρναβάζου Φρυγίαν .
and he took it and set out for Pharnabazus’ province of Phrygia.


3.4.27
1165
ὄντι δ’ αὐτῷ ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ τῷ ὑπὲρ Κύμης ἔρχεται ἀπὸ τῶν οἴκοι τελῶν ἄρχειν καὶ τοῦ ναυτικοῦ ὅπως γιγνώσκοι καὶ καταστήσασθαι ναύαρχον ὅντινα αὐτὸς βούλοιτο .
And when he was in the plain which is above Cyme, orders came to him from the authorities at home to exercise command as he thought best over the fleet also, and to appoint as admiral whomsoever he wished.


3.4.27
1166
τοῦτο δ’ ἐποίησαν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τοιῷδε λογισμῷ , ὡς , εἰ ὁ αὐτὸς ἀμφοτέρων ἄρχοι , τό τε πεζὸν πολὺ ἂν ἰσχυρότερον εἶναι , καθ’ ἓν οὔσης τῆς ἰσχύος ἀμφοτέροις , τό τε ναυτικόν , ἐπιφαινομένου τοῦ πεζοῦ ἔνθα δέοι .
Now the Lacedaemonians did this because they reasoned that if the same man were in command of both army and fleet, the army would be much stronger because the strength of both would be united, and the fleet likewise because the army would appear wherever it was needed.


3.4.28
1167
ἀκούσας δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , πρῶτον μὲν ταῖς πόλεσι παρήγγειλε ταῖς ἐν ταῖς νήσοις καὶ ταῖς ἐπιθαλαττιδίοις τριήρεις ποιεῖσθαι ὁπόσας ἑκάστη βούλοιτο τῶν πόλεων .
But when Agesilaus heard this, in the first place he sent orders to the cities in the islands and on the coast to build triremes in such numbers as the several cities desired.


3.4.28
1168
καὶ ἐγένοντο καιναί , ἐξ ὧν αἵ τε πόλεις ἐπηγγείλαντο καὶ οἱ ἰδιῶται ἐποιοῦντο χαρίζεσθαι βουλόμενοι , εἰς εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατόν .
And the result was new triremes to the number of one hundred and twenty, consisting of those which the cities offered and those which private individuals built out of desire to please Agesilaus.


3.4.29
1169
Πείσανδρον δὲ τὸν τῆς γυναικὸς ἀδελφὸν ναύαρχον κατέστησε , φιλότιμον μὲν καὶ ἐρρωμένον τὴν ψυχήν , ἀπειρότερον δὲ τοῦ παρασκευάζεσθαι ὡς δεῖ .
Then he appointed as admiral Peisander, his wife’s brother, a man who was ambitious and of a stout spirit, but rather inexperienced in making such provisions as were needful.


3.4.29
1170
καὶ Πείσανδρος μὲν ἀπελθὼν τὰ ναυτικὰ ἔπραττεν ·
So Peisander departed and busied himself with naval matters;


3.4.29
1171
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος , ὥσπερ ὥρμησεν , ἐπὶ τὴν Φρυγίαν ἐπορεύετο .
and Agesilaus continued the march to Phrygia on which he had set out.


3.5.1
1172
ὁ μέντοι Τιθραύστης , καταμαθεῖν δοκῶν τὸν Ἀγησίλαον καταφρονοῦντα τῶν βασιλέως πραγμάτων καὶ οὐδαμῇ διανοούμενον ἀπιέναι ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας , ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ἐλπίδας ἔχοντα μεγάλας αἱρήσειν βασιλέα , ἀπορῶν τί χρῷτο τοῖς πράγμασι , πέμπει Τιμοκράτην τὸν Ῥόδιον εἰς Ἑλλάδα , δοὺς χρυσίον εἰς πεντήκοντα τάλαντα ἀργυρίου , καὶ κελεύει πειρᾶσθαι πιστὰ τὰ μέγιστα λαμβάνοντα διδόναι τοῖς προεστηκόσιν ἐν ταῖς πόλεσιν ἐφ’ ᾧτε πόλεμον ἐξοίσειν πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους .
But now Tithraustes, who thought he had found out that Agesilaus despised the power of the King and did not in the least intend to depart from Asia, but rather had great hopes that he would overcome the King, being perplexed to know how to deal with the situation, sent Timocrates the Rhodian to Greece, giving him gold to the value of fifty talents of silver, and bade him undertake, on receipt of the surest pledges, to give this money to the leaders in the various states on condition that they should make war upon the Lacedaemonians.


3.5.1
1173
ἐκεῖνος δ’ ἐλθὼν δίδωσιν ἐν Θήβαις μὲν Ἀνδροκλείδᾳ τε καὶ Ἰσμηνίᾳ καὶ Γαλαξιδώρῳ , ἐν Κορίνθῳ δὲ Τιμολάῳ τε καὶ Πολυάνθει , ἐν Ἄργει δὲ Κύλωνί τε καὶ τοῖς μετ’ αὐτοῦ .
So Timocrates went and gave his money, at Thebes to Androcleidas, Ismenias, and Galaxidorus; at Corinth to Timolaus and Polyanthes; and at Argos to Cylon and his followers.


3.5.2
1174
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ καὶ οὐ μεταλαβόντες τούτου τοῦ χρυσίου ὅμως πρόθυμοι ἦσαν εἰς τὸν πόλεμον , νομίζοντές τε αὐτῶν ἄρχεσθαι .
And the Athenians, even though they did not receive a share of this gold, were nevertheless eager for the war, thinking that theirs was the right to rule.


3.5.2
1175
οἱ μὲν δὴ δεξάμενοι τὰ χρήματα εἰς τὰς οἰκείας πόλεις διέβαλλον τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ·
Then those who had taken the money set to work in their own states to defame the Lacedaemonians;


3.5.2
1176
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταύτας εἰς μῖσος αὐτῶν προήγαγον , συνίστασαν καὶ τὰς μεγίστας πόλεις πρὸς ἀλλήλας .
and when they had brought their people to a feeling of hatred toward them, they undertook, further, to unite the largest states with one another.


3.5.3
1177
γιγνώσκοντες δὲ οἱ ἐν ταῖς Θήβαις προεστῶτες ὅτι εἰ μή τις ἄρξει πολέμου , οὐκ ἐθελήσουσιν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι λύειν τὰς σπονδὰς πρὸς τοὺς συμμάχους , πείθουσι Λοκροὺς τοὺς Ὀπουντίους , ἐκ τῆς ἀμφισβητησίμου χώρας Φωκεῦσί τε καὶ ἑαυτοῖς , χρήματα τελέσαι , νομίζοντες τοὺς Φωκέας τούτου γενομένου ἐμβαλεῖν εἰς τὴν Λοκρίδα .
But the leading men in Thebes, being aware that unless someone began war the Lacedaemonians would not break the peace with their allies, persuaded the Opuntian Locrians to levy money from the territory which was in dispute between the Phocians and themselves, for they thought that if this was done the Phocians would invade Locris.


3.5.3
1178
καὶ οὐκ ἐψεύσθησαν , ἀλλ’ εὐθὺς οἱ Φωκεῖς ἐμβαλόντες εἰς τὴν Λοκρίδα πολλαπλάσια χρήματα ἔλαβον .
And they were not disappointed, for the Phocians did at once invade Locris and seize property many times as valuable.


3.5.4
1179
οἱ οὖν περὶ τὸν Ἀνδροκλείδαν ταχὺ ἔπεισαν τοὺς Θηβαίους βοηθεῖν τοῖς Λοκροῖς , ὡς οὐκ εἰς τὴν ἀμφισβητήσιμον , ἀλλ’ εἰς τὴν ὁμολογουμένην φίλην τε καὶ σύμμαχον εἶναι Λοκρίδα ἐμβεβληκότων αὐτῶν .
Then Androcleidas and his followers speedily persuaded the Thebans to aid the Locrians, on the ground that the Phocians had invaded, not the disputed territory, but Locris, which was admitted to be a friendly and allied country.


3.5.4
1180
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἀντεμβαλόντες εἰς τὴν Φωκίδα ἐδῄουν τὴν χώραν , εὐθὺς οἱ Φωκεῖς πέμπουσι πρέσβεις εἰς Λακεδαίμονα καὶ ἠξίουν βοηθεῖν αὑτοῖς , διδάσκοντες ὡς οὐκ ἤρξαντο πολέμου , ἀλλ’ ἀμυνόμενοι ἦλθον ἐπὶ τοὺς Λοκρούς .
And when the Thebans made a counter-invasion into Phocis and laid waste the land, the Phocians straightway sent ambassadors to Lacedaemon and asked the Lacedaemonians to aid them, setting forth that they had not begun war, but had gone against the Locrians in self-defence.


3.5.5
1181
οἱ μέντοι Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἄσμενοι ἔλαβον πρόφασιν στρατεύειν ἐπὶ τοὺς Θηβαίους , πάλαι ὀργιζόμενοι αὐτοῖς τῆς τε ἀντιλήψεως τῆς τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος δεκάτης ἐν Δεκελείᾳ καὶ τοῦ ἐπὶ τὸν Πειραιᾶ μὴ ἐθελῆσαι ἀκολουθῆσαι .
Now the Lacedaemonians were glad to seize a pretext for undertaking a campaign against the Thebans, for they had long been angry with them both on account of their claiming Apollo’s tenth at Decelea and their refusing to follow them against Piraeus.


3.5.5
1182
ᾐτιῶντο δ’ αὐτοὺς καὶ Κορινθίους πεῖσαι μὴ συστρατεύειν .
Furthermore, they charged them with persuading the Corinthians likewise not to join in that campaign.


3.5.5
1183
ἀνεμιμνῄσκοντο δὲ καὶ ὡς θύειν τ’ ἐν Αὐλίδι τὸν Ἀγησίλαον οὐκ εἴων καὶ τὰ τεθυμένα ἱερὰ ὡς ἔρριψαν ἀπὸ τοῦ βωμοῦ καὶ ὅτι οὐδ’ εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν Ἀγησιλάῳ συνεστράτευον .
Again, they recalled that they had refused to permit Agesilaus to sacrifice at Aulis and had cast from the altar the victims already offered, and that they also would not join Agesilaus for the campaign in Asia.


3.5.5
1184
ἐλογίζοντο δὲ καὶ καλὸν καιρὸν εἶναι τοῦ ἐξάγειν στρατιὰν ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς καὶ παῦσαι τῆς εἰς αὐτοὺς ὕβρεως ·
They also reasoned that it was a favourable time to lead forth an army against the Thebans and put a stop to their insolent behaviour toward them;


3.5.5
1185
τά τε γὰρ ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ καλῶς σφίσιν ἔχειν , κρατοῦντος Ἀγησιλάου , καὶ ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι οὐδένα ἄλλον πόλεμον ἐμποδὼν σφίσιν εἶναι .
for matters in Asia were in an excellent condition for them, Agesilaus being victorious, and in Greece there was no other war to hinder them.


3.5.6
1186
οὕτω δὲ γιγνωσκούσης τῆς πόλεως τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων φρουρὰν μὲν οἱ ἔφοροι ἔφαινον , Λύσανδρον δ’ ἐξέπεμψαν εἰς Φωκέας καὶ ἐκέλευσαν αὐτούς τε τοὺς Φωκέας ἄγοντα παρεῖναι καὶ Οἰταίους καὶ Ἡρακλεώτας καὶ Μηλιέας καὶ Αἰνιᾶνας εἰς Ἁλίαρτον .
The city of the Lacedaemonians being thus minded, the ephors called out the ban and sent Lysander to Phocis with orders to report at Haliartus, bringing with him the Phocians themselves and also the Oetaeans, Heracleots, Malians, and Aenianians.


3.5.6
1187
ἐκεῖσε δὲ καὶ Παυσανίας , ὅσπερ ἔμελλεν ἡγεῖσθαι , συνετίθετο παρέσεσθαι εἰς ῥητὴν ἡμέραν , ἔχων Λακεδαιμονίους τε καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους Πελοποννησίους .
And Pausanias also, who was to have chief command, agreed to appear at Haliartus on an appointed day, with the troops of the Lacedaemonians and the other Peloponnesians.


3.5.6
1188
καὶ ὁ μὲν Λύσανδρος τά τε ἄλλα τὰ κελευόμενα ἔπραττε καὶ προσέτι Ὀρχομενίους ἀπέστησε Θηβαίων .
Now Lysander carried out all his orders and, besides, caused the Orchomenians to revolt from the Thebans.


3.5.7
1189
ὁ δὲ Παυσανίας , ἐπεὶ τὰ διαβατήρια ἐγένετο αὐτῷ , καθεζόμενος ἐν Τεγέᾳ τούς τε ξεναγοὺς διέπεμπε καὶ τοὺς ἐκ τῶν περιοικίδων στρατιώτας περιέμενεν .
And Pausanias, when his sacrifice at the frontier proved favourable, sent out his officers to muster the allies, and waited for the troops from the outlying towns of Laconia, he meanwhile resting at Tegea.


3.5.7
1190
ἐπεί γε μὴν δῆλον τοῖς Θηβαίοις ἐγένετο ὅτι ἐμβαλοῖεν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι εἰς τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν , πρέσβεις ἔπεμψαν Ἀθήναζε λέγοντας τοιάδε .
But when it became clear to the Thebans that the Lacedaemonians were going to invade their land, they sent ambassadors to Athens with the following message:


3.5.8
1191
ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , ἃ μὲν μέμφεσθε ἡμῖν ὡς ψηφισαμένων χαλεπὰ περὶ ὑμῶν ἐν τῇ καταλύσει τοῦ πολέμου , οὐκ ὀρθῶς μέμφεσθε ·
Men of Athens, as regards your complaints against us for having voted for harsh measures toward you at the conclusion of the war, your complaints are not justified;


3.5.8
1192
οὐ γὰρ ἡ πόλις ἐκεῖνα ἐψηφίσατο , ἀλλ’ εἷς ἀνὴρ εἶπεν , ὃς ἔτυχε τότε ἐν τοῖς συμμάχοις καθήμενος .
for it was not the state which voted for those measures, but only the one individual who proposed them, a man who chanced at that time to have a seat in the assembly of the allies.


3.5.8
1193
ὅτε δὲ παρεκάλουν ἡμᾶς οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐπὶ τὸν Πειραιᾶ , τότε ἅπασα ἡ πόλις ἀπεψηφίσατο μὴ συστρατεύειν αὐτοῖς .
But when the Lacedaemonians summoned us to the attack upon Piraeus, then the whole state voted not to join them in the campaign.


3.5.8
1194
δι’ ὑμᾶς οὖν οὐχ ἥκιστα ὀργιζομένων ἡμῖν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων , δίκαιον εἶναι νομίζομεν βοηθεῖν ὑμᾶς τῇ πόλει ἡμῶν .
Therefore, since it is chiefly on your account that the Lacedaemonians are angry with us, we think it is fair that you should aid our state.


3.5.9
1195
πολὺ δ’ ἔτι μᾶλλον ἀξιοῦμεν , ὅσοι τῶν ἐν ἄστει ἐγένεσθε , προθύμως ἐπὶ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἰέναι .
And we consider it in a far greater degree incumbent upon all those among you who belonged to the city party that you should zealously take the field against the Lacedaemonians.


3.5.9
1196
ἐκεῖνοι γὰρ καταστήσαντες ὑμᾶς εἰς ὀλιγαρχίαν καὶ εἰς ἔχθραν τῷ δήμῳ , ἀφικόμενοι πολλῇ δυνάμει ὡς ὑμῖν σύμμαχοι παρέδοσαν ὑμᾶς τῷ πλήθει ·
For the Lacedaemonians, after establishing you as an oligarchy and making you objects of hatred to the commons, came with a great force, ostensibly as your allies, and delivered you over to the democrats;


3.5.9
1197
ὥστε τὸ μὲν ἐπ’ ἐκείνοις εἶναι ἀπολώλατε , ὁ δὲ δῆμος οὑτοσὶ ὑμᾶς ἔσωσε .
consequently, in so far as it depended upon them, you would certainly have perished, but the commons here saved you.


3.5.10
1198
καὶ μὴν ὅτι μέν , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , βούλοισθ’ ἂν τὴν ἀρχὴν ἣν πρότερον ἐκέκτησθε ἀναλαβεῖν πάντες ἐπιστάμεθα ·
Furthermore, men of Athens, although we all understand that you would like to recover the dominion which you formerly possessed, we ask in what way this is more likely to come to pass than by your aiding those who are wronged by the Lacedaemonians?


3.5.10
1199
τοῦτο δὲ πῶς μᾶλλον εἰκὸς γενέσθαι ἢ εἰ αὐτοὶ τοῖς ὑπ’ ἐκείνων ἀδικουμένοις βοηθοῖτε ;
And do not be afraid because they rule over many, but much rather be of good courage on that account, keeping in mind your own case, that when the subjects over whom you ruled were the most numerous, then you had the most enemies.


3.5.10
1200
ὅτι δὲ πολλῶν ἄρχουσι , μὴ φοβηθῆτε , ἀλλὰ πολὺ μᾶλλον διὰ τοῦτο θαρρεῖτε , ἐνθυμούμενοι ὅτι καὶ ὑμεῖς ὅτε πλείστων ἤρχετε , τότε πλείστους ἐχθροὺς ἐκέκτησθε .
To be sure they concealed their enmity to you so long as they had no one to whom to revolt, but as soon as the Lacedaemonians offered themselves as leaders, then they showed what their feelings were toward you.


3.5.10
1201
ἀλλ’ ἕως μὲν οὐκ εἶχον ὅποι ἀποσταῖεν , ἔκρυπτον τὴν πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἔχθραν ·
To be sure they concealed their enmity to you so long as they had no one to whom to revolt, but as soon as the Lacedaemonians offered themselves as leaders, then they showed what their feelings were toward you.


3.5.10
1202
ἐπεὶ δέ γε Λακεδαιμόνιοι προύστησαν , τότε ἔφηναν οἷα περὶ ὑμῶν ἐγίγνωσκον .
And now the Eleans, whom they have robbed of much territory and many cities, have been added to the number of their enemies.


3.5.11
1203
καὶ νῦν γε , ἂν φανεροὶ γενώμεθα ἡμεῖς τε καὶ ὑμεῖς συνασπιδοῦντες ἐναντία τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις , εὖ ἴστε , ἀναφανήσονται πολλοὶ οἱ μισοῦντες αὐτούς .
Even so now, if we and you are found in arms together against the Lacedaemonians, be well assured that those who hate them will appear in full numbers.


3.5.11
1204
ὡς δὲ ἀληθῆ λέγομεν , ἐὰν ἀναλογίσησθε , αὐτίκα γνώσεσθε .
That we speak truth you will see at once if you consider the matter.


3.5.11
1205
τίς γὰρ ἤδη καταλείπεται αὐτοῖς εὐμενής ;
For who is now left that is friendly to them? Have not the Argives been hostile to them from all time?


3.5.11
1206
οὐκ Ἀργεῖοι μὲν ἀεί ποτε δυσμενεῖς αὐτοῖς ὑπάρχουσιν ;
And now the Eleans, whom they have robbed of much territory and many cities, have been added to the number of their enemies.


3.5.12
1207
Ἠλεῖοί γε μὴν νῦν ἐστερημένοι καὶ χώρας πολλῆς καὶ πόλεων ἐχθροὶ αὐτοῖς προσγεγένηνται .
As for the Corinthians, Arcadians, and Achaeans, what shall we say of them, who in the war against you, at the earnest entreaty of the Lacedaemonians, bore a share of all hardships and perils and expenses;


3.5.12
1208
Κορινθίους δὲ καὶ Ἀρκάδας καὶ Ἀχαιοὺς τί φῶμεν , οἳ ἐν μὲν τῷ πρὸς ὑμᾶς πολέμῳ μάλα λιπαρούμενοι ὑπ’ ἐκείνων πάντων καὶ πόνων καὶ κινδύνων καὶ τῶν δαπανημάτων μετεῖχον , ἐπεὶ δ’ ἔπραξαν ἃ ἐβούλοντο οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ποίας ἢ ἀρχῆς ἢ τιμῆς ἢ ποίων χρημάτων μεταδεδώκασιν αὐτοῖς ;
but when the Lacedaemonians had accomplished what they desired, what dominion or honour or what captured treasure did they ever share with them? Nay, it is their Helots whom they deem it proper to appoint as governors, while toward their allies, who are free men, they have behaved themselves like masters since they have achieved success.


3.5.12
1209
ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὲν εἵλωτας ἁρμοστὰς ἀξιοῦσι καθιστάναι , τῶν δὲ συμμάχων ἐλευθέρων ὄντων , ἐπεὶ ηὐτύχησαν , δεσπόται ἀναπεφήνασιν .
Nay, it is their Helots whom they deem it proper to appoint as governors, while toward their allies, who are free men, they have behaved themselves like masters since they have achieved success.


3.5.13
1210
ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ οὓς ὑμῶν ἀπέστησαν φανεροί εἰσιν ἐξηπατηκότες ·
Furthermore, it is plain that they have deceived in like manner the peoples whom they won away from you; for instead of freedom they have given them a double servitude—they are under the tyrant rule both of the governors and of the decarchies which Lysander established in each city.


3.5.13
1211
ἀντὶ γὰρ ἐλευθερίας διπλῆν αὐτοῖς δουλείαν παρεσχήκασιν ·
Take the King of Asia also—although his contributions helped them most to win the victory over you, what better treatment is he now receiving than if he had joined with you and subdued them?


3.5.13
1212
ὑπό τε γὰρ τῶν ἁρμοστῶν τυραννοῦνται καὶ ὑπὸ δέκα ἀνδρῶν , οὓς Λύσανδρος κατέστησεν ἐν ἑκάστῃ πόλει .
Take the King of Asia also—although his contributions helped them most to win the victory over you, what better treatment is he now receiving than if he had joined with you and subdued them?


3.5.13
1213
ὅ γε μὴν τῆς Ἀσίας βασιλεὺς καὶ τὰ μέγιστ’ αὐτοῖς συμβαλλόμενος εἰς τὸ ὑμῶν κρατῆσαι νῦν τί διάφορον πάσχει ἢ εἰ μεθ’ ὑμῶν κατεπολέμησεν αὐτούς ;
Take the King of Asia also—although his contributions helped them most to win the victory over you, what better treatment is he now receiving than if he had joined with you and subdued them?


3.5.14
1214
πῶς οὖν οὐκ εἰκός , ἐὰν ὑμεῖς αὖ προστῆτε τῶν οὕτω φανερῶς ἀδικουμένων , νῦν ὑμᾶς πολὺ ἤδη μεγίστους τῶν πώποτε γενέσθαι ;
How, then, can it be doubtful that if you in your turn offer yourselves as leaders of those who are so manifestly wronged, you will now become by far the greatest of all the states that have ever been?


3.5.14
1215
ὅτε μὲν γὰρ ἤρχετε , τῶν κατὰ θάλατταν μόνων δήπου ἡγεῖσθε ·
For at the time when you held dominion you were the leaders, you recall, of those only who dwelt on the sea;


3.5.14
1216
νῦν δὲ πάντων καὶ ἡμῶν καὶ Πελοποννησίων καὶ ὧν πρόσθεν ἤρχετε καὶ αὐτοῦ βασιλέως τοῦ μεγίστην δύναμιν ἔχοντος ἡγεμόνες ἂν γένοισθε .
but now you would become the leaders of all alike—of ourselves, of the Peloponnesians, of those whom you formerly ruled, and of the King himself with his vast power.


3.5.14
1217
καίτοι ἦμεν πολλοῦ ἄξιοι καὶ ἐκείνοις σύμμαχοι , ὡς ὑμεῖς ἐπίστασθε ·
And we certainly were valuable allies to the Lacedaemonians, as you so well know;


3.5.14
1218
νῦν δέ γε εἰκὸς τῷ παντὶ ἐρρωμενεστέρως ὑμῖν συμμαχεῖν ἡμᾶς ἢ τότε Λακεδαιμονίοις ·
but now we can be expected to support you altogether more stoutly than we supported the Lacedaemonians then;


3.5.14
1219
οὐδὲ γὰρ ὑπὲρ νησιωτῶν ἢ Συρακοσίων οὐδ’ ὑπὲρ ἀλλοτρίων , ὥσπερ τότε , ἀλλ’ ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν αὐτῶν ἀδικουμένων βοηθήσομεν .
for it is by no means on behalf of islanders or Syracusans, or in fact of any alien people, that we shall be lending our aid as we were then, but on behalf of our own injured selves.


3.5.15
1220
καὶ τοῦτο μέντοι χρὴ εὖ εἰδέναι , ὅτι ἡ Λακεδαιμονίων πλεονεξία πολὺ εὐκαταλυτωτέρα ἐστὶ τῆς ὑμετέρας γενομένης ἀρχῆς .
And this also is to be well understood, that the selfishly acquired dominion of the Lacedaemonians is far easier to destroy than the empire which was once yours.


3.5.15
1221
ὑμεῖς μὲν γὰρ ἔχοντες ναυτικὸν οὐκ ἐχόντων ἤρχετε , οὗτοι δὲ ὀλίγοι ὄντες πολλαπλασίων ὄντων καὶ οὐδὲν χεῖρον ὡπλισμένων πλεονεκτοῦσι .
For you had a navy and ruled over men who had none, while they, being few, arrogate to themselves dominion over men who are many times their number and are fully as well armed.


3.5.15
1222
ταῦτ’ οὖν λέγομεν ἡμεῖς ·
This, then, is our proposal;


3.5.15
1223
εὖ γε μέντοι ἐπίστασθε , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , ὅτι νομίζομεν ἐπὶ πολὺ μείζω ἀγαθὰ παρακαλεῖν ὑμᾶς τῇ ὑμετέρᾳ πόλει ἢ τῇ ἡμετέρᾳ .
but be well assured, men of Athens, that we believe we are inviting you to benefits far greater for your state than for our own.


3.5.16
1224
ὁ μὲν ταῦτ’ εἰπὼν ἐπαύσατο .
With these words he ceased speaking.


3.5.16
1225
τῶν δ’ Ἀθηναίων πάμπολλοι μὲν συνηγόρευον , πάντες δ’ ἐψηφίσαντο βοηθεῖν αὐτοῖς .
But as for the Athenians, very many spoke in support of him and they voted unanimously to aid the Thebans.


3.5.16
1226
Θρασύβουλος δὲ ἀποκρινάμενος τὸ ψήφισμα καὶ τοῦτο ἐνεδείκνυτο , ὅτι ἀτειχίστου τοῦ Πειραιῶς ὄντος ὅμως παρακινδυνεύσοιεν χάριτα αὐτοῖς ἀποδοῦναι μείζονα ἢ ἔλαβον .
And Thrasybulus, after giving the ambassadors the decree for an answer, pointed out also that, although Piraeus was without walls, they would nevertheless brave the danger of repaying to the Thebans a greater favour than they had received.


3.5.16
1227
ὑμεῖς μὲν γάρ , ἔφη , οὐ συνεστρατεύσατε ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς , ἡμεῖς δέ γε μεθ’ ὑμῶν μαχούμεθα ἐκείνοις , ἂν ἴωσιν ἐφ’ ὑμᾶς .
For whereas you, he said, did not join in the campaign against us, we are going to fight along with you against them, in case they march upon you.


3.5.17
1228
οἱ μὲν δὴ Θηβαῖοι ἀπελθόντες παρεσκευάζοντο ὡς ἀμυνούμενοι , οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι ὡς βοηθήσοντες .
So the Thebans went away and made preparations for defending themselves, and the Athenians for aiding them.


3.5.17
1229
καὶ μὴν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὐκέτι ἔμελλον , ἀλλὰ Παυσανίας μὲν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐπορεύετο εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν τό τε οἴκοθεν ἔχων στράτευμα καὶ τὸ ἐκ Πελοποννήσου , πλὴν Κορίνθιοι οὐκ ἠκολούθουν αὐτοῖς .
And in fact the Lacedaemonians did not longer delay, but Pausanias the king marched into Boeotia with the troops from home and those from Peloponnesus except the Corinthians, who refused to accompany them.


3.5.17
1230
ὁ δὲ Λύσανδρος , ἄγων τὸ ἀπὸ Φωκέων καὶ Ὀρχομενοῦ καὶ τῶν κατ’ ἐκεῖνα χωρίων στράτευμα , ἔφθη τὸν Παυσανίαν ἐν τῷ Ἁλιάρτῳ γενόμενος .
And Lysander, at the head of the army from Phocis, Orchomenus, and the places in that region, arrived at Haliartus before Pausanias.


3.5.18
1231
ἥκων δὲ οὐκέτι ἡσυχίαν ἔχων ἀνέμενε τὸ ἀπὸ Λακεδαίμονος στράτευμα , ἀλλὰ σὺν οἷς εἶχεν ᾔει πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος τῶν Ἁλιαρτίων .
Having arrived, he did not keep quiet and wait for the army from Lacedaemon, but went up to the wall of the Haliartians with the troops which he had.


3.5.18
1232
καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἔπειθεν αὐτοὺς ἀφίστασθαι καὶ αὐτονόμους γίγνεσθαι ·
And at first he tried to persuade them to revolt from the Thebans and become independent;


3.5.18
1233
ἐπεὶ δὲ τῶν Θηβαίων τινὲς ὄντες ἐν τῷ τείχει διεκώλυον , προσέβαλε πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος .
but when some of the Thebans, who were within the wall, prevented them from doing so, he made an attack upon the wall.


3.5.19
1234
ἀκούσαντες δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Θηβαῖοι , δρόμῳ ἐβοήθουν οἵ τε ὁπλῖται καὶ οἱ ἱππεῖς .
And on hearing of this the Thebans came on the run to the rescue, both hoplites and cavalry.


3.5.19
1235
ὁπότερα μὲν οὖν , εἴτε λαθόντες τὸν Λύσανδρον ἐπέπεσον αὐτῷ εἴτε καὶ αἰσθόμενος προσιόντας ὡς κρατήσων ὑπέμενεν , ἄδηλον ·
Whether it was that they fell upon Lysander unawares, or that he saw them coming and nevertheless stood his ground in the belief that he would be victorious, is uncertain;


3.5.19
1236
τοῦτο δ’ οὖν σαφές , ὅτι παρὰ τὸ τεῖχος ἡ μάχη ἐγένετο ·
but this at any rate is clear, that the battle took place beside the wall;


3.5.19
1237
καὶ τροπαῖον ἕστηκε πρὸς τὰς πύλας τῶν Ἁλιαρτίων .
and a trophy stands at the gates of the Haliartians.


3.5.19
1238
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀποθανόντος Λυσάνδρου ἔφευγον οἱ ἄλλοι πρὸς τὸ ὄρος , ἐδίωκον ἐρρωμένως οἱ Θηβαῖοι .
Now when Lysander had been killed and his troops were fleeing to the mountain, the Thebans pursued stoutly.


3.5.20
1239
ὡς δὲ ἄνω ἤδη ἦσαν διώκοντες καὶ δυσχωρία τε καὶ στενοπορία ὑπελάμβανεν αὐτούς , ὑποστρέψαντες οἱ ὁπλῖται ἠκόντιζόν τε καὶ ἔβαλλον .
But when they had reached the heights in their pursuit and came upon rough country and narrow ways, the hoplites of the enemy turned about and threw javelins and other missiles upon them.


3.5.20
1240
ὡς δὲ ἔπεσον αὐτῶν δύο ἢ τρεῖς οἱ πρῶτοι καὶ ἐπὶ τοὺς λοιποὺς ἐπεκυλίνδουν πέτρους εἰς τὸ κάταντες καὶ πολλῇ προθυμίᾳ ἐνέκειντο , ἐτρέφθησαν οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἀπὸ τοῦ κατάντους καὶ ἀποθνῄσκουσιν αὐτῶν πλείους ἢ διακόσιοι .
And when two or three of them who were in the van had been struck down, and the enemy began to roll stones down the hill upon the rest and to attack them with great spirit, the Thebans were driven in flight from the slope, and more than two hundred of them were killed.


3.5.21
1241
ταύτῃ μὲν οὖν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἠθύμουν , νομίζοντες οὐκ ἐλάττω κακὰ πεπονθέναι ἢ πεποιηκέναι ·
On this day, therefore, the Thebans were despondent, thinking that they had suffered losses no less severe than those they had inflicted;


3.5.21
1242
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐπεὶ ᾔσθοντο ἀπεληλυθότας ἐν νυκτὶ τούς τε Φωκέας καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἅπαντας οἴκαδε ἑκάστους , ἐκ τούτου μεῖζον δὴ ἐφρόνουν ἐπὶ τῷ γεγενημένῳ .
on the following day, however, when they learned that the Phocians and the rest had all gone away in the night to their several homes, then they began to be more elated over their exploit.


3.5.21
1243
ἐπεὶ δ’ αὖ ὁ Παυσανίας ἀνεφαίνετο ἔχων τὸ ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος στράτευμα , πάλιν αὖ ἐν μεγάλῳ κινδύνῳ ἡγοῦντο εἶναι , καὶ πολλὴν ἔφασαν σιωπήν τε καὶ ταπεινότητα ἐν τῷ στρατεύματι εἶναι αὐτῶν .
But when, on the other hand, Pausanias appeared with the army from Lacedaemon, they again thought that they were in great danger, and, by all accounts, there was deep silence and despondency in their army.


3.5.22
1244
ὡς δὲ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ οἵ τε Ἀθηναῖοι ἐλθόντες συμπαρετάξαντο ὅ τε Παυσανίας οὐ προσῆγεν οὐδὲ ἐμάχετο , ἐκ τούτου τὸ μὲν Θηβαίων πολὺ μεῖζον φρόνημα ἐγίγνετο ·
When, however, on the next day the Athenians arrived and formed in line of battle with them, while Pausanias did not advance against them nor offer battle, then the elation of the Thebans increased greatly;


3.5.22
1245
ὁ δὲ Παυσανίας συγκαλέσας πολεμάρχους καὶ πεντηκοντῆρας ἐβουλεύετο πότερον μάχην συνάπτοι ἢ ὑπόσπονδον τόν τε Λύσανδρον ἀναιροῖτο καὶ τοὺς μετ’ αὐτοῦ πεσόντας .
as for Pausanias, he called together the commanders of regiments and of fifties, and took counsel with them as to whether he should join battle or recover by means of a truce the bodies of Lysander and those who fell with him.


3.5.23
1246
λογιζόμενος δ’ ὁ Παυσανίας καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι οἱ ἐν τέλει Λακεδαιμονίων ὡς Λύσανδρος τετελευτηκὼς εἴη καὶ τὸ μετ’ αὐτοῦ στράτευμα ἡττημένον ἀποκεχωρήκοι , καὶ Κορίνθιοι μὲν παντάπασιν οὐκ ἠκολούθουν αὐτοῖς , οἱ δὲ παρόντες οὐ προθύμως στρατεύοιντο ·
Accordingly Pausanias and the other Lacedaemonians who were in authority, considering that Lysander was dead and that the army under his command had been defeated and was gone, while the Corinthians had altogether refused to accompany them and those who had come were not serving with any spirit;


3.5.23
1247
ἐλογίζοντο δὲ καὶ τὸ ἱππικὸν ὡς τὸ μὲν ἀντίπαλον πολύ , τὸ δὲ αὑτῶν ὀλίγον εἴη , τὸ δὲ μέγιστον , ὅτι οἱ νεκροὶ ὑπὸ τῷ τείχει ἔκειντο , ὥστε οὐδὲ κρείττοσιν οὖσι διὰ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν πύργων ῥᾴδιον εἴη ἀνελέσθαι ·
considering also the matter of horsemen, that the enemy’s were numerous while their own were few, and, most important of all, that the bodies lay close up to the wall, so that even in case of victory it would not be easy to recover them on account of the men upon the towers—


3.5.23
1248
διὰ οὖν πάντα ταῦτα ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς τοὺς νεκροὺς ὑποσπόνδους ἀναιρεῖσθαι .
for all these reasons they decided that it was best to recover the bodies under a truce.


3.5.24
1249
οἱ μέντοι Θηβαῖοι εἶπαν ὅτι οὐκ ἂν ὑποδοῖεν τοὺς νεκρούς , εἰ μὴ ἐφ’ ᾧτε ἀπιέναι ἐκ τῆς χώρας .
The Thebans, however, said that they would not give up the dead except on condition that the Lacedaemonians should depart from their country.


3.5.24
1250
οἱ δὲ ἄσμενοί τε ταῦτα ἤκουσαν καὶ ἀνελόμενοι τοὺς νεκροὺς ἀπῇσαν ἐκ τῆς Βοιωτίας .
The Lacedaemonians welcomed these conditions, and were ready, after taking up their dead, to depart from Boeotia.


3.5.24
1251
τούτων δὲ πραχθέντων οἱ μὲν Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀθύμως ἀπῇσαν , οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι μάλα ὑβριστικῶς , εἰ καὶ μικρόν τις τῶν χωρίων του ἐπιβαίη , παίοντες ἐδίωκον εἰς τὰς ὁδούς .
When this had been done, the Lacedaemonians marched off despondently, while the Thebans behaved most insolently—in case a man trespassed never so little upon anyone’s lands, chasing him back with blows into the roads.


3.5.24
1252
αὕτη μὲν δὴ οὕτως ἡ στρατιὰ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων διελύθη .
Thus it was that this campaign of the Lacedaemonians came to its end.


3.5.25
1253
ὁ μέντοι Παυσανίας ἐπεὶ ἀφίκετο οἴκαδε , ἐκρίνετο περὶ θανάτου .
But when Pausanias reached home he was brought to trial for his life.


3.5.25
1254
κατηγορουμένου δ’ αὐτοῦ καὶ ὅτι ὑστερήσειεν εἰς Ἁλίαρτον τοῦ Λυσάνδρου , συνθέμενος εἰς τὴν αὐτὴν ἡμέραν παρέσεσθαι , καὶ ὅτι ὑποσπόνδους ἀλλ’ οὐ μάχῃ ἐπειρᾶτο τοὺς νεκροὺς ἀναιρεῖσθαι , καὶ ὅτι τὸν δῆμον τῶν Ἀθηναίων λαβὼν ἐν τῷ Πειραιεῖ ἀνῆκε , καὶ πρὸς τούτοις οὐ παρόντος ἐν τῇ δίκῃ , θάνατος αὐτοῦ κατεγνώσθη ·
He was charged with having arrived at Haliartus later than Lysander, though he had agreed to reach there on the same day, with having recovered the bodies of the dead by a truce instead of trying to recover them by battle, and with having allowed the Athenian democrats to escape when he had got them in his power in Piraeus; and since, besides all this, he failed to appear at the trial, he was condemned to death.


3.5.25
1255
καὶ ἔφυγεν εἰς Τεγέαν , καὶ ἐτελεύτησε μέντοι ἐκεῖ νόσῳ .
And he fled to Tegea, and there died a natural death.


3.5.25
1256
κατὰ μὲν οὖν τὴν Ἑλλάδα ταῦτ’ ἐπράχθη .
These, then, were the events which took place in Greece.



4.1.1
1257
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος ἐπεὶ ἀφίκετο ἅμα μετοπώρῳ εἰς τὴν τοῦ Φαρναβάζου Φρυγίαν , τὴν μὲν χώραν ἔκαε καὶ ἐπόρθει , πόλεις δὲ τὰς μὲν βίᾳ , τὰς δ’ ἑκούσας προσελάμβανε .
Now when Agesilaus arrived, at the beginning of autumn, in Pharnabazus’ province of Phrygia, he laid the land waste with fire and sword and gained possession of cities, some by force, others by their voluntary surrender.


4.1.2
1258
λέγοντος δὲ τοῦ Σπιθριδάτου ὡς εἰ ἔλθοι πρὸς τὴν Παφλαγονίαν σὺν αὐτῷ , τὸν τῶν Παφλαγόνων βασιλέα καὶ εἰς λόγους ἄξοι καὶ σύμμαχον ποιήσοι , προθύμως ἐπορεύετο , πάλαι τούτου ἐπιθυμῶν , τοῦ ἀφιστάναι τι ἔθνος ἀπὸ βασιλέως .
And when Spithridates said that if he would come to Paphlagonia with him, he would bring the king of the Paphlagonians to a conference and make him an ally, Agesilaus eagerly undertook the journey, since this was a thing he had long desired — to win some nation away from the Persian King.


4.1.3
1259
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφίκετο εἰς τὴν Παφλαγονίαν , ἦλθεν Ὄτυς καὶ συμμαχίαν ἐποιήσατο ·
Upon his arriving in Paphlagonia, Otys came and concluded an alliance;


4.1.3
1260
καὶ γὰρ καλούμενος ὑπὸ βασιλέως οὐκ ἀνεβεβήκει .
for he had been summoned by the Persian King and had refused to go up to him.


4.1.3
1261
πείσαντος δὲ τοῦ Σπιθριδάτου κατέλιπε τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ Ὄτυς χιλίους μὲν ἱππέας , δισχιλίους δὲ πελταστάς .
He also, by the persuasion of Spithridates, left behind for Agesilaus a thousand horsemen and two thousand peltasts.


4.1.4
1262
χάριν δὲ τούτων εἰδὼς Ἀγησίλαος τῷ Σπιθριδάτῃ , Εἰπέ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Σπιθριδάτα , οὐκ ἂν δοίης Ὄτυϊ τὴν θυγατέρα ;
And Agesilaus, feeling grateful to Spithridates for these things, said to him:  Tell me, Spithridates, would you not give your daughter to Otys?


4.1.4
1263
πολύ γε , ἔφη , μᾶλλον ἢ ἐκεῖνος ἂν λάβοι φυγάδος ἀνδρὸς βασιλεύων πολλῆς καὶ χώρας καὶ δυνάμεως .
Far more willingly,  said he,  than he would accept her, the daughter of an exile, while he is lord of a great land and power.


4.1.4
1264
τότε μὲν οὖν ταῦτα μόνον ἐρρήθη περὶ τοῦ γάμου .
So at that time nothing more was said about the marriage.


4.1.5
1265
ἐπεὶ δὲ Ὄτυς ἔμελλεν ἀπιέναι , ἦλθε πρὸς τὸν Ἀγησίλαον ἀσπασόμενος ·
But when Otys was about to depart, he came to Agesilaus to bid him farewell.


4.1.5
1266
ἤρξατο δὲ λόγου ὁ Ἀγησίλαος παρόντων τῶν τριάκοντα , μεταστησάμενος τὸν Σπιθριδάτην ·
Then Agesilaus began conversation with him in the presence of the thirty Spartiatae, after asking Spithridates to withdraw.


4.1.6
1267
λέξον μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Ὄτυ , ποίου τινὸς γένους ἐστὶν ὁ Σπιθριδάτης ;
Tell me,  he said,  Otys, to what sort of a family does Spithridates belong?


4.1.6
1268
ὁ δ’ εἶπεν ὅτι Περσῶν οὐδενὸς ἐνδεέστερος .
Otys replied that he was inferior in rank to no one of all the Persians.


4.1.6
1269
τὸν δὲ υἱόν , ἔφη , ἑόρακας αὐτοῦ ὡς καλός ἐστι ;
And have you noticed his son,  said Agesilaus,  how handsome he is?


4.1.6
1270
τί δ’ οὐ μέλλω ;
To be sure I have; for I dined with him last evening.


4.1.6
1271
καὶ γὰρ ἑσπέρας συνεδείπνουν αὐτῷ .
They say his daughter is handsomer than the son.


4.1.6
1272
τούτου μέν φασι τὴν θυγατέρα αὐτῷ καλλίονα εἶναι .
Yes, by Zeus,  said Otys,  she certainly is beautiful.


4.1.7
1273
νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη ὁ Ὄτυς , καλὴ γάρ ἐστι .
Yes, by Zeus, said Otys, she certainly is beautiful.


4.1.7
1274
καὶ ἐγὼ μέν , ἔφη , ἐπεὶ φίλος ἡμῖν γεγένησαι , συμβουλεύοιμ’ ἄν σοι τὴν παῖδα ἄγεσθαι γυναῖκα , καλλίστην μὲν οὖσαν , οὗ τί ἀνδρὶ ἥδιον ;
And I, said he, since you have become a friend of ours, should like to advise you to take the girl as your wife, for she is very beautiful — and what is more pleasant to a husband than that?


4.1.7
1275
πατρὸς δ’ εὐγενεστάτου , δύναμιν δ’ ἔχοντος τοσαύτην , ὃς ὑπὸ Φαρναβάζου ἀδικηθεὶς οὕτω τιμωρεῖται αὐτὸν ὥστε φυγάδα πάσης τῆς χώρας , ὡς ὁρᾷς , πεποίηκεν .
and the daughter of a father very well born and possessed of so great power, a man who, when wronged by Pharnabazus, takes such vengeance upon him that he has, as you see, made him an exile from his whole country.


4.1.8
1276
εὖ ἴσθι μέντοι , ἔφη , ὅτι ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνον ἐχθρὸν ὄντα δύναται τιμωρεῖσθαι , οὕτω καὶ φίλον ἄνδρα εὐεργετεῖν ἂν δύναιτο .
Be well assured, moreover, he said, that even as he is able to take vengeance upon Pharnabazus, an enemy, so he would also be able to benefit a friend


4.1.8
1277
νόμιζε δὲ τούτων πραχθέντων μὴ ἐκεῖνον ἄν σοι μόνον κηδεστὴν εἶναι , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐμὲ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους Λακεδαιμονίους , ἡμῶν δ’ ἡγουμένων τῆς Ἑλλάδος καὶ τὴν ἄλλην Ἑλλάδα .
I ask you also to take into consideration that, if this plan should be carried out, it would not be he alone that would be a connexion of yours, but I too and the rest of the Lacedaemonians, and, since we are the leaders of Greece, the rest of Greece as well.


4.1.9
1278
καὶ μὴν μεγαλειοτέρως γε σοῦ , εἰ ταῦτα πράττοις , τίς ἄν ποτε γήμειε ;
And further, if you should do this, who could possibly have a more magnificent wedding than you?


4.1.9
1279
ποίαν γὰρ νύμφην πώποτε τοσοῦτοι ἱππεῖς καὶ πελτασταὶ καὶ ὁπλῖται προύπεμψαν ὅσοι τὴν σὴν γυναῖκα εἰς τὸν σὸν οἶκον προπέμψειαν ἄν ;
For what bride was ever escorted by so many horsemen and peltasts and hoplites as would escort your wife to your house?


4.1.10
1280
καὶ ὁ Ὄτυς ἐπήρετο ·
And Otys asked,


4.1.10
1281
δοκοῦντα δ’ , ἔφη , ὦ Ἀγησίλαε , ταῦτα καὶ Σπιθριδάτῃ λέγεις ;
But is this, said he, which you are proposing, Agesilaus, pleasing to Spithridates also?


4.1.10
1282
μὰ τοὺς θεούς , ἔφη ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , ἐκεῖνος μὲν ἐμέ γε οὐκ ἐκέλευσε ταῦτα λέγειν ·
By the gods, said Agesilaus, it was not he that bade me say this;


4.1.10
1283
ἐγὼ μέντοι , καίπερ ὑπερχαίρων , ὅταν ἐχθρὸν τιμωρῶμαι , πολὺ μᾶλλόν μοι δοκῶ ἥδεσθαι , ὅταν τι τοῖς φίλοις ἀγαθὸν ἐξευρίσκω .
but I for my own part, even though I rejoice exceedingly when I punish an enemy, believe that I am far more pleased when I discover some good thing for my friends.


4.1.11
1284
τί οὖν , ἔφη , οὐ πυνθάνῃ εἰ καὶ ἐκείνῳ βουλομένῳ ταῦτ’ ἐστί ;
Why, then, said he, do you not find out whether this is pleasing to him also?


4.1.11
1285
καὶ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ·
And Agesilaus said:


4.1.11
1286
ἴτ’ , ἔφη , ὑμεῖς , ὦ Ἡριππίδα , καὶ διδάσκετε αὐτὸν βουληθῆναι ἅπερ ἡμεῖς .
Herippidas, do you men all go and persuade him to desire the same things that we do.


4.1.12
1287
οἱ μὲν δὴ ἀναστάντες ἐδίδασκον .
So they went and set about persuading him.


4.1.12
1288
ἐπεὶ δὲ διέτριβον , Βούλει , ἔφη , ὦ Ὄτυ , καὶ ἡμεῖς δεῦρο καλέσωμεν αὐτόν ;
And when they had spent some time away, Agesilaus said:  Do you wish, Otys, that we should call him in and talk with him ourselves?


4.1.12
1289
πολύ γ’ ἂν οἶμαι μᾶλλον ὑπὸ σοῦ πεισθῆναι αὐτὸν ἢ ὑπὸ τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων .
I do think that he would be far more likely to be persuaded by you than by all the rest put together.


4.1.12
1290
ἐκ τούτου δὴ ἐκάλει ὁ Ἀγησίλαος τὸν Σπιθριδάτην τε καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους .
Thereupon Agesilaus called in both Spithridates and the others.


4.1.13
1291
προσιόντων δ’ εὐθὺς εἶπεν ὁ Ἡριππίδας ·
And as soon as they came in, Herippidas said:


4.1.13
1292
τὰ μὲν ἄλλα , ὦ Ἀγησίλαε , τὰ ῥηθέντα τί ἄν τις μακρολογοίη ;
Why, Agesilaus, need one make a long story about all that was said?


4.1.13
1293
τέλος δὲ λέγει Σπιθριδάτης πᾶν ποιεῖν ἂν ἡδέως ὅ τι σοι δοκοίη .
The upshot of it is that Spithridates says he would be glad to do anything that you think best.


4.1.14
1294
ἐμοὶ μὲν τοίνυν , ἔφη , δοκεῖ , ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , σὲ μέν , ὦ Σπιθριδάτα , τύχῃ ἀγαθῇ διδόναι Ὄτυϊ τὴν θυγατέρα , σὲ δὲ λαμβάνειν .
Well, then,  said Agesilaus,  I think it best that you, Spithridates, should give your daughter to Otys—and may good fortune attend upon the deed—


4.1.14
1295
τὴν μέντοι παῖδα πρὸ ἦρος οὐκ ἂν δυναίμεθα πεζῇ ἀγαγεῖν .
and that you, Otys, should accept her. But we could not fetch the girl by land before spring.


4.1.14
1296
ἀλλὰ ναὶ μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη ὁ Ὄτυς , κατὰ θάλατταν ἤδη ἂν πέμποιτο , εἰ σὺ βούλοιο .
But, by Zeus,  said Otys,  she could be sent by sea at once, if you so desired.


4.1.15
1297
ἐκ τούτου δεξιὰς δόντες καὶ λαβόντες ἐπὶ τούτοις ἀπέπεμπον τὸν Ὄτυν .
Thereupon they gave and received pledges to ratify this agreement, and so sent Otys on his way.


4.1.15
1298
καὶ εὐθὺς ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , ἐπεὶ ἔγνω αὐτὸν σπεύδοντα , τριήρη πληρώσας καὶ Καλλίαν Λακεδαιμόνιον κελεύσας ἀπαγαγεῖν τὴν παῖδα , αὐτὸς ἐπὶ Δασκυλείου ἀπεπορεύετο , ἔνθα καὶ τὰ βασίλεια ἦν Φαρναβάζῳ , καὶ κῶμαι περὶ αὐτὰ πολλαὶ καὶ μεγάλαι καὶ ἄφθονα ἔχουσαι τὰ ἐπιτήδεια , καὶ θῆραι αἱ μὲν καὶ ἐν περιειργμένοις παραδείσοις , αἱ δὲ καὶ ἐν ἀναπεπταμένοις τόποις , πάγκαλαι .
And Agesilaus, being now assured that Otys was eager, immediately manned a trireme and ordered Callias the Lacedaemonian to fetch the girl, while he set off himself for Dascyleium, the place where the palace of Pharnabazus was situated, and round about it were many large villages, stored with provisions in abundance, and splendid wild animals, some of them in enclosed parks, others in open spaces.


4.1.16
1299
παρέρρει δὲ καὶ ποταμὸς παντοδαπῶν ἰχθύων πλήρης .
There was also a river, full of all kinds of fish, flowing by the palace.


4.1.16
1300
ἦν δὲ καὶ τὰ πτηνὰ ἄφθονα τοῖς ὀρνιθεῦσαι δυναμένοις .
And, besides, there was winged game in abundance for those who knew how to take it.


4.1.16
1301
ἐνταῦθα μὲν δὴ διεχείμαζε , καὶ αὐτόθεν καὶ σὺν προνομαῖς τὰ ἐπιτήδεια τῇ στρατιᾷ λαμβάνων .
There he spent the winter, procuring provisions for his army partly on the spot, and partly by means of foraging expeditions.


4.1.17
1302
καταφρονητικῶς δέ ποτε καὶ ἀφυλάκτως διὰ τὸ μηδὲν πρότερον ἐσφάλθαι λαμβανόντων τῶν στρατιωτῶν τὰ ἐπιτήδεια , ἐπέτυχεν αὐτοῖς ὁ Φαρνάβαζος κατὰ τὸ πεδίον ἐσπαρμένοις , ἅρματα μὲν ἔχων δύο δρεπανηφόρα , ἱππέας δὲ ὡς τετρακοσίους .
But on one occasion, while the soldiers were getting their provisions in disdainful and careless fashion, because they had not previously met with any mishap, Pharnabazus came upon them, scattered as they were over the plain, with two scythe-bearing chariots and about four hundred horsemen.


4.1.18
1303
οἱ δ’ Ἕλληνες ὡς εἶδον αὐτὸν προσελαύνοντα , συνέδραμον ὡς εἰς ἑπτακοσίους ·
Now when the Greeks saw him advancing upon them, they ran together to the number of about seven hundred;


4.1.18
1304
ὁ δ’ οὐκ ἐμέλλησεν , ἀλλὰ προστησάμενος τὰ ἅρματα , αὐτὸς δὲ σὺν τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν ὄπισθεν γενόμενος , ἐλαύνειν εἰς αὐτοὺς ἐκέλευσεν .
Pharnabazus, however, did not delay, but putting his chariots in front, and posting himself and the horsemen behind them, he gave orders to charge upon the Greeks.


4.1.19
1305
ὡς δὲ τὰ ἅρματα ἐμβαλόντα διεσκέδασε τὸ ἁθρόον , ταχὺ οἱ ἱππεῖς κατέβαλον ὡς εἰς ἑκατὸν ἀνθρώπους , οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι κατέφυγον πρὸς Ἀγησίλαον ·
And when the chariots dashed into the close-gathered crowd and scattered it,


4.1.19
1306
ἐγγὺς γὰρ ἔτυχε σὺν τοῖς ὁπλίταις ὤν .
the horsemen speedily struck down about a hundred men, while the rest fled for refuge to Agesilaus; for he chanced to be near at hand with the hoplites.


4.1.20
1307
ἐκ δὲ τούτου τρίτῃ ἢ τετάρτῃ ἡμέρᾳ αἰσθάνεται ὁ Σπιθριδάτης τὸν Φαρνάβαζον ἐν Καυῇ κώμῃ μεγάλῃ στρατοπεδευόμενον , ἀπέχοντα στάδια ὡς ἑξήκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν , καὶ εὐθὺς λέγει πρὸς τὸν Ἡριππίδαν .
On the third or fourth day following this incident, Spithridates learned that Pharnabazus was encamped in a large village named Caue, about one hundred and sixty stadia away, and at once told Herippidas.


4.1.21
1308
καὶ ὁ Ἡριππίδας ἐπιθυμῶν λαμπρόν τι ἐργάσασθαι , αἰτεῖ τὸν Ἀγησίλαον ὁπλίτας τε εἰς δισχιλίους καὶ πελταστὰς ἄλλους τοσούτους καὶ ἱππέας τούς τε Σπιθριδάτου καὶ τοὺς Παφλαγόνας καὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὁπόσους πείσειεν .
And Herippidas, eager to achieve a brilliant exploit, asked from Agesilaus hoplites to the number of two thousand, as many peltasts, and for horsemen, those of Spithridates, the Paphlagonians, and as many of the Greeks as he could persuade to join him.


4.1.22
1309
ἐπεὶ δὲ ὑπέσχετο αὐτῷ , ἐθύετο ·
When Agesilaus had promised him these troops Herippidas proceeded to sacrifice;


4.1.22
1310
καὶ ἅμα δείλῃ καλλιερησάμενος κατέλυσε τὴν θυσίαν .
and towards evening he obtained favourable omens and terminated his sacrifice.


4.1.22
1311
ἐκ δὲ τούτου δειπνήσαντας παρήγγειλε παρεῖναι πρόσθεν τοῦ στρατοπέδου .
Thereupon he gave orders to his men to get their dinner, and then report in front of the camp.


4.1.22
1312
σκότους δὲ γενομένου οὐδ’ οἱ ἡμίσεις ἑκάστων ἐξῆλθον .
But by the time darkness had come on, not so much as the half of the several detachments had come out.


4.1.23
1313
ὅπως δὲ μή , εἰ ἀποτρέποιτο , καταγελῷεν αὐτοῦ οἱ ἄλλοι τριάκοντα , ἐπορεύετο σὺν ᾗ εἶχε δυνάμει .
However, in order that the rest of the thirty Spartiatae might not laugh at him, as they would if he gave up his plan, he set out with the force that he had.


4.1.24
1314
ἅμα δὲ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐπιπεσὼν τῇ Φαρναβάζου στρατοπεδείᾳ , τῆς μὲν προφυλακῆς αὐτοῦ Μυσῶν ὄντων πολλοὶ ἔπεσον , αὐτοὶ δὲ διαφεύγουσι , τὸ δὲ στρατόπεδον ἁλίσκεται , καὶ πολλὰ μὲν ἐκπώματα καὶ ἄλλα δὴ οἷα Φαρναβάζου κτήματα , πρὸς δὲ τούτοις σκεύη πολλὰ καὶ ὑποζύγια σκευοφόρα .
And when at daybreak he fell upon the encampment of Pharnabazus, many of his outposts, who were Mysians, were slain, the troops themselves scattered in flight, and the camp was captured, and with it many drinking-cups and other articles such as a man like Pharnabazus would naturally have, and besides these things a great deal of baggage and many baggage animals.


4.1.25
1315
διὰ γὰρ τὸ φοβεῖσθαι μή , εἴ που κατασταίη , κυκλωθεὶς πολιορκοῖτο , ἄλλοτε ἄλλῃ τῆς χώρας ἐπῄει , ὥσπερ οἱ νομάδες , καὶ μάλα ἀφανίζων τὰς στρατοπεδεύσεις .
For through fear that, if he took up a fixed position anywhere, he would be surrounded and besieged, Pharnabazus kept going first to one and then to another part of the country, even as the nomads do, very carefully concealing his encampments.


4.1.26
1316
ἐπεὶ δὲ τὰ ληφθέντα χρήματα ἀπήγαγον οἵ τε Παφλαγόνες καὶ ὁ Σπιθριδάτης , ὑποστήσας Ἡριππίδας ταξιάρχους καὶ λοχαγοὺς ἀφείλετο ἅπαντα τόν τε Σπιθριδάτην καὶ τοὺς Παφλαγόνας , ἵνα δὴ πολλὰ ἀπαγάγοι τὰ αἰχμάλωτα τοῖς λαφυροπώλαις .
Now when the Paphlagonians and Spithridates had brought in the property they had captured, Herippidas posted commanders of divisions and companies to intercept them, and took everything away from both Spithridates and the Paphlagonians, merely in order that he might have a great quantity of booty to turn in to the officials who sold it.


4.1.27
1317
ἐκεῖνοι μέντοι ταῦτα παθόντες οὐκ ἤνεγκαν , ἀλλ’ ὡς ἀδικηθέντες καὶ ἀτιμασθέντες νυκτὸς συσκευασάμενοι ᾤχοντο ἀπιόντες εἰς Σάρδεις πρὸς Ἀριαῖον , πιστεύσαντες , ὅτι καὶ ὁ Ἀριαῖος ἀποστὰς βασιλέως ἐπολέμησεν αὐτῷ .
They, however, would not stand being so treated, but, feeling that they had been wronged and dishonoured, packed up and went off during the night to Ariaeus at Sardis, putting their trust in Ariaeus because he also had revolted from the King and made war upon him.


4.1.28
1318
Ἀγησιλάῳ μὲν δὴ τῆς ἀπολείψεως τοῦ Σπιθριδάτου καὶ τοῦ Μεγαβάτου καὶ τῶν Παφλαγόνων οὐδὲν ἐγένετο βαρύτερον ἐν τῇ στρατείᾳ .
And nothing happened during the campaign which was more distressing to Agesilaus than the desertion of Spithridates, Megabates, and the Paphlagonians.


4.1.29
1319
ἦν δέ τις Ἀπολλοφάνης Κυζικηνός , ὃς καὶ Φαρναβάζῳ ἐτύγχανεν ἐκ παλαιοῦ ξένος ὢν καὶ Ἀγησιλάῳ κατ’ ἐκεῖνον τὸν χρόνον ἐξενώθη .
Now there was a certain Apollophanes of Cyzicus who chanced to be an old friend of Pharnabazus and at that time had become a friend of Agesilaus also.


4.1.29
1320
οὗτος οὖν εἶπε πρὸς τὸν Ἀγησίλαον ὡς οἴοιτο συναγαγεῖν αὐτῷ ἂν εἰς λόγους περὶ φιλίας Φαρνάβαζον .
This man, accordingly, said to Agesilaus that he thought he could bring Pharnabazus to a conference with him in regard to establishing friendly relations.


4.1.30
1321
ὡς δ’ ἤκουσεν αὐτοῦ , σπονδὰς λαβὼν καὶ δεξιὰν παρῆν ἄγων τὸν Φαρνάβαζον εἰς συγκείμενον χωρίον , ἔνθα δὴ Ἀγησίλαος καὶ οἱ περὶ αὐτὸν τριάκοντα χαμαὶ ἐν πόᾳ τινὶ κατακείμενοι ἀνέμενον ·
And when Agesilaus heard what he had to say, Apollophanes, after obtaining a truce and a pledge, brought Pharnabazus with him to a place which had been agreed upon,


4.1.30
1322
ὁ δὲ Φαρνάβαζος ἧκεν ἔχων στολὴν πολλοῦ χρυσοῦ ἀξίαν .
where Agesilaus and the thirty Spartiatae with him were lying on the ground in a grassy spot awaiting them;


4.1.30
1323
ὑποτιθέντων δὲ αὐτῷ τῶν θεραπόντων ῥαπτά , ἐφ’ ὧν καθίζουσιν οἱ Πέρσαι μαλακῶς , ᾐσχύνθη ἐντρυφῆσαι , ὁρῶν τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου τὴν φαυλότητα ·
Pharnabazus, however, came in a dress which was worth much gold.


4.1.30
1324
κατεκλίθη οὖν καὶ αὐτὸς ὥσπερ εἶχε χαμαί .
But when his attendants were proceeding to spread rugs beneath him, upon which the Persians sit softly, he was ashamed to indulge in luxury, seeing as he did the simplicity of Agesilaus; so he too lay down on the ground without further ado.


4.1.31
1325
καὶ πρῶτα μὲν ἀλλήλους χαίρειν προσεῖπαν , ἔπειτα τὴν δεξιὰν προτείναντος τοῦ Φαρναβάζου ἀντιπρούτεινε καὶ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος .
And first they gave each other greeting, then Pharnabazus held out his right hand and Agesilaus held out his to meet it.


4.1.31
1326
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο ἤρξατο λόγου ὁ Φαρνάβαζος ·
After this Pharnabazus began speaking,—


4.1.31
1327
καὶ γὰρ ἦν πρεσβύτερος ·
for he was the elder:


4.1.32
1328
ὦ Ἀγησίλαε καὶ πάντες οἱ παρόντες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ἐγὼ ὑμῖν , ὅτε τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις ἐπολεμεῖτε , φίλος καὶ σύμμαχος ἐγενόμην , καὶ τὸ μὲν ναυτικὸν τὸ ὑμέτερον χρήματα παρέχων ἰσχυρὸν ἐποίουν , ἐν δὲ τῇ γῇ αὐτὸς ἀπὸ τοῦ ἵππου μαχόμενος μεθ’ ὑμῶν εἰς τὴν θάλατταν κατεδίωκον τοὺς πολεμίους .
Agesilaus and all you Lacedaemonians who are present, I became your friend and ally at the time when you were at war with the Athenians,


4.1.32
1329
καὶ διπλοῦν ὥσπερ Τισσαφέρνους οὐδὲν πώποτέ μου οὔτε ποιήσαντος οὔτ’ εἰπόντος πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἔχοιτ’ ἂν κατηγορῆσαι .
and not only did I make your fleet strong by providing money, but on the land I myself fought on horseback with you and drove your enemies into the sea. And you cannot accuse me, as you accused Tissaphernes, of any double-dealing toward you at any time, either in deed or word.


4.1.33
1330
τοιοῦτος δὲ γενόμενος νῦν οὕτω διάκειμαι ὑφ’ ὑμῶν ὡς οὐδὲ δεῖπνον ἔχω ἐν τῇ ἐμαυτοῦ χώρᾳ , εἰ μή τι ὧν ἂν ὑμεῖς λίπητε συλλέξομαι , ὥσπερ τὰ θηρία .
Such a friend I proved myself, and now I am brought to such a pass by you that I have not so much as a meal in my own land unless, like the beasts, I pick up a bit of what you may leave.


4.1.33
1331
ἃ δέ μοι ὁ πατὴρ καὶ οἰκήματα καλὰ καὶ παραδείσους καὶ δένδρων καὶ θηρίων μεστοὺς κατέλιπεν , ἐφ’ οἷς ηὐφραινόμην , ταῦτα πάντα ὁρῶ τὰ μὲν κατακεκομμένα , τὰ δὲ κατακεκαυμένα .
And the beautiful dwellings and parks, full of trees and wild animals, which my father left me, in which I took delight,—all these parks I see cut down, all these dwellings burned to the ground.


4.1.33
1332
εἰ οὖν ἐγὼ μὴ γιγνώσκω μήτε τὰ ὅσια μήτε τὰ δίκαια , ὑμεῖς δὲ διδάξατέ με ὅπως ταῦτ’ ἐστὶν ἀνδρῶν ἐπισταμένων χάριτας ἀποδιδόναι .
If it is I that do not understand either what is righteous or what is just, do you teach me how these are the deeds of men who know how to repay favours.


4.1.34
1333
ὁ μὲν ταῦτ’ εἶπεν .
Thus he spoke.


4.1.34
1334
οἱ δὲ τριάκοντα πάντες μὲν ἐπῃσχύνθησαν αὐτὸν καὶ ἐσιώπησαν ·
And all the thirty Spartiatae were filled with shame before him and fell silent;


4.1.34
1335
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος χρόνῳ ποτὲ εἶπεν ·
but Agesilaus at length said:


4.1.34
1336
ἀλλ’ οἶμαι μέν σε , ὦ Φαρνάβαζε , εἰδέναι ὅτι καὶ ἐν ταῖς Ἑλληνικαῖς πόλεσι ξένοι ἀλλήλοις γίγνονται ἄνθρωποι .
I think you know, Pharnabazus, that in the Greek states, also, men become guest-friends of one another.


4.1.34
1337
οὗτοι δέ , ὅταν αἱ πόλεις πολέμιαι γένωνται , σὺν ταῖς πατρίσι καὶ τοῖς ἐξενωμένοις πολεμοῦσι καί , ἂν οὕτω τύχωσιν , ἔστιν ὅτε καὶ ἀπέκτειναν ἀλλήλους .
But these men, when their states come to war, fight with their fatherlands even against their former friends, and, if it so chance, sometimes even kill one another.


4.1.34
1338
καὶ ἡμεῖς οὖν νῦν βασιλεῖ τῷ ὑμετέρῳ πολεμοῦντες πάντα ἠναγκάσμεθα τὰ ἐκείνου πολέμια νομίζειν ·
And so we to-day, being at war with your king, are constrained to regard all that is his as hostile;


4.1.34
1339
σοί γε μέντοι φίλοι γενέσθαι περὶ παντὸς ἂν ποιησαίμεθα .
as for yourself, however, we should prize it above everything to become friends of yours.


4.1.35
1340
καὶ εἰ μὲν ἀλλάξασθαί σε ἔδει ἀντὶ δεσπότου βασιλέως ἡμᾶς δεσπότας , οὐκ ἂν ἔγωγέ σοι συνεβούλευον ·
And if it were an exchange that you had to make, from the King as master to us as masters, I for my part should not advise you to make the exchange;


4.1.35
1341
νῦν δὲ ἔξεστί σοι μεθ’ ἡμῶν γενομένῳ μηδένα προσκυνοῦντα μηδὲ δεσπότην ἔχοντα ζῆν καρπούμενον τὰ σαυτοῦ .
but in fact it is within your power by joining with us to live in the enjoyment of your possessions without doing homage to anyone or having any master.


4.1.35
1342
καίτοι ἐλεύθερον εἶναι ἐγὼ μὲν οἶμαι ἀντάξιον εἶναι τῶν πάντων χρημάτων .
And being free is worth, in my opinion, as much as all manner of possessions.


4.1.36
1343
οὐδὲ μέντοι τοῦτό σε κελεύομεν , πένητα μέν , ἐλεύθερον δ’ εἶναι , ἀλλ’ ἡμῖν συμμάχοις χρώμενον αὔξειν μὴ τὴν βασιλέως ἀλλὰ τὴν σαυτοῦ ἀρχήν , τοὺς νῦν ὁμοδούλους σοι καταστρεφόμενον , ὥστε σοὺς ὑπηκόους εἶναι .
Yet it is not this that we urge upon you, to be free and poor, but rather by employing us as allies to increase, not the King’s empire, but your own, subduing those who are now your fellow-slaves so that they shall be your subjects.


4.1.36
1344
καίτοι εἰ ἅμα ἐλεύθερός τ’ εἴης καὶ πλούσιος γένοιο , τίνος ἂν δέοις μὴ οὐχὶ πάμπαν εὐδαίμων εἶναι ;
And if, being free, you should at the same time become rich, what would you lack of being altogether happy?


4.1.37
1345
οὐκοῦν , ἔφη ὁ Φαρνάβαζος , ἁπλῶς ὑμῖν ἀποκρίνομαι ἅπερ ποιήσω ;
Shall I, then,  said Pharnabazus,  tell you frankly just what I shall do?


4.1.37
1346
πρέπει γοῦν σοι .
It surely becomes you to do so.


4.1.37
1347
ἐγὼ τοίνυν , ἔφη , ἐὰν βασιλεὺς ἄλλον μὲν στρατηγὸν πέμπῃ , ἐμὲ δὲ ὑπήκοον ἐκείνου τάττῃ , βουλήσομαι ὑμῖν καὶ φίλος καὶ σύμμαχος εἶναι ·
Well, then,  said he,  if the King sends another as general and makes me his subordinate, I shall choose to be your friend and ally;


4.1.37
1348
ἐὰν μέντοι μοι τὴν ἀρχὴν προστάττῃ ( τοιοῦτόν τι , ὡς ἔοικε , φιλοτιμία ἐστίν ) , εὖ χρὴ εἰδέναι ὅτι πολεμήσω ὑμῖν ὡς ἂν δύνωμαι ἄριστα .
but if he assigns the command to me,—so strong, it seems, is the power of ambition—you may be well assured that I shall war upon you to the best of my ability.


4.1.38
1349
ἀκούσας ταῦτα ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ἐλάβετο τῆς χειρὸς αὐτοῦ καὶ εἶπεν ·
Upon hearing these words Agesilaus grasped his hand and said:


4.1.38
1350
εἴθ’ , ὦ λῷστε σύ , τοιοῦτος ὢν φίλος ἡμῖν γένοιο .
O that you, noble sir, a man of such a spirit, may come to be our friend.


4.1.38
1351
ἓν δ’ οὖν , ἔφη , ἐπίστω , ὅτι νῦν τε ἄπειμι ὡς ἂν δύνωμαι τάχιστα ἐκ τῆς σῆς χώρας , τοῦ τε λοιποῦ , κἂν πόλεμος ᾖ , ἕως ἂν ἐπ’ ἄλλον ἔχωμεν στρατεύεσθαι , σοῦ τε καὶ τῶν σῶν ἀφεξόμεθα .
But at least,  he said,  be assured of one thing, that now I am going away from your land as speedily as I can, and in the future, even if war continues, we shall withhold our hands from you and yours so long as we can turn our attack against another.


4.1.39
1352
τούτων δὲ λεχθέντων διέλυσε τὴν σύνοδον .
With these words he broke up the meeting.


4.1.39
1353
καὶ ὁ μὲν Φαρνάβαζος ἀναβὰς ἐπὶ τὸν ἵππον ἀπῄει , ὁ δὲ ἐκ τῆς Παραπίτας υἱὸς αὐτοῦ , καλὸς ἔτι ὤν , ὑπολειφθεὶς καὶ προσδραμών , Ξένον σε , ἔφη , ὦ Ἀγησίλαε , ποιοῦμαι .
And Pharnabazus mounted his horse and rode away, but his son by Parapita, who was still in the bloom of youth, remaining behind, ran up to Agesilaus and said to him:


4.1.39
1354
ἐγὼ δέ γε δέχομαι .
Agesilaus, I make you my guest-friend.


4.1.39
1355
μέμνησό νυν , ἔφη .
And I accept your friendship.


4.1.39
1356
καὶ εὐθὺς τὸ παλτόν ( εἶχε δὲ καλόν ) ἔδωκε τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ .
Remember, then,  he said.


4.1.39
1357
ὁ δὲ δεξάμενος , φάλαρα ἔχοντος περὶ τῷ ἵππῳ Ἰδαίου τοῦ γραφέως πάγκαλα , περιελὼν ἀντέδωκεν αὐτῷ .
And immediately he gave his javelin—it was a beautiful one—to Agesilaus.


4.1.39
1358
τότε μὲν οὖν ὁ παῖς ἀναπηδήσας ἐπὶ τὸν ἵππον μετεδίωκε τὸν πατέρα .
And he, accepting it, took off and gave to the boy in return a splendid trapping which Idaeus, his secretary, had round his horse’s neck. Then the boy leaped upon his horse and followed after his father.


4.1.40
1359
ὡς δ’ ἐν τῇ τοῦ Φαρναβάζου ἀποδημίᾳ ἀποστερῶν ἁδελφὸς τὴν ἀρχὴν φυγάδα ἐποίησε τὸν τῆς Παραπίτας υἱόν , τά τ’ ἄλλα ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ἐπεμελεῖτο αὐτοῦ , καὶ ἐρασθέντος αὐτοῦ τοῦ Εὐάλκους υἱέος Ἀθηναίου , πάντ’ ἐποίησεν ὅπως ἂν δι’ ἐκεῖνον ἐγκριθείη τὸ στάδιον ἐν Ὀλυμπίᾳ , μέγιστος ὢν τῶν παίδων .
And afterwards, when his brother had deprived the son of Parapita of his domain during the absence of Pharnabazus, and had made him an exile, Agesilaus not only cared for him in every way, but in particular, since he had become enamoured of the son of Eualces an Athenian, made every effort for his sake to have Eualces’ son, inasmuch as he was taller than any of the other boys, admitted to the stadium race at Olympia.


4.1.41
1360
καὶ τότε δή , ὥσπερ εἶπε πρὸς τὸν Φαρνάβαζον , εὐθὺς ἀπεπορεύετο ἐκ τῆς χώρας ·
So at that time Agesilaus immediately marched off out of the territory of Pharnabazus, just as he had told him he would;


4.1.41
1361
σχεδὸν δὲ καὶ ἔαρ ἤδη ὑπέφαινεν .
besides, spring was now almost at hand.


4.1.41
1362
ἀφικόμενος δ’ εἰς Θήβης πεδίον κατεστρατοπεδεύσατο περὶ τὸ τῆς Ἀστυρηνῆς Ἀρτέμιδος ἱερόν , καὶ ἐκεῖ πρὸς ᾧ εἶχε συνέλεγε πανταχόθεν πάμπληθες στράτευμα .
And upon arriving in the plain of Thebe he encamped near the shrine of Artemis of Astyra, and there gathered together from all quarters a very great army in addition to that which he had.


4.1.41
1363
παρεσκευάζετο γὰρ πορευσόμενος ὡς δύναιτο ἀνωτάτω , νομίζων ὁπόσα ὄπισθεν ποιήσαιτο ἔθνη πάντα ἀποστερήσειν βασιλέως .
For he was preparing to march as far as he could into the interior, thinking that he would detach from the King all the nations which he could put in his rear.


4.2.1
1364
Ἀγησίλαος μὲν δὴ ἐν τούτοις ἦν .
Agesilaus, then, was occupied with these things.


4.2.1
1365
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐπεὶ σαφῶς ᾔσθοντο τά τε χρήματα ἐληλυθότα εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα καὶ τὰς μεγίστας πόλεις συνεστηκυίας ἐπὶ πολέμῳ πρὸς ἑαυτούς , ἐν κινδύνῳ τε τὴν πόλιν ἐνόμισαν καὶ στρατεύειν ἀναγκαῖον ἡγήσαντο εἶναι .
But the Lacedaemonians at home, when they found out definitely that the money had come to Greece, and that the largest states had united for war against them, believed that their state was in danger, and thought that it was necessary to undertake a campaign.


4.2.2
1366
καὶ αὐτοὶ μὲν ταῦτα παρεσκευάζοντο , εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀγησίλαον πέμπουσιν Ἐπικυδίδαν .
And while themselves making preparations for this, they also immediately sent Epicydidas to fetch Agesilaus.


4.2.2
1367
ὁ δ’ ἐπεὶ ἀφίκετο , τά τε ἄλλα διηγεῖτο ὡς ἔχοι καὶ ὅτι ἡ πόλις ἐπιστέλλοι αὐτῷ βοηθεῖν ὡς τάχιστα τῇ πατρίδι .
And when Epicydidas arrived in Asia, he told Agesilaus the general condition of affairs, and that the state bade him come as speedily as possible to the aid of his fatherland.


4.2.3
1368
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος ἐπεὶ ἤκουσε , χαλεπῶς μὲν ἤνεγκεν , ἐνθυμούμενος καὶ οἵων τιμῶν καὶ οἵων ἐλπίδων ἀπεστερεῖτο , ὅμως δὲ συγκαλέσας τοὺς συμμάχους ἐδήλωσε τὰ ὑπὸ τῆς πόλεως παραγγελλόμενα , καὶ εἶπεν ὅτι ἀναγκαῖον εἴη βοηθεῖν τῇ πατρίδι ·
Now when Agesilaus heard this, although he was disturbed, considering what honours and what hopes he was deprived of, nevertheless, calling together the allies, he made known to them what the state commanded, and said that it was necessary to go to the aid of the fatherland.


4.2.3
1369
ἐὰν μέντοι ἐκεῖνα καλῶς γένηται , εὖ ἐπίστασθε , ἔφη , ὦ ἄνδρες σύμμαχοι , ὅτι οὐ μὴ ἐπιλάθωμαι ὑμῶν , ἀλλὰ πάλιν παρέσομαι πράξων ὧν ὑμεῖς δεῖσθε .
But if those matters turn out successfully, be well assured, my allies,  he said,  that I shall not forget you, but shall return again to accomplish the things which you desire.


4.2.4
1370
ἀκούσαντες ταῦτα πολλοὶ μὲν ἐδάκρυσαν , πάντες δ’ ἐψηφίσαντο βοηθεῖν μετ’ Ἀγησιλάου τῇ Λακεδαίμονι ·
Upon hearing this many burst into tears, but they all voted to go with Agesilaus to the aid of Lacedaemon,


4.2.4
1371
εἰ δὲ καλῶς τ- ἐκεῖ γένοιτο , λαβόντες αὐτὸν πάλιν ἥκειν εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν .
resolved, if matters there should turn out successfully, to bring him back again with them to Asia.


4.2.5
1372
καὶ οἱ μὲν δὴ συνεσκευάζοντο ὡς ἀκολουθήσοντες .
Accordingly they made preparations to follow with him.


4.2.5
1373
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος ἐν μὲν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ κατέλιπεν Εὔξενον ἁρμοστὴν καὶ φρουροὺς παρ’ αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔλαττον τετρακισχιλίων , ἵνα δύναιτο διασῴζειν τὰς πόλεις ·
As for Agesilaus, he left behind him in Asia Euxenus as governor, and with him a garrison of not less than four thousand men, so that he could keep the cities safe;


4.2.5
1374
αὐτὸς δὲ ὁρῶν ὅτι οἱ πολλοὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν μένειν ἐπεθύμουν μᾶλλον ἢ ἐφ’ Ἕλληνας στρατεύεσθαι , βουλόμενος ὡς βελτίστους καὶ πλείστους ἄγειν μεθ’ ἑαυτοῦ , ἆθλα προύθηκε ταῖς πόλεσιν , ἥτις ἄριστον στράτευμα πέμποι , καὶ τῶν μισθοφόρων τοῖς λοχαγοῖς , ὅστις εὐοπλότατον λόχον ἔχων συστρατεύοιτο καὶ ὁπλιτῶν καὶ τοξοτῶν καὶ πελταστῶν .
and seeing that most of his own soldiers were more desirous of remaining than of undertaking a campaign against Greeks, in the desire to lead with him the best men and as many as possible he offered prizes to the cities, for the one which should send the best force, and to the captains of the mercenaries, for the one who should join the expedition with the best equipped company of hoplites, of bowmen, and of peltasts.


4.2.5
1375
προεῖπε δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἱππάρχοις , ὅστις εὐιπποτάτην καὶ εὐοπλοτάτην τάξιν παρέχοιτο , ὡς καὶ τούτοις νικητήριον δώσων .
He likewise announced to the commanders of cavalry that he would also give a prize of victory to the one who should furnish the best mounted and best equipped battalion.


4.2.6
1376
τὴν δὲ κρίσιν ἔφη ποιήσειν , ἐπεὶ διαβαίησαν ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας εἰς τὴν Εὐρώπην , ἐν Χερρονήσῳ , ὅπως εὖ εἰδείησαν ὅτι τοὺς στρατευομένους δεῖ εὐκρινεῖν .
And he said that he would make the decision in the Chersonese, when they had crossed from Asia to Europe, his purpose being to let them understand thoroughly that they must select their troops with care.


4.2.7
1377
ἦν δὲ τὰ ἆθλα τὰ μὲν πλεῖστα ὅπλα ἐκπεπονημένα εἰς κόσμον καὶ ὁπλιτικὰ καὶ ἱππικά ·
As for the prizes, most of them were beautifully wrought arms, both for hoplites and for horsemen;


4.2.7
1378
ἦσαν δὲ καὶ στέφανοι χρυσοῖ ·
there were also wreaths of gold,


4.2.7
1379
τὰ δὲ πάντα ἆθλα οὐκ ἔλαττον ἐγένοντο ἢ ἀπὸ τεττάρων ταλάντων .
and the prizes all told cost not less than four talents.


4.2.7
1380
τοσούτων μέντοι ἀναλωθέντων , παμπόλλων χρημάτων ὅπλα εἰς τὴν στρατιὰν κατεσκευάσθη .
As a result, however, of the expending of this sum, arms worth a vast sum of money were provided for the army.


4.2.8
1381
ἐπεὶ δὲ διέβη τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον , κριταὶ κατέστησαν Λακεδαιμονίων μὲν Μένασκος καὶ Ἡριππίδας καὶ Ὄρσιππος , τῶν δὲ συμμάχων εἷς ἀπὸ πόλεως .
And when he had crossed the Hellespont, Menascus, Herippidas, and Orsippus were appointed as judges from the side of the Lacedaemonians,


4.2.8
1382
καὶ Ἀγησίλαος μέν , ἐπεὶ τὴν κρίσιν ἐποίησεν , ἔχων τὸ στράτευμα ἐπορεύετο τὴν αὐτὴν ὁδὸν ἥνπερ βασιλεὺς ὅτε ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἐστράτευεν .
and from that of the allies one from each city. Then Agesilaus, after he had made the decision, marched on with his army by the same route which the Persian king followed when he made his expedition against Greece.


4.2.9
1383
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ οἱ μὲν ἔφοροι φρουρὰν ἔφηναν ·
Meanwhile the ephors called out the ban;


4.2.9
1384
ἡ δὲ πόλις , ἐπεὶ Ἀγησίπολις παῖς ἔτι ἦν , Ἀριστόδημον τοῦ γένους ὄντα καὶ πρόδικον τοῦ παιδός , ἡγεῖσθαι τῇ στρατιᾷ ἐκέλευον .
and since Agesipolis was still a boy, the state commanded Aristodemus, who was of the royal family and the boy’s guardian, to lead the army.


4.2.10
1385
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐξῇσαν μὲν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , συνειλεγμένοι δ’ ἦσαν οἱ ἐναντίοι , συνελθόντες ἐβουλεύοντο πῶς ἂν τὴν μάχην συμφορώτατα σφίσιν αὐτοῖς ποιήσαιντο .
Now when the Lacedaemonians were marching forth and their enemies had gathered together, the latter met and took counsel as to how they might fight the battle with the greatest advantage to themselves.


4.2.11
1386
Τιμόλαος μὲν δὴ Κορίνθιος ἔλεξεν ·
Then Timolaus of Corinth spoke as follows:


4.2.11
1387
ἀλλ’ ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ , ἔφη , ὦ ἄνδρες σύμμαχοι , ὅμοιον εἶναι τὸ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων πρᾶγμα οἷόνπερ τὸ τῶν ποταμῶν .
It seems to me,  he said,  fellow allies, that the case of the Lacedaemonians is much the same as that of rivers.


4.2.11
1388
οἵ τε γὰρ ποταμοὶ πρὸς μὲν ταῖς πηγαῖς οὐ μεγάλοι εἰσὶν ἀλλ’ εὐδιάβατοι , ὅσῳ δ’ ἂν πορρωτέρω γίγνωνται , ἐπεμβάλλοντες ἕτεροι ποταμοὶ ἰσχυρότερον αὐτῶν τὸ ῥεῦμα ποιοῦσι , καὶ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὡσαύτως , ἔνθεν μὲν ἐξέρχονται , αὐτοὶ μόνοι εἰσί , προϊόντες δὲ καὶ παραλαμβάνοντες τὰς πόλεις πλείους τε καὶ δυσμαχώτεροι γίγνονται .
For rivers at their sources are not large, but easy to cross, yet the farther on they go, other rivers empty into them and make their current stronger;


4.2.12
1389
ὁρῶ δ’ ἔγωγε , ἔφη , καὶ ὁπόσοι σφῆκας ἐξαιρεῖν βούλονται , ἐὰν μὲν ἐκθέοντας τοὺς σφῆκας πειρῶνται θηρᾶν , ὑπὸ πολλῶν τυπτομένους ·
and just so the Lacedaemonians, at the place whence they come forth, are alone by themselves, but as they go on and keep attaching the cities to them, they become more numerous and harder to fight against. Again, I see,  he said,  that all who wish to destroy wasps, in case they try to capture the wasps as they issue forth, are stung by many of them;


4.2.12
1390
ἐὰν δ’ ἔτι ἔνδον ὄντων τὸ πῦρ προσφέρωσι , πάσχοντας μὲν οὐδέν , χειρουμένους δὲ τοὺς σφῆκας .
but if they apply the fire while the wasps are still in their nests, they suffer no harm and subdue the wasps.


4.2.12
1391
ταῦτ’ οὖν ἐνθυμούμενος ἡγοῦμαι κράτιστον εἶναι μάλιστα μὲν ἐν αὐτῇ , εἰ δὲ μή , ὅτι ἐγγύτατα τῆς Λακεδαίμονος τὴν μάχην ποιεῖσθαι .
Considering these things, therefore, I believe it is best to fight the battle in Lacedaemon itself if possible, but if not, as near there as we can.


4.2.13
1392
δόξαντος δ’ εὖ λέγειν αὐτοῦ ἐψηφίσαντο ταῦτα .
But while they were negotiating about the leadership and trying to come to an agreement with one another as to the number of ranks in depth in which the whole army should be drawn up,


4.2.13
1393
ἐν ᾧ δὲ περὶ ἡγεμονίας τε διεπράττοντο καὶ διωμολογοῦντο εἰς ὁπόσους δέοι τάττεσθαι πᾶν τὸ στράτευμα , ὅπως μὴ λίαν βαθείας τὰς φάλαγγας ποιούμεναι αἱ πόλεις κύκλωσιν τοῖς πολεμίοις παρέχοιεν , ἐν τούτῳ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ δὴ Τεγεάτας παρειληφότες καὶ Μαντινέας ἐξῇσαν τὴν ἀμφίαλον .
in order to prevent the states from making their phalanxes too deep and thus giving the enemy a chance of surrounding them, — meanwhile the Lacedaemonians, having already picked up the Tegeans and Mantineans, were on their outward march, taking the road along the sea-shore.


4.2.14
1394
καὶ πορευόμενοι , σχεδόν τι ἅμα οἱ μὲν περὶ τοὺς Κορινθίους ἐν τῇ Νεμέᾳ ἦσαν , οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι ἐν τῷ Σικυῶνι .
And as the two armies marched on, the Corinthians and their allies were in the district of Nemea, and the Lacedaemonians and their allies at Sicyon, at almost the same time.


4.2.14
1395
ἐμβαλόντων δὲ αὐτῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἐπιείκειαν , τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐκ τῶν ὑπερδεξίων βάλλοντες αὐτοὺς καὶ τοξεύοντες μάλα κακῶς ἐποίουν οἱ γυμνῆτες τῶν ἀντιπάλων .
Now when the latter had made their entry into Corinthian territory by way of Epieiceia, at first the light troops of their adversaries did them a great deal of harm by throwing missiles and discharging arrows upon them from the heights upon their right.


4.2.15
1396
ὡς δὲ κατέβησαν ἐπὶ θάλατταν , ταύτῃ προῇσαν διὰ τοῦ πεδίου , τέμνοντες καὶ κάοντες τὴν χώραν ·
But when they had descended towards the sea, they marched on by this route through the plain, devastating and burning the land.


4.2.15
1397
καὶ οἱ ἕτεροι μέντοι ἀπελθόντες κατεστρατοπεδεύσαντο , ἔμπροσθεν ποιησάμενοι τὴν χαράδραν ·
The enemy also, however, retired and encamped, getting the river-bed in front of them;


4.2.15
1398
ἐπεὶ δὲ προϊόντες οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὐκέτι δέκα στάδια ἀπεῖχον τῶν πολεμίων , κ- ἐκεῖνοι αὐτοῦ στρατοπεδευσάμενοι ἡσυχίαν εἶχον .
and when, as they advanced, the Lacedaemonians were distant not so much as ten stadia from the enemy, they also encamped where they were and remained quiet.


4.2.16
1399
φράσω δὲ καὶ τὸ πλῆθος ἑκατέρων .
Now I will state the numbers on either side.


4.2.16
1400
συνελέγησαν γὰρ ὁπλῖται Λακεδαιμονίων μὲν εἰς ἑξακισχιλίους , Ἠλείων δὲ καὶ Τριφυλίων καὶ Ἀκρωρείων καὶ Λασιωνίων ἐγγὺς τρισχίλιοι καὶ Σικυωνίων πεντακόσιοι καὶ χίλιοι , Ἐπιδαυρίων δὲ καὶ Τροιζηνίων καὶ Ἑρμιονέων καὶ Ἁλιέων ἐγένοντο οὐκ ἐλάττους τρισχιλίων .
As for hoplites, there had gathered together of the Lacedaemonians about six thousand, of the Eleans, Triphylians, Acrorians, and Lasionians almost three thousand, and of the Sicyonians one thousand five hundred, while of the Epidaurians, Troezenians, Hermionians, and Halians there were not less than three thousand.


4.2.16
1401
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ἱππεῖς μὲν Λακεδαιμονίων περὶ ἑξακοσίους , Κρῆτες δὲ τοξόται ἠκολούθουν ὡς τριακόσιοι , καὶ μὴν σφενδονῆται Μαργανέων καὶ Λετρίνων καὶ Ἀμφιδόλων οὐκ ἐλάττους τετρακοσίων .
Besides these there were horsemen of the Lacedaemonians to the number of about seven hundred, Cretan bowmen who accompanied the army, about three hundred, and, further, slingers of the Marganians, Letrinians, and Amphidolians, not less than four hundred.


4.2.16
1402
Φλειάσιοι μέντοι οὐκ ἠκολούθουν ·
The Phliasians, however, would not join them;


4.2.16
1403
ἐκεχειρίαν γὰρ ἔφασαν ἔχειν .
for they said that they were keeping a holy truce.


4.2.16
1404
αὕτη μὲν δὴ ἡ μετὰ Λακεδαιμονίων δύναμις ἦν .
This, then, was the force on the side of the Lacedaemonians.


4.2.17
1405
ἥ γε μὴν τῶν πολεμίων ἡθροίσθη Ἀθηναίων μὲν εἰς ἑξακισχιλίους ὁπλίτας , Ἀργείων δ’ ἐλέγοντο περὶ ἑπτακισχιλίους , Βοιωτῶν δ’ , ἐπεὶ Ὀρχομένιοι οὐ παρῆσαν , περὶ πεντακισχιλίους , Κορινθίων γε μὴν εἰς τρισχιλίους , καὶ μὴν ἐξ Εὐβοίας ἁπάσης οὐκ ἐλάττους τρισχιλίων .
But the force of the enemy which was gathered together included, of the Athenians about six thousand hoplites, of the Argives, according to all accounts, about seven thousand, of the Boeotians (since the Orchomenians were not present) only about five thousand, of the Corinthians about three thousand, and, further, from the whole of Euboea not less than three thousand.


4.2.17
1406
ὁπλιτικὸν μὲν δὴ τοσοῦτον ·
This was the number of the hoplites;


4.2.17
1407
ἱππεῖς δὲ Βοιωτῶν μὲν ἐπεὶ Ὀρχομένιοι οὐ παρῆσαν εἰς ὀκτακοσίους , Ἀθηναίων δ’ εἰς ἑξακοσίους , καὶ Χαλκιδέων τῶν ἐξ Εὐβοίας εἰς ἑκατόν , Λοκρῶν δὲ τῶν Ὀπουντίων εἰς πεντήκοντα .
but as for horsemen, there were of the Boeotians (since the Orchomenians were not present) about eight hundred, of the Athenians about six hundred, of the Chalcidians from Euboea about one hundred, and of the Opuntian Locrians about fifty.


4.2.17
1408
καὶ ψιλῶν δὲ σὺν τοῖς τῶν Κορινθίων πλέον ἦν ·
And of light troops also there was a greater number with the party of the Corinthians;


4.2.17
1409
καὶ γὰρ Λοκροὶ οἱ Ὀζόλαι καὶ Μηλιεῖς καὶ Ἀκαρνᾶνες παρῆσαν αὐτοῖς .
for the Ozolian Locrians, Malians, and Acarnanians were with them.


4.2.18
1410
αὕτη μὲν δὴ ἑκατέρων ἡ δύναμις ἐγένετο .
This, then, was the force on either side.


4.2.18
1411
οἱ δὲ Βοιωτοὶ ἕως μὲν τὸ εὐώνυμον εἶχον , οὐδέν τι κατήπειγον τὴν μάχην συνάπτειν ·
Now the Boeotians, so long as they occupied the left wing, were not in the least eager to join battle;


4.2.18
1412
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ μὲν Ἀθηναῖοι κατὰ Λακεδαιμονίους ἐγένοντο , αὐτοὶ δὲ τὸ δεξιὸν ἔσχον καὶ κατ’ Ἀχαιοὺς ἀντετάχθησαν , εὐθὺς τά τε ἱερὰ καλὰ ἔφασαν εἶναι καὶ παρήγγειλαν παρασκευάζεσθαι ὡς μάχης ἐσομένης .
but when the Athenians took position opposite the Lacedaemonians, and the Boeotians themselves got the right wing and were stationed opposite the Achaeans, they immediately said that the sacrifices were favourable and gave the order to make ready, saying that there would be a battle.


4.2.18
1413
καὶ πρῶτον μὲν ἀμελήσαντες τοῦ εἰς ἑκκαίδεκα βαθεῖαν παντελῶς ἐποιήσαντο τὴν φάλαγγα , ἔτι δὲ καὶ ἦγον ἐπὶ τὰ δεξιά , ὅπως ὑπερέχοιεν τῷ κέρατι τῶν πολεμίων ·
And in the first place, disregarding the sixteen-rank formation, they made their phalanx exceedingly deep, and, besides, they also veered to the right in leading the advance, in order to outflank the enemy with their wing;


4.2.18
1414
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι , ἵνα μὴ διασπασθείησαν , ἐπηκολούθουν , καίπερ γιγνώσκοντες ὅτι κίνδυνος εἴη κυκλωθῆναι .
and the Athenians, in order not to be detached from the rest of the line, followed them towards the right, although they knew that there was danger of their being surrounded.


4.2.19
1415
τέως μὲν οὖν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὐκ ᾐσθάνοντο προσιόντων τῶν πολεμίων ·
Now for a time the Lacedaemonians did not perceive that the enemy were advancing;


4.2.19
1416
καὶ γὰρ ἦν λάσιον τὸ χωρίον ·
for the place was thickly overgrown;


4.2.19
1417
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐπαιάνισαν , τότε δὴ ἔγνωσαν , καὶ εὐθὺς ἀντιπαρήγγειλαν ἅπαντας διασκευάζεσθαι ὡς εἰς μάχην .
but when the latter struck up the paean, then at length they knew, and immediately gave orders in their turn that all should make ready for battle.


4.2.19
1418
ἐπεὶ δὲ συνετάχθησαν ὡς ἑκάστους οἱ ξεναγοὶ ἔταξαν , παρηγγύησαν μὲν ἀκολουθεῖν τῷ ἡγουμένῳ , ἦγον δὲ καὶ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐπὶ τὰ δεξιά , καὶ οὕτω πολὺ ὑπερέτεινον τὸ κέρας , ὥστε τῶν Ἀθηναίων αἱ μὲν ἓξ φυλαὶ κατὰ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἐγένοντο , αἱ δὲ τέτταρες κατὰ Τεγεάτας .
And when they had been drawn up together in the positions which the Lacedaemonian leaders of the allies assigned to the several divisions, they passed the word along to follow the van. Now the Lacedaemonians also veered to the right in leading the advance, and extended their wing so far beyond that of the enemy that only six tribes of the Athenians found themselves opposite the Lacedaemonians, the other four being opposite the Tegeans.


4.2.20
1419
οὐκέτι δὲ στάδιον ἀπεχόντων , σφαγιασάμενοι οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τῇ Ἀγροτέρᾳ , ὥσπερ νομίζεται , τὴν χίμαιραν , ἡγοῦντο ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐναντίους , τὸ ὑπερέχον ἐπικάμψαντες εἰς κύκλωσιν .
And when the armies were now not so much as a stadium apart, the Lacedaemonians sacrificed the goat to Artemis Agrotera, as is their custom, and led the charge upon their adversaries, wheeling round their overlapping wing in order to surround them.


4.2.20
1420
ἐπεὶ δὲ συνέμειξαν , οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι σύμμαχοι πάντες οἱ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἐκρατήθησαν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐναντίων , Πελληνεῖς δὲ κατὰ Θεσπιέας γενόμενοι ἐμάχοντό τε καὶ ἐν χώρᾳ ἔπιπτον ἑκατέρων .
When they had come to close encounter, all the allies of the Lacedaemonians were overcome by their adversaries except the men of Pellene, who, being pitted against the Thespians, fought and fell in their places,—as did also many of the other side.


4.2.21
1421
αὐτοὶ δὲ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὅσον τε κατέσχον τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἐκράτησαν , καὶ κυκλωσάμενοι τῷ ὑπερέχοντι πολλοὺς ἀπέκτειναν αὐτῶν , καὶ ἅτε δὴ ἀπαθεῖς ὄντες , συντεταγμένοι ἐπορεύοντο ·
But the Lacedaemonians themselves overcame that part of the Athenians which they covered, and wheeling round with their overlapping wing killed many of them, and then, unscathed as they were, marched on with lines unbroken.


4.2.21
1422
καὶ τὰς μὲν τέτταρας φυλὰς τῶν Ἀθηναίων πρὶν ἐκ τῆς διώξεως ἐπαναχωρῆσαι παρῆλθον , ὥστε οὐκ ἀπέθανον αὐτῶν πλὴν εἴ τις ἐν τῇ συμβολῇ ὑπὸ Τεγεατῶν ·
They passed by the other four tribes of the Athenians before the latter had returned from the pursuit, so that none of these were killed except such as fell in the original encounter, at the hands of the Tegeans;


4.2.22
1423
τοῖς δ’ Ἀργείοις ἐπιτυγχάνουσιν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀναχωροῦσι , καὶ μέλλοντος τοῦ πρώτου πολεμάρχου ἐκ τοῦ ἐναντίου συμβάλλειν αὐτοῖς , λέγεται ἄρα τις ἀναβοῆσαι παρεῖναι τοὺς πρώτους .
but the Lacedaemonians did come upon the Argives as they were returning from the pursuit, and when the first polemarch was about to attack them in front, it is said that some one shouted out to let their front ranks pass by.


4.2.22
1424
ὡς δὲ τοῦτ’ ἐγένετο , παραθέοντας δὴ παίοντες εἰς τὰ γυμνὰ πολλοὺς ἀπέκτειναν αὐτῶν .
When this had been done, they struck them on their unprotected sides as they ran past, and killed many of them.


4.2.22
1425
ἐπελάβοντο δὲ καὶ Κορινθίων ἀναχωρούντων .
The Lacedaemonians also attacked the Corinthians as they were returning.


4.2.22
1426
ἔτι δ’ ἐπέτυχον οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ τῶν Θηβαίων τισὶν ἀναχωροῦσιν ἐκ τῆς διώξεως , καὶ ἀπέκτειναν συχνοὺς αὐτῶν .
And, furthermore, they likewise came upon some of the Thebans returning from the pursuit, and killed a large number of them.


4.2.23
1427
τούτων δὲ γενομένων , οἱ ἡττώμενοι τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἔφευγον πρὸς τὰ τείχη ·
These things having taken place, the defeated troops at first fled to the walls of Corinth;


4.2.23
1428
ἔπειτα δ’ εἰρξάντων Κορινθίων πάλιν κατεσκήνησαν εἰς τὸ ἀρχαῖον στρατόπεδον .
but afterwards, since the Corinthians shut them out, they encamped again in their old camp.


4.2.23
1429
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δ’ αὖ ἐπαναχωρήσαντες , ἔνθα τὸ πρῶτον τοῖς πολεμίοις συνέμειξαν , ἐστήσαντο τροπαῖον .
The Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, returning to the place where they first engaged the enemy, set up a trophy.


4.2.23
1430
καὶ αὕτη μὲν δὴ ἡ μάχη οὕτως ἐγένετο .
Such, then, was the issue of this battle.


4.3.1
1431
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος σπεύδων μὲν ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας ἐβοήθει ·
Meanwhile Agesilaus was hurrying from Asia to the rescue;


4.3.1
1432
ὄντι δ’ αὐτῷ ἐν Ἀμφιπόλει ἀγγέλλει Δερκυλίδας ὅτι νικῷέν τε αὖ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , καὶ αὐτῶν μὲν τεθνάναι ὀκτώ , τῶν δὲ πολεμίων παμπλήθεις ·
and when he was at Amphipolis, Dercylidas brought him word that this time the Lacedaemonians were victorious, and that only eight of them had been killed, but of the enemy a vast number;


4.3.1
1433
ἐδήλου δὲ ὅτι καὶ τῶν συμμάχων οὐκ ὀλίγοι πεπτωκότες εἶεν .
he made it known to him, however, that not a few of the allies of the Lacedaemonians had also fallen.


4.3.2
1434
ἐρομένου δὲ τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου ·
And when Agesilaus asked:


4.3.2
1435
ἆρ’ ἄν , ὦ Δερκυλίδα , ἐν καιρῷ γένοιτο , εἰ αἱ συμπέμπουσαι πόλεις ἡμῖν τοὺς στρατιώτας τὴν νίκην ὡς τάχιστα πύθοιντο ;
Would it not be advantageous, Dercylidas, if the cities which are sending their troops with us should learn of the victory as speedily as possible?


4.3.2
1436
ἀπεκρίνατο δὴ ὁ Δερκυλίδας ·
Dercylidas replied:


4.3.2
1437
εὐθυμοτέρους γοῦν εἰκὸς ταῦτ’ ἀκούσαντας εἶναι .
It is certainly likely that they would be in better spirits if they heard of this.


4.3.2
1438
οὐκοῦν σύ , ἐπεὶ παρεγένου , κάλλιστα ἂν ἀπαγγείλαις ;
Then are not you the man who could report it best, since you were present at the battle?


4.3.2
1439
ὁ δὲ ἄσμενος ἀκούσας , καὶ γὰρ ἀεὶ φιλαπόδημος ἦν , εἶπεν ·
And Dercylidas, glad to hear this, for he was always fond of travel, replied:


4.3.2
1440
εἰ σὺ τάττοις .
If you should so order.


4.3.2
1441
ἀλλὰ τάττω , ἔφη , καὶ προσαπαγγέλλειν γε κελεύω ὅτι ἐὰν καὶ τάδε εὖ γένηται , πάλιν παρεσόμεθα , ὥσπερ καὶ ἔφαμεν .
Well, I do, said Agesilaus, and I bid you announce, further, that if the present undertaking also turns out well, we shall come back again, even as we said.


4.3.3
1442
ὁ μὲν δὴ Δερκυλίδας ἐφ’ Ἑλλησπόντου πρῶτον ἐπορεύετο ·
Accordingly Dercylidas set out at once for the Hellespont.


4.3.3
1443
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος διαλλάξας Μακεδονίαν εἰς Θετταλίαν ἀφίκετο .
And Agesilaus, passing through Macedonia, arrived in Thessaly.


4.3.3
1444
Λαρισαῖοι μὲν οὖν καὶ Κραννώνιοι καὶ Σκοτουσσαῖοι καὶ Φαρσάλιοι , σύμμαχοι ὄντες Βοιωτοῖς , καὶ πάντες δὲ Θετταλοί , πλὴν ὅσοι αὐτῶν φυγάδες τότ’ ἐτύγχανον , ἐκακούργουν αὐτὸν ἐπακολουθοῦντες .
Then the Larisaeans, Crannonians, Scotussaeans, and Pharsalians, who were allies of the Boeotians, and in fact all the Thessalians except those of them who chanced at that time to be exiles, followed after him and kept molesting him.


4.3.4
1445
ὁ δὲ τέως μὲν ἦγεν ἐν πλαισίῳ τὸ στράτευμα , τοὺς ἡμίσεις μὲν ἔμπροσθεν , τοὺς ἡμίσεις δ’ ἐπ’ οὐρᾷ ἔχων τῶν ἱππέων ·
And for a time he led the army in a hollow square, with one half of the horsemen in front and the other half at the rear;


4.3.4
1446
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐκώλυον τῆς πορείας οἱ Θετταλοὶ ἐπελαύνοντες τοῖς ὄπισθεν , παραπέμπει ἐπ’ οὐρὰν καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τοῦ στόματος ἱππικὸν πλὴν τῶν περὶ αὐτόν .
but when the Thessalians, by charging upon those who were behind, kept interfering with his progress, he sent along to the rear the vanguard of horsemen also, except those about his own person.


4.3.5
1447
ὡς δὲ παρετάξαντο ἀλλήλοις , οἱ μὲν Θετταλοὶ νομίσαντες οὐκ ἐν καλῷ εἶναι πρὸς τοὺς ὁπλίτας ἱππομαχεῖν , στρέψαντες βάδην ἀπεχώρουν .
Now when the two forces had formed in line of battle against one another, the Thessalians, thinking that it was not expedient to engage as cavalry in a battle with hoplites, turned round and slowly retired.


4.3.6
1448
οἱ δὲ μάλα σωφρόνως ἐπηκολούθουν .
And the Greeks very cautiously followed them.


4.3.6
1449
γνοὺς δὲ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ἃ ἑκάτεροι ἡμάρτανον , πέμπει τοὺς περὶ αὑτὸν μάλα εὐρώστους ἱππέας , καὶ κελεύει τοῖς τε ἄλλοις παραγγέλλειν καὶ αὐτοὺς διώκειν ὡς τάχιστα καὶ μηκέτι δοῦναι αὐτοῖς ἀναστροφήν .
Agesilaus, however, perceiving the mistakes which each side was making, sent the very stalwart horsemen who were about his person and ordered them not only to give word to the others to pursue with all speed, but to do likewise themselves, and not to give the Thessalians a chance to face round again.


4.3.7
1450
οἱ δὲ Θετταλοὶ ὡς εἶδον παρὰ δόξαν ἐλαύνοντας , οἱ μὲν αὐτῶν ἔφυγον , οἱ δ’ ἀνέστρεψαν , οἱ δὲ πειρώμενοι τοῦτο ποιεῖν , πλαγίους ἔχοντες τοὺς ἵππους ἡλίσκοντο .
And when the Thessalians saw them rushing upon them unexpectedly, some of them fled, others turned about, and others, in trying to do this, were captured while their horses were turned half round.


4.3.8
1451
Πολύχαρμος μέντοι ὁ Φαρσάλιος ἱππαρχῶν ἀνέστρεψέ τε καὶ μαχόμενος σὺν τοῖς περὶ αὐτὸν ἀποθνῄσκει .
But Polycharmus the Pharsalian, who was the commander of the cavalry, turned round and fell fighting, together with those about him.


4.3.8
1452
ὡς δὲ τοῦτ’ ἐγένετο , φυγὴ τῶν Θετταλῶν ἐξαισία γίγνεται ·
When this happened, there followed a headlong flight on the part of the Thessalians.


4.3.8
1453
ὥστε οἱ μὲν ἀπέθνῃσκον αὐτῶν , οἱ δὲ καὶ ἡλίσκοντο .
The result was that some of them were killed and others were captured.


4.3.8
1454
ἔστησαν δ’ οὖν οὐ πρόσθεν , πρὶν ἐν τῷ ὄρει τῷ Ναρθακίῳ ἐγένοντο .
At all events they did not stop until they had arrived at Mount Narthacium.


4.3.9
1455
καὶ τότε μὲν δὴ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος τροπαῖόν τ’ ἐστήσατο μεταξὺ Πραντὸς καὶ Ναρθακίου , καὶ αὐτοῦ ἔμεινε , μάλα ἡδόμενος τῷ ἔργῳ , ὅτι τοὺς μέγιστον φρονοῦντας ἐπὶ ἱππικῇ ἐνενικήκει σὺν ᾧ αὐτὸς συνέλεξεν ἱππικῷ .
On that day, accordingly, Agesilaus set up a trophy between Pras and Narthacium and remained on the field of battle, greatly pleased with his exploit, in that he had been victorious, over the people who pride themselves particularly upon their horsemanship, with the cavalry that he had himself gathered together.


4.3.9
1456
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ὑπερβάλλων τὰ Ἀχαϊκὰ τῆς Φθίας ὄρη τὴν λοιπὴν πᾶσαν διὰ φιλίας ἐπορεύετο μέχρι πρὸς τὰ Βοιωτῶν ὅρια .
And on the following day he crossed the Achaean mountains of Phthia and marched on through a friendly country all the rest of the way, even to the boundaries of the Boeotians.


4.3.10
1457
ὄντος δ’ αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τῇ ἐμβολῇ ὁ ἥλιος μηνοειδὴς ἔδοξε φανῆναι , καὶ ἠγγέλθη ὅτι ἡττημένοι εἶεν Λακεδαιμόνιοι τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ καὶ ὁ ναύαρχος Πείσανδρος τεθναίη .
When he was at the entrance to Boeotia, the sun seemed to appear crescent-shaped, and word was brought to him that the Lacedaemonians had been defeated in the naval battle and the admiral, Peisander, had been killed.


4.3.10
1458
ἐλέγετο δὲ καὶ ᾧ τρόπῳ ἡ ναυμαχία ἐγένετο .
It was also stated in what way the battle had been fought.


4.3.11
1459
εἶναι μὲν γὰρ περὶ Κνίδον τὸν ἐπίπλουν ἀλλήλοις , Φαρνάβαζον δὲ ναύαρχον ὄντα σὺν ταῖς Φοινίσσαις εἶναι , Κόνωνα δὲ τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν ἔχοντα τετάχθαι ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοῦ .
For it was near Cnidos that the fleets sailed against one another, and Pharnabazus, who was admiral, was with the Phoenician ships, while Conon with the Greek fleet was posted in front of him.


4.3.12
1460
ἀντιπαραταξαμένου δὲ τοῦ Πεισάνδρου , καὶ πολὺ ἐλαττόνων αὐτῷ τῶν νεῶν φανεισῶν τῶν αὑτοῦ τοῦ μετὰ Κόνωνος τοῦ Ἑλληνικοῦ , τοὺς μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ εὐωνύμου συμμάχους εὐθὺς αὐτῷ φεύγειν , αὐτὸν δὲ συμμείξαντα τοῖς πολεμίοις ἐμβολὰς ἐχούσῃ τῇ τριήρει πρὸς τὴν γῆν ἐξωσθῆναι ·
And when Peisander, in spite of his ships being clearly fewer than the Greek ships under Conon, had formed his line of battle against them, his allies on the left wing immediately fled, and he himself, after coming to close encounter with the enemy, was driven ashore, his trireme damaged by the enemy’s beaks;


4.3.12
1461
καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους ὅσοι εἰς τὴν γῆν ἐξεώσθησαν ἀπολιπόντας τὰς ναῦς σῴζεσθαι ὅπῃ δύναιντο εἰς τὴν Κνίδον , αὐτὸν δ’ ἐπὶ τῇ νηὶ μαχόμενον ἀποθανεῖν .
and all the others who were driven ashore abandoned their ships and made their escape as best they could to Cnidos, but he fell fighting on board his ship.


4.3.13
1462
ὁ οὖν Ἀγησίλαος πυθόμενος ταῦτα τὸ μὲν πρῶτον χαλεπῶς ἤνεγκεν ·
Now Agesilaus, on learning these things, at first was overcome with sorrow;


4.3.13
1463
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἐνεθυμήθη ὅτι τοῦ στρατεύματος τὸ πλεῖστον εἴη αὐτῷ οἷον ἀγαθῶν μὲν γιγνομένων ἡδέως μετέχειν , εἰ δέ τι χαλεπὸν ὁρῷεν , οὐκ ἀνάγκην εἶναι κοινωνεῖν αὐτοῖς , ἐκ τούτου μεταβαλὼν ἔλεγεν ὡς ἀγγέλλοιτο ὁ μὲν Πείσανδρος τετελευτηκώς , νικῴη δὲ τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ .
but when he had considered that the most of his troops were the sort of men to share gladly in good fortune if good fortune came, but that if they saw anything unpleasant, they were under no compulsion to share in it,—thereupon, changing the report, he said that word had come that Peisander was dead, but victorious in the naval battle.


4.3.14
1464
ἅμα δὲ ταῦτα λέγων καὶ ἐβουθύτει ὡς εὐαγγέλια καὶ πολλοῖς διέπεμπε τῶν τεθυμένων ·
And at the moment of saying these things he offered sacrifice as if for good news, and sent around to many people portions of the victims which had been offered;


4.3.14
1465
ὥστε ἀκροβολισμοῦ ὄντος πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους ἐκράτησαν οἱ τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου τῷ λόγῳ ὡς Λακεδαιμονίων νικώντων τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ .
so that when a skirmish with the enemy took place, the troops of Agesilaus won the day in consequence of the report that the Lacedaemonians were victorious in the naval battle.


4.3.15
1466
ἦσαν δ’ οἱ μὲν ἀντιτεταγμένοι τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ Βοιωτοί , Ἀθηναῖοι , Ἀργεῖοι , Κορίνθιοι , Αἰνιᾶνες , Εὐβοεῖς , Λοκροὶ ἀμφότεροι ·
Those who were now drawn up against Agesilaus were the Boeotians, Athenians, Argives, Corinthians, Aenianians, Euboeans, and both the Locrian peoples;


4.3.15
1467
σὺν Ἀγησιλάῳ δὲ Λακεδαιμονίων μὲν μόρα ἡ ἐκ Κορίνθου διαβᾶσα , ἥμισυ δὲ μόρας τῆς ἐξ Ὀρχομενοῦ , ἔτι δ’ οἱ ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος νεοδαμώδεις συστρατευσάμενοι αὐτῷ , πρὸς δὲ τούτοις οὗ Ἡριππίδας ἐξενάγει ξενικοῦ , ἔτι δὲ οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ πόλεων Ἑλληνίδων , καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ ὅσας διιὼν παρέλαβεν ·
while with Agesilaus was a regiment of Lacedaemonians which had crossed over from Corinth, half of the regiment from Orchomenus, furthermore the emancipated Helots from Lacedaemon who had made the expedition with him, besides these the foreign contingent which Herippidas commanded, and, furthermore, the troops from the Greek cities in Asia and from all those cities in Europe which he had brought over as he passed through them;


4.3.15
1468
αὐτόθεν δὲ προσεγένοντο ὁπλῖται Ὀρχομένιοι καὶ Φωκεῖς .
and from the immediate neighbourhood there came to him hoplites of the Orchomenians and Phocians.


4.3.15
1469
πελτασταί γε μὴν πολὺ πλείους οἱ μετ’ Ἀγησιλάου ·
As for peltasts, those with Agesilaus were far more numerous;


4.3.15
1470
ἱππεῖς δ’ αὖ παραπλήσιοι ἀμφοτέροις τὸ πλῆθος .
on the other hand, the horsemen of either side were about equal in number.


4.3.16
1471
ἡ μὲν δὴ δύναμις αὕτη ἀμφοτέρων ·
This, then, was the force on both sides;


4.3.16
1472
διηγήσομαι δὲ καὶ τὴν μάχην , καὶ πῶς ἐγένετο οἵα οὐκ ἄλλη τῶν γ’ ἐφ’ ἡμῶν .
and I will also describe the battle, and how it proved to be like no other of the battles of our time.


4.3.16
1473
συνῇσαν μὲν γὰρ εἰς τὸ κατὰ Κορώνειαν πεδίον οἱ μὲν σὺν Ἀγησιλάῳ ἀπὸ τοῦ Κηφισοῦ , οἱ δὲ σὺν Θηβαίοις ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἑλικῶνος .
They met on the plain of Coronea, those with Agesilaus coming from the Cephisus, and those with the Thebans from Mount Helicon.


4.3.16
1474
εἶχε δ’ Ἀγησίλαος μὲν δεξιὸν τοῦ μετ’ αὐτοῦ , Ὀρχομένιοι δ’ αὐτῷ ἔσχατοι ἦσαν τοῦ εὐωνύμου .
And Agesilaus occupied the right wing of the army under his command, while the Orchomenians were at the extreme end of his left wing.


4.3.16
1475
οἱ δ’ αὖ Θηβαῖοι αὐτοὶ μὲν δεξιοὶ ἦσαν , Ἀργεῖοι δ’ αὐτοῖς τὸ εὐώνυμον εἶχον .
On the other side, the Thebans themselves were on the right. The Argives occupied their left wing.


4.3.17
1476
συνιόντων δὲ τέως μὲν σιγὴ πολλὴ ἀπ’ ἀμφοτέρων ἦν ·
Now as the opposing armies were coming together, there was deep silence for a time in both lines;


4.3.17
1477
ἡνίκα δ’ ἀπεῖχον ἀλλήλων ὅσον στάδιον , ἀλαλάξαντες οἱ Θηβαῖοι δρόμῳ ὁμόσε ἐφέροντο .
but when they were distant from one another about a stadium, the Thebans raised the war-cry and rushed to close quarters on the run.


4.3.17
1478
ὡς δὲ τριῶν ἔτι πλέθρων ἐν μέσῳ ὄντων , ἀντεξέδραμον ἀπὸ τῆς Ἀγησιλάου φάλαγγος ὧν Ἡριππίδας ἐξενάγει καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς Ἴωνες καὶ Αἰολεῖς καὶ Ἑλλησπόντιοι , καὶ πάντες οὗτοι τῶν συνεκδραμόντων τε ἐγένοντο καὶ εἰς δόρυ ἀφικόμενοι ἔτρεψαν τὸ καθ’ αὑτούς .
When, however, the distance between the armies was still about three plethra, the troops whom Herippidas commanded, and with them the Ionians, Aeolians, and Hellespontines, ran forth in their turn from the phalanx of Agesilaus, and the whole mass joined in the charge and, when they came within spear thrust, put to flight the force in their front.


4.3.17
1479
Ἀργεῖοι μέντοι οὐκ ἐδέξαντο τοὺς περὶ Ἀγησίλαον , ἀλλ’ ἔφυγον ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλικῶνα .
As for the Argives, they did not await the attack of the forces of Agesilaus, but fled to Mount Helicon.


4.3.18
1480
κ- ἐνταῦθα οἱ μέν τινες τῶν ξένων ἐστεφάνουν ἤδη τὸν Ἀγησίλαον , ἀγγέλλει δέ τις αὐτῷ ὅτι οἱ Θηβαῖοι τοὺς Ὀρχομενίους διακόψαντες ἐν τοῖς σκευοφόροις εἴησαν .
Thereupon some of the mercenaries were already garlanding Agesilaus, when a man brought him word that the Thebans had cut their way through the Orchomenians and were in among the baggage train.


4.3.18
1481
καὶ ὁ μὲν εὐθὺς ἐξελίξας τὴν φάλαγγα ἦγεν ἐπ’ αὐτούς ·
And he immediately wheeled his phalanx and led the advance against them;


4.3.18
1482
οἱ δ’ αὖ Θηβαῖοι ὡς εἶδον τοὺς συμμάχους πρὸς Ἑλικῶνι πεφευγότας , διαπεσεῖν βουλόμενοι πρὸς τοὺς ἑαυτῶν , συσπειραθέντες ἐχώρουν ἐρρωμένως .
but the Thebans on their side, when they saw that their allies had taken refuge at Mount Helicon, wishing to break through to join their own friends, massed themselves together and came on stoutly.


4.3.19
1483
ἐνταῦθα δὴ Ἀγησίλαον ἀνδρεῖον μὲν ἔξεστιν εἰπεῖν ἀναμφισβητήτως ·
At this point one may unquestionably call Agesilaus courageous;


4.3.19
1484
οὐ μέντοι εἵλετό γε τὰ ἀσφαλέστατα .
at least he certainly did not choose the safest course.


4.3.19
1485
ἐξὸν γὰρ αὐτῷ παρέντι τοὺς διαπίπτοντας ἀκολουθοῦντι χειροῦσθαι τοὺς ὄπισθεν , οὐκ ἐποίησε τοῦτο , ἀλλ’ ἀντιμέτωπος συνέρραξε τοῖς Θηβαίοις ·
For while he might have let the men pass by who were trying to break through and then have followed them and overcome those in the rear, he did not do this, but crashed against the Thebans front to front;


4.3.19
1486
καὶ συμβαλόντες τὰς ἀσπίδας ἐωθοῦντο , ἐμάχοντο , ἀπέκτεινον , ἀπέθνῃσκον .
and setting shields against shields they shoved, fought, killed, and were killed.


4.3.19
1487
τέλος δὲ τῶν Θηβαίων οἱ μὲν διαπίπτουσι πρὸς τὸν Ἑλικῶνα , πολλοὶ δ’ ἀποχωροῦντες ἀπέθανον .
Finally, some of the Thebans broke through and reached Mount Helicon, but many were killed while making their way thither.


4.3.20
1488
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἡ μὲν νίκη Ἀγησιλάου ἐγεγένητο , τετρωμένος δ’ αὐτὸς προσενήνεκτο πρὸς τὴν φάλαγγα , προσελάσαντές τινες τῶν ἱππέων λέγουσιν αὐτῷ ὅτι τῶν πολεμίων ὡς ὀγδοήκοντα σὺν ὅπλοις ὑπὸ τῷ νεῷ εἰσι , καὶ ἠρώτων τί χρὴ ποιεῖν .
Now when the victory had fallen to Agesilaus and he himself had been carried, wounded, to the phalanx, some of the horsemen rode up and told him that about eighty of the enemy, still armed, had taken shelter in the temple of Athena, and asked him what they should do.


4.3.20
1489
ὁ δέ , καίπερ πολλὰ τραύματα ἔχων , ὅμως οὐκ ἐπελάθετο τοῦ θείου , ἀλλ’ ἐᾶν τε ἀπιέναι ᾗ βούλοιντο ἐκέλευε καὶ ἀδικεῖν οὐκ εἴα .
And he, although he had received many wounds, nevertheless did not forget the deity, but ordered them to allow these men to go away whithersoever they wished, and would permit them to commit no wrong.


4.3.20
1490
τότε μὲν οὖν , καὶ γὰρ ἦν ἤδη ὀψέ , δειπνοποιησάμενοι ἐκοιμήθησαν .
Then—it was already late—they took dinner and lay down to rest.


4.3.21
1491
πρῲ δὲ Γῦλιν τὸν πολέμαρχον παρατάξαι τε ἐκέλευε τὸ στράτευμα καὶ τροπαῖον ἵστασθαι , καὶ στεφανοῦσθαι πάντας τῷ θεῷ καὶ τοὺς αὐλητὰς πάντας αὐλεῖν .
And in the morning Agesilaus gave orders that Gylis, the polemarch, should draw up the army in line of battle and set up a trophy, that all should deck themselves with garlands in honour of the god, and that all the flute-players should play.


4.3.21
1492
καὶ οἱ μὲν ταῦτ’ ἐποίουν .
And they did these things.


4.3.21
1493
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ἔπεμψαν κήρυκας , ὑποσπόνδους τοὺς νεκροὺς αἰτοῦντες θάψαι .
The Thebans, however, sent heralds asking to bury their dead under a truce.


4.3.21
1494
καὶ οὕτω δὴ αἵ τε σπονδαὶ γίγνονται καὶ Ἀγησίλαος μὲν εἰς Δελφοὺς ἀφικόμενος δεκάτην τῶν ἐκ τῆς λείας τῷ θεῷ ἀπέθυσεν οὐκ ἐλάττω ἑκατὸν ταλάντων ·
In this way, accordingly, the truce was made, and Agesilaus went to Delphi and offered to the god a tithe of the amount derived from his booty, an offering of not less than one hundred talents;


4.3.21
1495
Γῦλις δὲ ὁ πολέμαρχος ἔχων τὸ στράτευμα ἀπεχώρησεν εἰς Φωκέας , ἐκεῖθεν δ’ εἰς τὴν Λοκρίδα ἐμβάλλει .
but Gylis, the polemarch, withdrew with the army to Phocis and from there made an invasion of Locris.


4.3.22
1496
καὶ τὴν μὲν ἄλλην ἡμέραν οἱ στρατιῶται καὶ σκεύη ἐκ τῶν κωμῶν καὶ σῖτον ἥρπαζον ·
And for most of the day the soldiers busied themselves in carrying off portable property and provisions from the villages;


4.3.22
1497
ἐπεὶ δὲ πρὸς ἑσπέραν ἦν , τελευταίων ἀποχωρούντων τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἐπηκολούθουν αὐτοῖς οἱ Λοκροὶ βάλλοντες καὶ ἀκοντίζοντες .
but when it was towards evening and they were withdrawing, the Lacedaemonians being in the rear, the Locrians followed after them throwing stones and javelins.


4.3.22
1498
ὡς δ’ αὐτῶν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὑποστρέψαντες καὶ διώξαντες κατέβαλόν τινας , ἐκ τούτου ὄπισθεν μὲν οὐκέτι ἐπηκολούθουν , ἐκ δὲ τῶν ὑπερδεξίων ἔβαλλον .
And when the Lacedaemonians, turning about and setting out in pursuit, had struck down some of them, after that, although the Locrians no longer followed in their rear, they threw missiles upon them from the heights upon their right.


4.3.23
1499
οἱ δ’ ἐπεχείρησαν μὲν καὶ πρὸς τὸ σιμὸν διώκειν ·
Then the Lacedaemonians again undertook to pursue them, even up the slope;


4.3.23
1500
ἐπεὶ δὲ σκότος τε ἐγίγνετο καὶ ἀποχωροῦντες οἱ μὲν διὰ τὴν δυσχωρίαν ἔπιπτον , οἱ δὲ καὶ διὰ τὸ μὴ προορᾶν τὰ ἔμπροσθεν , οἱ δὲ καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν βελῶν , ἐνταῦθα ἀποθνῄσκουσι Γῦλίς τε ὁ πολέμαρχος καὶ τῶν παραστατῶν Πελλῆς , καὶ οἱ πάντες ὡς ὀκτωκαίδεκα τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν , οἱ μὲν καταλευσθέντες , οἱ δὲ καὶ τραυματισθέντες .
but since darkness was coming on and, as they were retiring from the pursuit, some of them fell on account of the roughness of the country, others because they could not see what was ahead of them, and still others from the missiles of the enemy, under these circumstances Gylis, the polemarch, and Pelles, one of his comrades, were slain, and in all about eighteen of the Spartiatae, some by being stoned to death, some by javelin wounds.


4.3.23
1501
εἰ δὲ μὴ ἐβοήθησαν αὐτοῖς ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου δειπνοῦντες , ἐκινδύνευσαν ἂν ἅπαντες ἀπολέσθαι .
And if some of those who were in the camp at dinner had not come to their aid, all of them would have been in danger of perishing.


4.4.1
1502
μετὰ τοῦτό γε μὴν ἀφείθη μὲν κατὰ πόλεις τὸ ἄλλο στράτευμα , ἀπέπλευσε δὲ καὶ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ἐπ’ οἴκου .
After this the various contingents of the army were dismissed to their several cities and Agesilaus also sailed back home.


4.4.1
1503
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἐπολέμουν Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν καὶ Βοιωτοὶ καὶ Ἀργεῖοι καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι αὐτῶν ἐκ Κορίνθου ὁρμώμενοι , Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι ἐκ Σικυῶνος .
And from that time on the Athenians, Boeotians, Argives, and their allies continued the war, making Corinth their base, and the Lacedaemonians and their allies from Sicyon.


4.4.1
1504
ὁρῶντες δ’ οἱ Κορίνθιοι ἑαυτῶν μὲν καὶ τὴν χώραν δῃουμένην καὶ ἀποθνῄσκοντας διὰ τὸ ἀεὶ τῶν πολεμίων ἐγγὺς εἶναι , τοὺς δ’ ἄλλους συμμάχους καὶ αὐτοὺς ἐν εἰρήνῃ ὄντας καὶ τὰς χώρας αὐτῶν ἐνεργοὺς οὔσας , οἱ πλεῖστοι καὶ βέλτιστοι αὐτῶν εἰρήνης ἐπεθύμησαν , καὶ συνιστάμενοι ἐδίδασκον ταῦτα ἀλλήλους .
As the Corinthians, however, saw that their own land was being laid waste and that many of them were being killed because they were continually near the enemy, while the rest of the allies were living in peace themselves and their lands were under cultivation, the most and best of them came to desire peace, and uniting together urged this course upon one another.


4.4.2
1505
γνόντες δ’ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ Βοιωτοὶ καὶ Κορινθίων οἵ τε τῶν παρὰ βασιλέως χρημάτων μετεσχηκότες καὶ οἱ τοῦ πολέμου αἰτιώτατοι γεγενημένοι ὡς εἰ μὴ ἐκποδὼν ποιήσοιντο τοὺς ἐπὶ τὴν εἰρήνην τετραμμένους , κινδυνεύσει πάλιν ἡ πόλις λακωνίσαι , οὕτω δὴ σφαγὰς ἐπεχείρουν ποιεῖσθαι .
But the Argives, Athenians, Boeotians, and those among the Corinthians who had received a share of the money from the King, as well as those who had made themselves chiefly responsible for the war, realizing that if they did not put out of the way the people who had turned toward peace, the state would be in danger of going over to the Lacedaemonians again, undertook, under these circumstances, to bring about a general massacre.


4.4.2
1506
καὶ πρῶτον μὲν τὸ πάντων ἀνοσιώτατον ἐβουλεύσαντο ·
And in the first place, they devised the most sacrilegious of all schemes;


4.4.2
1507
οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἄλλοι , κἂν νόμῳ τις καταγνωσθῇ , οὐκ ἀποκτιννύουσιν ἐν ἑορτῇ ·
for other people, even if a man is condemned by process of law, do not put him to death during a religious festival;


4.4.2
1508
ἐκεῖνοι δ’ Εὐκλείων τὴν τελευταίαν προείλοντο , ὅτι πλείους ἂν ᾤοντο λαβεῖν ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ , ὥστε ἀποκτεῖναι .
but these men chose the last day of the Euclea, because they thought they would catch more people in the market-place, so as to kill them.


4.4.3
1509
ὡς δ’ ἐσημάνθη οἷς εἴρητο οὓς ἔδει ἀποκτεῖναι , σπασάμενοι τὰ ξίφη ἔπαιον τὸν μέν τινα συνεστηκότα ἐν κύκλῳ , τὸν δὲ καθήμενον , τὸν δέ τινα ἐν θεάτρῳ , ἔστι δ’ ὃν καὶ κριτὴν καθήμενον .
Then again, when the signal was given to those who had been told whom they were to kill, they drew their swords and struck men down,—one while standing in a social group, another while sitting in his seat, still another in the theatre, and another even while he was sitting as judge in a dramatic contest.


4.4.3
1510
ὡς δ’ ἐγνώσθη τὸ πρᾶγμα , εὐθὺς ἔφευγον οἱ βέλτιστοι , οἱ μὲν πρὸς τὰ ἀγάλματα τῶν ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ θεῶν , οἱ δ’ ἐπὶ τοὺς βωμούς ·
Now when the situation became known, the better classes immediately fled, in part to the statues of the gods in the market-place, in part to the altars;


4.4.3
1511
ἔνθα δὴ οἱ ἀνοσιώτατοι καὶ παντάπασιν οὐδὲν νόμιμον φρονοῦντες , οἵ τε κελεύοντες καὶ οἱ πειθόμενοι , ἔσφαττον καὶ πρὸς τοῖς ἱεροῖς , ὥστ’ ἐνίους καὶ τῶν οὐ τυπτομένων , νομίμων δ’ ἀνθρώπων , ἀδημονῆσαι τὰς ψυχὰς ἰδόντας τὴν ἀσέβειαν .
then the conspirators, utterly sacrilegious and without so much as a single thought for civilized usage, both those who gave the orders and those who obeyed, kept up the slaughter even at the holy places, so that some even among those who were not victims of the attack, being right-minded men, were dismayed in their hearts at beholding such impiety.


4.4.4
1512
ἀποθνῄσκουσι δ’ οὕτω τῶν μὲν πρεσβυτέρων πολλοί ·
In this way many of the older men were killed;


4.4.4
1513
μᾶλλον γὰρ ἔτυχον ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ ὄντες ·
for it was they especially who chanced to be in the market-place;


4.4.4
1514
οἱ δὲ νεώτεροι , ὑποπτεύσαντος Πασιμήλου τὸ μέλλον ἔσεσθαι , ἡσυχίαν ἔσχον ἐν τῷ Κρανείῳ .
while the younger men, since Pasimelus suspected what was going to happen, had remained quietly in the gymnasium of Craneium.


4.4.4
1515
ὡς δὲ τῆς κραυγῆς ᾔσθοντο , καὶ φεύγοντές τινες ἐκ τοῦ πράγματος ἀφίκοντο πρὸς αὐτούς , ἐκ τούτου ἀναδραμόντες κατὰ τὸν Ἀκροκόρινθον , προσβαλόντας μὲν Ἀργείους καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἀπεκρούσαντο ·
But when they heard the outcry and some had come to them in flight from the massacre, thereupon, rushing up on the slopes of Acrocorinthus, they beat off an attack which the Argives and the rest made upon them.


4.4.5
1516
βουλευομένων δὲ τί χρὴ ποιεῖν , πίπτει τὸ κιόκρανον ἀπό του κίονος οὔτε σεισμοῦ οὔτε ἀνέμου γενομένου .
While they were deliberating, however, as to what they should do, the capital fell from a column, although there had been neither earthquake nor wind.


4.4.5
1517
καὶ θυομένοις δὲ τοιαῦτα ἦν τὰ ἱερὰ ὥστε οἱ μάντεις ἔφασαν ἄμεινον εἶναι καταβαίνειν ἐκ τοῦ χωρίου .
Likewise, when they sacrificed, the omens from the victims were such that the seers said it was better to descend from the place.


4.4.5
1518
καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὡς φευξόμενοι ἔξω τῆς Κορινθίας ἀπεχώρησαν ·
And at first they retired beyond the territory of Corinth with the intention of going into exile;


4.4.5
1519
ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ οἱ φίλοι αὐτοὺς ἔπειθον καὶ μητέρες ἰοῦσαι καὶ ἀδελφοί , καὶ αὐτῶν δὲ τῶν ἐν δυνάμει ὄντων ἦσαν οἳ ὀμνύοντες ὑπισχνοῦντο μηδὲν χαλεπὸν αὐτοὺς πείσεσθαι , οὕτω δὴ ἀπῆλθόν τινες οἴκαδε αὐτῶν .
but when their friends and mothers and sisters kept coming to them and trying to dissuade them, and, further, some of the very men who were in power promised under oath that they should suffer no harm, under these circumstances some of them returned home.


4.4.6
1520
ὁρῶντες δὲ τοὺς τυραννεύοντας , αἰσθανόμενοι δὲ ἀφανιζομένην τὴν πόλιν διὰ τὸ καὶ ὅρους ἀνασπᾶσθαι καὶ Ἄργος ἀντὶ Κορίνθου τὴν πατρίδα αὐτοῖς ὀνομάζεσθαι , καὶ πολιτείας μὲν ἀναγκαζόμενοι τῆς ἐν Ἄργει μετέχειν , ἧς οὐδὲν ἐδέοντο , ἐν δὲ τῇ πόλει μετοίκων ἔλαττον δυνάμενοι , ἐγένοντό τινες αὐτῶν οἳ ἐνόμισαν οὕτω μὲν ἀβίωτον εἶναι ·
They saw, however, that those who were in power were ruling like tyrants, and perceived that their state was being put out of existence, inasmuch as boundary stones had been removed and their fatherland was called Argos instead of Corinth; and, while they were compelled to share in the rights of citizenship at Argos, for which they had no desire, they had less influence in their state than aliens.


4.4.6
1521
πειρωμένους δὲ τὴν πατρίδα , ὥσπερ ἦν καὶ ἐξ ἀρχῆς , Κόρινθον ποιῆσαι καὶ ἐλευθέραν ἀποδεῖξαι καὶ τῶν μὲν μιαιφόνων καθαράν , εὐνομίᾳ δὲ χρωμένην , ἄξιον εἶναι , εἰ μὲν δύναιντο καταπρᾶξαι ταῦτα , σωτῆρας γενέσθαι τῆς πατρίδος , εἰ δὲ μὴ δύναιντο , τῶν γε καλλίστων καὶ μεγίστων ἀγαθῶν ὀρεγομένους ἀξιεπαινοτάτης τελευτῆς τυχεῖν .
Some of them, accordingly, came to the belief that life under such conditions was not endurable; but if they endeavoured to make their fatherland Corinth again, even as it had been from the beginning, and to make it free, and not only pure of the stain of the murderers, but blest with an orderly government, they thought it a worthy deed, if they could accomplish these things, to become saviours of their fatherland, but if they could not do so, to meet a most praiseworthy death in striving after the fairest and greatest blessings.


4.4.7
1522
οὕτω δὴ ἐπιχειρεῖτον ἄνδρε δύο , Πασίμηλός τε καὶ Ἀλκιμένης , διαδύντε διὰ χειμάρρου συγγενέσθαι Πραξίτᾳ τῷ Λακεδαιμονίων πολεμάρχῳ , ὃς ἐτύγχανε μετὰ τῆς ἑαυτοῦ μόρας φρουρῶν ἐν Σικυῶνι , καὶ εἶπον ὅτι δύναιντ’ ἂν παρασχεῖν αὐτῷ εἴσοδον εἰς τὰ κατατείνοντα ἐπὶ Λέχαιον τείχη .
Accordingly two men, Pasimelus and Alcimenes, undertook by wading through a torrent to effect a meeting with Praxitas, the Lacedaemonian polemarch, who chanced to be on garrison duty with his regiment at Sicyon, and told him that they could give him entrance to the walls which reached down to Lechaeum.


4.4.7
1523
ὁ δὲ καὶ πρόσθεν γιγνώσκων τὼ ἄνδρε ἀξιοπίστω ὄντε , ἐπίστευσε , καὶ διαπραξάμενος ὥστε καὶ τὴν ἀπιέναι μέλλουσαν ἐκ Σικυῶνος μόραν καταμεῖναι , ἔπραττε τὴν εἴσοδον .
And Praxitas, since even before this he had known the two men to be trustworthy, trusted them, and after arranging that the regiment which was about to depart from Sicyon should also remain, made plans for his entrance.


4.4.8
1524
ἐπεὶ δὲ τὼ ἄνδρε καὶ κατὰ τύχην καὶ κατ’ ἐπιμέλειαν ἐγενέσθην φύλακε κατὰ τὰς πύλας ταύτας ἔνθαπερ τὸ τροπαῖον ἕστηκεν , οὕτω δὴ ἔχων ὁ Πραξίτας ἔρχεται τήν τε μόραν καὶ Σικυωνίους καὶ Κορινθίων ὅσοι φυγάδες ὄντες ἐτύγχανον .
And when the two men, partly by accident and partly by contrivance, had been made sentinels at the very gate where the trophy stands, then Praxitas came with his regiment, the Sicyonians, and all the Corinthians who chanced to be exiles.


4.4.8
1525
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἦν πρὸς ταῖς πύλαις , φοβούμενος τὴν εἴσοδον , ἐβουλήθη τῶν πιστῶν ἄνδρα εἰσπέμψαι σκεψόμενον τὰ ἔνδον .
But when he was at the gate, being afraid to make the entry, he wished to send in one of his trusted men to examine the situation inside.


4.4.8
1526
τὼ δὲ εἰσηγαγέτην καὶ οὕτως ἁπλῶς ἀπεδειξάτην ὥστε ὁ εἰσελθὼν ἐξήγγειλε πάντα εἶναι ἀδόλως οἷάπερ ἐλεγέτην .
Then the two Corinthians led him in and showed him everything in so straightforward a manner that the man who went in reported that all was truly just as they said.


4.4.8
1527
ἐκ τούτου δ’ εἰσέρχεται .
Thereupon Praxitas entered.


4.4.9
1528
ὡς δὲ πολὺ διεχόντων τῶν τειχῶν ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων παραταττόμενοι ὀλίγοι ἑαυτοῖς ἔδοξαν εἶναι , σταύρωμά τ’ ἐποιήσαντο καὶ τάφρον οἵαν ἐδύναντο πρὸ αὑτῶν , ἕως δὴ οἱ σύμμαχοι βοηθήσοιεν αὐτοῖς .
The walls, however, are a long distance from each other; his troops, in consequence, when they formed in line for battle, thought themselves to be few in number, and therefore made a stockade and as good a trench as they could in front of them, to protect them until their allies should come to their aid.


4.4.9
1529
ἦν δὲ καὶ ὄπισθεν αὐτῶν ἐν τῷ λιμένι Βοιωτῶν φυλακή .
Besides, there was a garrison of Thebans in their rear, at the port.


4.4.9
1530
τὴν μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ τῇ νυκτὶ ᾗ εἰσῆλθον ἡμέραν ἄμαχοι διήγαγον ·
Now the day after the night on which they entered they passed without a battle;


4.4.9
1531
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἧκον οἱ Ἀργεῖοι πασσυδίᾳ βοηθοῦντες ·
but on the following day came the Argives, hurrying with all speed to the rescue;


4.4.9
1532
καὶ εὑρόντες τεταγμένους Λακεδαιμονίους μὲν ἐπὶ τῷ δεξιῷ ἑαυτῶν , Σικυωνίους δὲ ἐχομένους , Κορινθίων δὲ τοὺς φυγάδας ὡς πεντήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν πρὸς τῷ ἑῴῳ τείχει , ἀντιτάττονται ἐχόμενοι δὲ τοῦ ἑῴου τείχους οἱ περὶ Ἰφικράτην μισθοφόροι , πρὸς δὲ τούτοις Ἀργεῖοι ·
and finding the Lacedaemonians stationed on the right of their own line, the Sicyonians next to them, and the Corinthian exiles, about one hundred and fifty in number, by the eastern wall, the enemy formed in line against them with the mercenaries under Iphicrates close to the eastern wall, and next to them the Argives;


4.4.9
1533
εὐώνυμον δ’ εἶχον αὐτοῖς Κορίνθιοι οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως .
while the Corinthians from the city occupied their left wing.


4.4.10
1534
καταφρονήσαντες δὲ τῷ πλήθει εὐθὺς ἐχώρουν ·
Then the Argives, filled with overweening confidence on account of their numbers, advanced at once;


4.4.10
1535
καὶ τοὺς μὲν Σικυωνίους ἐκράτησαν καὶ διασπάσαντες τὸ σταύρωμα ἐδίωκον ἐπὶ θάλατταν , καὶ ἐκεῖ πολλοὺς αὐτῶν ἀπέκτειναν .
and they defeated the Sicyonians, and breaking through the stockade pursued them to the sea and there killed many of them.


4.4.10
1536
Πασίμαχος δὲ ὁ ἱππαρμοστής , ἔχων ἱππέας οὐ πολλούς , ὡς ἑώρα τοὺς Σικυωνίους πιεζομένους , καταδήσας ἀπὸ δένδρων τοὺς ἵππους , καὶ ἀφελόμενος τὰς ἀσπίδας αὐτῶν , μετὰ τῶν ἐθελόντων ᾔει ἐναντίον τοῖς Ἀργείοις .
But Pasimachus, the Lacedaemonian commander of horse, at the head of a few horsemen, when he saw the Sicyonians hard pressed, tied his horses to trees, took from the Sicyonians their shields, and advanced with a volunteer force against the Argives.


4.4.10
1537
οἱ δὲ Ἀργεῖοι ὁρῶντες τὰ σίγμα τὰ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀσπίδων , ὡς Σικυωνίους οὐδὲν ἐφοβοῦντο .
The Argives, however, seeing the Sigmas upon the shields, did not fear these opponents at all, thinking that they were Sicyonians.


4.4.10
1538
ἔνθα δὴ λέγεται εἰπὼν ὁ Πασίμαχος ·
Then, as the story goes, Pasimachus said:


4.4.10
1539
ναὶ τὼ σιώ , ὦ Ἀργεῖοι , ψευσεῖ ὑμὲ τὰ σίγμα ταῦτα , χωρεῖν ὁμόσε ·
By the twin gods, Argives, these Sigmas will deceive you,


4.4.10
1540
καὶ οὕτω μαχόμενος μετ’ ὀλίγων πρὸς πολλοὺς ἀποθνῄσκει καὶ ἄλλοι τῶν περὶ αὐτόν .
and came to close quarters with them; and fighting thus with a few against many he was slain, and likewise others of his party.


4.4.11
1541
οἱ μέντοι φυγάδες τῶν Κορινθίων νικῶντες τοὺς καθ’ αὑτοὺς διέδυσαν ἄνω , καὶ ἐγένοντο ἐγγὺς τοῦ περὶ τὸ ἄστυ κύκλου ·
Meanwhile the Corinthian exiles, being victorious over the troops opposed to them, pushed their way through in the inland direction and got near the wall which surrounded the city.


4.4.11
1542
οἱ δ’ αὖ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὡς ᾔσθοντο κρατούμενα τὰ κατὰ τοὺς Σικυωνίους , βοηθοῦσιν ἐξελθόντες , ἐν ἀριστερᾷ ἔχοντες τὸ σταύρωμα .
As for the Lacedaemonians, when they perceived that the forces opposed to the Sicyonians were victorious, they issued forth from the stockade and went to the rescue, keeping the stockade on their left.


4.4.11
1543
οἵ γε μὴν Ἀργεῖοι ἐπεὶ ἤκουσαν ὄπισθεν ὄντας τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους , στραφέντες δρόμῳ πάλιν ἐκ τοῦ σταυρώματος ἐξέπιπτον .
But when the Argives heard that the Lacedaemonians were in their rear, they turned around and burst out of the stockade again on the run.


4.4.11
1544
καὶ οἱ μὲν ἐν δεξιᾷ ἔσχατοι αὐτῶν παιόμενοι εἰς τὰ γυμνὰ ὑπὸ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἀπέθνῃσκον , οἱ δὲ πρὸς τῷ τείχει ἁθρόοι σὺν πολλῷ ὄχλῳ πρὸς τὴν πόλιν ἀπεχώρουν .
And those upon their extreme right were struck on their unprotected sides by the Lacedaemonians and killed, but those who were near the wall, crowded together in a disorderly mass, continued their retreat towards the city.


4.4.11
1545
ὡς δ’ ἐνέτυχον τοῖς φυγάσι τῶν Κορινθίων , καὶ ἔγνωσαν πολεμίους ὄντας , ἀπέκλιναν πάλιν .
When, however, they came upon the Corinthian exiles and discovered that they were enemies, they turned back again.


4.4.11
1546
ἐνταῦθα μέντοι οἱ μὲν κατὰ τὰς κλίμακας ἀναβαίνοντες ἥλλοντο κατὰ τοῦ τείχους καὶ διεφθείροντο , οἱ δὲ περὶ τὰς κλίμακας ὠθούμενοι καὶ παιόμενοι ἀπέθνῃσκον , οἱ δὲ καὶ καταπατούμενοι ὑπ’ ἀλλήλων ἀπεπνίγοντο .
Thereupon some of them, climbing up by the steps to the top of the wall, jumped down on the other side and were killed, others perished around the steps, being shoved and struck by the enemy, and still others were trodden under foot by one another and suffocated.


4.4.12
1547
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὐκ ἠπόρουν τίνα ἀποκτείνοιεν ·
And the Lacedaemonians were in no uncertainty about whom they should kill;


4.4.12
1548
ἔδωκε γὰρ τότε γε ὁ θεὸς αὐτοῖς ἔργον οἷον οὐδ’ ηὔξαντό ποτ’ ἄν .
for then at least heaven granted them an achievement such as they could never even have prayed for.


4.4.12
1549
τὸ γὰρ ἐγχειρισθῆναι αὐτοῖς πολεμίων πλῆθος πεφοβημένον , ἐκπεπληγμένον , τὰ γυμνὰ παρέχον , ἐπὶ τὸ μάχεσθαι οὐδένα τρεπόμενον , εἰς δὲ τὸ ἀπόλλυσθαι πάντας πάντα ὑπηρετοῦντας , πῶς οὐκ ἄν τις θεῖον ἡγήσαιτο ;
For to have a crowd of enemies delivered into their hands, frightened, panic-stricken, presenting their unprotected sides, no one rallying to his own defence, but all rendering all possible assistance toward their own destruction,—how could one help regarding this as a gift from heaven?


4.4.12
1550
τότε γοῦν οὕτως ἐν ὀλίγῳ πολλοὶ ἔπεσον ὥστε εἰθισμένοι ὁρᾶν οἱ ἄνθρωποι σωροὺς σίτου , ξύλων , λίθων , τότε ἐθεάσαντο σωροὺς νεκρῶν .
On that day, at all events, so many fell within a short time that men accustomed to see heaps of corn, wood, or stones, beheld then heaps of dead bodies.


4.4.12
1551
ἀπέθανον δὲ καὶ οἱ ἐν τῷ λιμένι τῶν Βοιωτῶν φύλακες , οἱ μὲν ἐπὶ τῶν τειχῶν , οἱ δὲ ἐπὶ τὰ τέγη τῶν νεωσοίκων ἀναβάντες .
Furthermore, the Boeotians of the garrison in the port were also killed, some upon the walls, and others after they had climbed up on the roofs of the ship-houses.


4.4.13
1552
μετὰ μὲν τοίνυν τοῦτο οἱ μὲν Κορίνθιοι καὶ Ἀργεῖοι τοὺς νεκροὺς ὑποσπόνδους ἀπήγοντο , οἱ δὲ σύμμαχοι τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἐβοήθουν .
After this the Corinthians and Argives carried of their dead under a truce, and the allies of the Lacedaemonians came to their aid.


4.4.13
1553
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἡθροίσθησαν , ἔγνω Πραξίτας πρῶτον μὲν τῶν τειχῶν καθελεῖν ὥστε δίοδον στρατοπέδῳ ἱκανὴν εἶναι , ἔπειτα δ’ ἀναλαβὼν τὸ στράτευμα ἦγε τὴν ἐπὶ Μέγαρα , καὶ αἱρεῖ προσβαλὼν πρῶτον μὲν Σιδοῦντα , ἔπειτα δὲ Κρομμυῶνα .
And when they were gathered together, in the first place Praxitas decided to tear down a portion of the walls so as to make a passage through wide enough for an army, and secondly, putting himself at the head of his army, he advanced by the road to Megara and captured by storm, first Sidus and then Crommyon.


4.4.13
1554
καὶ ἐν τούτοις τοῖς τείχεσι καταστήσας φρουροὺς τ- ἔμπαλιν ἐπορεύετο ·
And after stationing garrisons in these strongholds he marched back again;


4.4.13
1555
καὶ τειχίσας Ἐπιείκειαν , ἵνα φρούριον εἴη πρὸ τῆς φιλίας τοῖς συμμάχοις , οὕτω διαφῆκε τὸ στράτευμα , καὶ αὐτὸς τὴν ἐπὶ Λακεδαίμονα ἀπεχώρει .
then he fortified Epieiceia, in order that it might serve as an outpost to protect the territory of his allies, and then disbanded his army and himself withdrew by the road to Lacedaemon.


4.4.14
1556
ἐκ δὲ τούτου στρατιαὶ μὲν μεγάλαι ἑκατέρων διεπέπαυντο , φρουροὺς δὲ πέμπουσαι αἱ πόλεις , αἱ μὲν εἰς Κόρινθον , αἱ δὲ εἰς Σικυῶνα , ἐφύλαττον τὰ τείχη ·
From this time on large armies of citizens were no longer employed on either side, for the states merely sent out garrisons, the one party to Corinth, the other to Sicyon, and guarded the walls of these cities.


4.4.14
1557
μισθοφόρους γε μὴν ἑκάτεροι ἔχοντες διὰ τούτων ἐρρωμένως ἐπολέμουν .
Each side, however, had mercenaries, and with these prosecuted the war vigorously.


4.4.15
1558
ἔνθα δὴ καὶ Ἰφικράτης εἰς Φλειοῦντα ἐμβαλὼν καὶ ἐνεδρευσάμενος , ὀλίγοις δὲ λεηλατῶν , βοηθησάντων τῶν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἀφυλάκτως , ἀπέκτεινε τοσούτους ὥστε καὶ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους πρόσθεν οὐ δεχόμενοι εἰς τὸ τεῖχος οἱ Φλειάσιοι , φοβούμενοι μὴ τοὺς φάσκοντας ἐπὶ λακωνισμῷ φεύγειν κατάγοιεν , τότε οὕτω κατεπλάγησαν τοὺς ἐκ Κορίνθου ὥστε μετεπέμψαντό τε τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους , καὶ τὴν πόλιν καὶ τὴν ἄκραν φυλάττειν αὐτοῖς παρέδωκαν .
It was at this time also that Iphicrates invaded the territory of Phlius, set an ambush, meanwhile plundering with a few followers, and when the men from the city came out against him in an unguarded way, killed so many of them that the Phliasians, although before this they had refused to receive the Lacedaemonians within their wall, from fear that the latter would bring back to the city the people who said that they were in exile on account of their Lacedaemonian sympathies, were then seized with such panic fear of the men from Corinth that they sent for the Lacedaemonians and put the city and the citadel in their hands to guard.


4.4.15
1559
οἱ μέντοι Λακεδαιμόνιοι , καίπερ εὐνοϊκῶς ἔχοντες τοῖς φυγάσιν , ὅσον χρόνον εἶχον αὐτῶν τὴν πόλιν , οὐδ’ ἐμνήσθησαν παντάπασι περὶ καθόδου φυγάδων , ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ ἀναθαρρῆσαι ἐδόκει ἡ πόλις , ἐξῆλθον καὶ τὴν πόλιν καὶ τοὺς νόμους παραδόντες οἵανπερ καὶ παρέλαβον .
And the Lacedaemonians, although they were well minded toward the exiles, during all the time that they held their city made not so much as the least mention of a restoration of exiles, but when the city seemed to have recovered its courage, they departed, after giving over to the Phliasians both their city and their laws unchanged, precisely as they were when they took the city in charge.


4.4.16
1560
οἱ δ’ αὖ περὶ τὸν Ἰφικράτην πολλαχόσε καὶ τῆς Ἀρκαδίας ἐμβαλόντες ἐλεηλάτουν τε καὶ προσέβαλλον πρὸς τὰ τείχη ·
Again, Iphicrates and his troops invaded many districts of Arcadia also, where they plundered and made attacks upon the walled towns;


4.4.16
1561
ἔξω γὰρ οἱ τῶν Ἀρκάδων ὁπλῖται παντάπασιν οὐκ ἀντεξῇσαν ·
for the hoplites of the Arcadians did not come out from their walls at all to meet them;


4.4.16
1562
οὕτω τοὺς πελταστὰς ἐπεφόβηντο .
such fear they had conceived of the peltasts.


4.4.16
1563
τοὺς μέντοι Λακεδαιμονίους οὕτως αὖ οἱ πελτασταὶ ἐδεδίεσαν ὡς ἐντὸς ἀκοντίσματος οὐ προσῇσαν τοῖς ὁπλίταις ·
But the peltasts in their turn were so afraid of the Lacedaemonians that they did not approach within a javelin’s cast of the hoplites;


4.4.16
1564
ἤδη γάρ ποτε καὶ ἐκ τοσούτου διώξαντες οἱ νεώτεροι τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἑλόντες ἀπέκτεινάν τινας αὐτῶν .
for it had once happened that the younger men among the Lacedaemonians, pursuing even from so great a distance as that, overtook and killed some of them.


4.4.17
1565
καταφρονοῦντες δὲ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τῶν πελταστῶν , ἔτι μᾶλλον τῶν ἑαυτῶν συμμάχων κατεφρόνουν ·
But while the Lacedaemonians felt contempt for the peltasts, they felt even greater contempt for their own allies;


4.4.17
1566
καὶ γὰρ οἱ Μαντινεῖς βοηθήσαντές ποτε , ἐπεκδραμόντες πελτασταῖς ἐκ τοῦ ἐπὶ Λέχαιον τείνοντος τείχους , ἀκοντιζόμενοι ἐνέκλινάν τε καὶ ἀπέθανόν τινες αὐτῶν φεύγοντες ·
for once, when the Mantineans went out against peltasts who had sallied forth from the wall that extends to Lechaeum, they had given way under the javelins of the peltasts and some of them had been killed as they fled;


4.4.17
1567
ὥστε οἱ μὲν Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ ἐπισκώπτειν ἐτόλμων ὡς οἱ σύμμαχοι φοβοῖντο τοὺς πελταστὰς ὥσπερ μορμόνας παιδάρια .
so that the Lacedaemonians were even so unkind as to make game of their allies, saying that they feared the peltasts just as children fear hobgoblins.


4.4.17
1568
αὐτοὶ δὲ ἐκ τοῦ Λεχαίου ὁρμώμενοι σὺν μόρᾳ καὶ τοῖς Κορινθίων φυγάσι κύκλῳ περὶ τὸ ἄστυ τῶν Κορινθίων ἐστρατεύοντο ·
As for themselves, setting out from Lechaeum as a base with one regiment and the Corinthian exiles, they made expeditions all round about the city of the Corinthians;


4.4.18
1569
οἱ δ’ αὖ Ἀθηναῖοι φοβούμενοι τὴν ῥώμην τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων , μὴ ἐπεὶ τὰ μακρὰ τείχη τῶν Κορινθίων διῄρητο , ἔλθοιεν ἐπὶ σφᾶς , ἡγήσαντο κράτιστον εἶναι ἀνατειχίσαι τὰ διῃρημένα ὑπὸ Πραξίτα τείχη .
but the Athenians, on the other hand, fearing the power of the Lacedaemonians and thinking that they might come against them, now that the long walls of the Corinthians had been destroyed, decided that it was best to rebuild the walls destroyed by Praxitas.


4.4.18
1570
καὶ ἐλθόντες πανδημεὶ μετὰ λιθολόγων καὶ τεκτόνων τὸ μὲν πρὸς Σικυῶνος καὶ πρὸς ἑσπέρας ἐν ὀλίγαις ἡμέραις πάνυ καλὸν ἐξετείχισαν , τὸ δὲ ἑῷον μᾶλλον κατὰ ἡσυχίαν ἐτείχιζον .
So they came with their full force, accompanied by masons and carpenters, and completed within a few days the wall toward Sicyon and the west, making a very excellent wall of it, and then went on to build the eastern wall in more leisurely fashion.


4.4.19
1571
οἱ δ’ αὖ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐνθυμηθέντες τοὺς Ἀργείους τὰ μὲν οἴκοι καρπουμένους , ἡδομένους δὲ τῷ πολέμῳ , στρατεύουσιν ἐπ’ αὐτούς .
The Lacedaemonians on their side, considering that the Argives were enjoying the fruits of their lands at home and taking pleasure in the war, made an expedition against them.


4.4.19
1572
Ἀγησίλαος δ’ ἡγεῖτο , καὶ δῃώσας πᾶσαν αὐτῶν τὴν χώραν , εὐθὺς ἐκεῖθεν ὑπερβαλὼν κατὰ Τενέαν εἰς Κόρινθον αἱρεῖ τὰ ἀνοικοδομηθέντα ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀθηναίων τείχη .
Agesilaus was in command, and after laying waste all their territory he proceeded straight from there across the mountains by way of Tenea to Corinth and captured the walls that had been rebuilt by the Athenians.


4.4.19
1573
παρεγένετο δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ ἁδελφὸς Τελευτίας κατὰ θάλατταν , ἔχων τριήρεις περὶ δώδεκα ·
And his brother Teleutias also came to his support by sea, with about twelve triremes;


4.4.19
1574
ὥστε μακαρίζεσθαι αὐτῶν τὴν μητέρα , ὅτι τῇ αὐτῇ ἡμέρᾳ ὧν ἔτεκεν ὁ μὲν κατὰ γῆν τὰ τείχη τῶν πολεμίων , ὁ δὲ κατὰ θάλατταν τὰς ναῦς καὶ τὰ νεώρια ᾕρηκε .
so that their mother was deemed happy in that on the same day one of the sons whom she bore captured by land the walls of the enemy and the other by sea his ships and dock-yards.


4.4.19
1575
καὶ τότε μὲν ταῦτα πράξας ὁ Ἀγησίλαος τό τε τῶν συμμάχων στράτευμα διῆκε καὶ τὸ πολιτικὸν οἴκαδε ἀπήγαγεν .
And at that time, after accomplishing these things, Agesilaus disbanded the army of the allies and led his citizen force back home.


4.5.1
1576
ἐκ δὲ τούτου Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀκούοντες τῶν φευγόντων ὅτι οἱ ἐν τῇ πόλει πάντα μὲν τὰ βοσκήματα ἔχοιεν καὶ σῴζοιντο ἐν τῷ Πειραίῳ , πολλοὶ δὲ τρέφοιντο αὐτόθεν , στρατεύουσι πάλιν εἰς τὴν Κόρινθον , Ἀγησιλάου καὶ τότε ἡγουμένου .
After this the Lacedaemonians, upon hearing from the Corinthian exiles that the people in the city had all their cattle in Piraeum and there kept them safe, and that many were being maintained from this supply, made another expedition to the territory of Corinth, Agesilaus being in command this time also.


4.5.1
1577
καὶ πρῶτον μὲν ἦλθεν εἰς Ἰσθμόν ·
And first he came to the Isthmus;


4.5.1
1578
καὶ γὰρ ἦν ὁ μὴν ἐν ᾧ Ἴσθμια γίγνεται , καὶ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι αὐτοῦ ἐτύγχανον τότε ποιοῦντες τὴν θυσίαν τῷ Ποσειδῶνι , ὡς Ἄργους τῆς Κορίνθου ὄντος .
for it was the month during which the Isthmian games are celebrated, and the Argives chanced at the time to be offering the sacrifice there to Poseidon, as though Argos were Corinth.


4.5.1
1579
ὡς δ’ ᾔσθοντο προσιόντα τὸν Ἀγησίλαον , καταλιπόντες καὶ τὰ τεθυμένα καὶ τὰ ἀριστοποιούμενα μάλα σὺν πολλῷ φόβῳ ἀπεχώρουν εἰς τὸ ἄστυ κατὰ τὴν ἐπὶ Κεγχρείας ὁδόν .
But when they learned that Agesilaus was approaching, they left behind both the victims that had been offered and the breakfast that was being made ready and retired to the city in very great fear, along the road leading to Cenchreae.


4.5.2
1580
ὁ μέντοι Ἀγησίλαος ἐκείνους μὲν καίπερ ὁρῶν οὐκ ἐδίωκε , κατασκηνήσας δὲ ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ αὐτός τε τῷ θεῷ ἔθυε καὶ περιέμενεν , ἕως οἱ φυγάδες τῶν Κορινθίων ἐποίησαν τῷ Ποσειδῶνι τὴν θυσίαν καὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα .
Agesilaus, however, did not pursue them, even though he saw them, but encamping in the sacred precinct offered sacrifice himself to the god and waited until the Corinthian exiles had conducted the sacrifice and the games in honour of Poseidon.


4.5.2
1581
ἐποίησαν δὲ καὶ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι ἀπελθόντος Ἀγησιλάου ἐξ ἀρχῆς πάλιν Ἴσθμια .
But when Agesilaus had left the Isthmus, the Argives celebrated the Isthmian games all over again.


4.5.2
1582
καὶ ἐκείνῳ τῷ ἔτει ἔστι μὲν ἃ τῶν ἄθλων δὶς ἕκαστος ἐνικήθη , ἔστι δὲ ἃ δὶς οἱ αὐτοὶ ἐκηρύχθησαν .
In that year, accordingly, in some of the contests individual competitors were beaten twice, while in others the same competitors were twice proclaimed victors.


4.5.3
1583
τῇ δὲ τετάρτῃ ἡμέρᾳ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ἦγε πρὸς τὸ Πείραιον τὸ στράτευμα .
On the fourth day Agesilaus led his army against Piraeum.


4.5.3
1584
ἰδὼν δὲ ὑπὸ πολλῶν φυλαττόμενον , ἀπεχώρησε μετ’ ἄριστον πρὸς τὸ ἄστυ , ὡς προδιδομένης τῆς πόλεως ·
But seeing that it was guarded by many, he withdrew after breakfast in the direction of the capital, as though the city were going to be betrayed to him;


4.5.3
1585
ὥστε οἱ Κορίνθιοι δείσαντες μὴ προδιδοῖτο ὑπό τινων ἡ πόλις , μετεπέμψαντο τὸν Ἰφικράτην σὺν τοῖς πλείστοις τῶν πελταστῶν .
The result was that the Corinthians, in fear that the city was to be betrayed by some one, summoned Iphicrates with the greater part of his peltasts.


4.5.3
1586
αἰσθόμενος δὲ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος τῆς νυκτὸς παρεληλυθότας αὐτούς , ὑποστρέψας ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ εἰς τὸ Πείραιον ἦγε .
Agesilaus, however, upon perceiving that they had passed by during the night, turned about, and at daybreak proceeded to lead his army to Piraeum.


4.5.3
1587
καὶ αὐτὸς μὲν κατὰ τὰ θερμὰ προῄει , μόραν δὲ κατὰ τὸ ἀκρότατον ἀνεβίβασε .
And he himself advanced by way of the hot springs, but he sent one regiment up the heights to proceed along the topmost ridge.


4.5.3
1588
καὶ ταύτην μὲν τὴν νύκτα ὁ μὲν πρὸς ταῖς θέρμαις ἐστρατοπεδεύετο , ἡ δὲ μόρα τὰ ἄκρα κατέχουσα ἐνυκτέρευσεν .
On that night, accordingly, he was in camp at the hot springs, while the regiment bivouacked, holding possession of the heights.


4.5.4
1589
ἔνθα δὴ καὶ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος μικρῷ καιρίῳ δ’ ἐνθυμήματι ηὐδοκίμησε .
It was then that Agesilaus won credit by a trifling but timely expedient.


4.5.4
1590
τῶν γὰρ τῇ μόρᾳ φερόντων τὰ σιτία οὐδενὸς πῦρ εἰσενεγκόντος , ψύχους δὲ ὄντος διά τε τὸ πάνυ ἐφ’ ὑψηλοῦ εἶναι καὶ διὰ τὸ γενέσθαι ὕδωρ καὶ χάλαζαν πρὸς τὴν ἑσπέραν , καὶ ἀνεβεβήκεσαν δὲ ἔχοντες οἷα δὴ θέρους σπειρία , ῥιγούντων δ’ αὐτῶν καὶ ἐν σκότῳ ἀθύμως πρὸς τὸ δεῖπνον ἐχόντων , πέμπει ὁ Ἀγησίλαος οὐκ ἔλαττον δέκα φέροντας πῦρ ἐν χύτραις .
For since no one among those who carried provisions for the regiment had brought fire, and it was cold, not only because they were at a high altitude, but also because there had been rain and hail towards evening—and besides, they had gone up in light clothing suitable to the summer season—and they were shivering and, in the darkness, had no heart for their dinner, Agesilaus sent up not less than ten men carrying fire in earthen pots.


4.5.4
1591
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἀνέβησαν ἄλλος ἄλλῃ , καὶ πολλὰ καὶ μεγάλα πυρὰ ἐγένετο , ἅτε πολλῆς ὕλης παρούσης , πάντες μὲν ἠλείφοντο , πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ ἐδείπνησαν ἐξ ἀρχῆς .
And when these men had climbed up by one way and another and many large fires had been made, since there was a great deal of fuel at hand, all the soldiers anointed themselves and many of them only then began their dinner.


4.5.4
1592
φανερὸς δὲ ἐγένετο καὶ ὁ νεὼς τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος ταύτῃ τῇ νυκτὶ καόμενος ·
It was on this night also that the temple of Poseidon was seen burning.


4.5.4
1593
ὑφ’ ὅτου δ’ ἐνεπρήσθη οὐδεὶς οἶδεν .
But no one knows by whom it was set on fire.


4.5.5
1594
ἐπεὶ δὲ ᾔσθοντο οἱ ἐν τῷ Πειραίῳ τὰ ἄκρα ἐχόμενα , ἐπὶ μὲν τὸ ἀμύνασθαι οὐκέτι ἐτράποντο , εἰς δὲ τὸ Ἥραιον κατέφυγον καὶ ἄνδρες καὶ γυναῖκες καὶ δοῦλοι καὶ ἐλεύθεροι καὶ τῶν βοσκημάτων τὰ πλεῖστα .
Now when the people in Piraeum perceived that the heights were occupied, they gave no further thought to defending themselves, but fled for refuge to the Heraeum, men and women, slaves and freemen, and the greater part of the cattle.


4.5.5
1595
καὶ Ἀγησίλαος μὲν δὴ σὺν τῷ στρατεύματι παρὰ θάλατταν ἐπορεύετο ·
And Agesilaus with the army proceeded along the sea shore;


4.5.5
1596
ἡ δὲ μόρα ἅμα καταβαίνουσα ἀπὸ τῶν ἄκρων Οἰνόην τὸ ἐντετειχισμένον τεῖχος αἱρεῖ , καὶ τὰ ἐνόντα ἔλαβε , καὶ πάντες δὲ οἱ στρατιῶται ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ πολλὰ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἐκ τῶν χωρίων ἐλάμβανον .
while the regiment, descending at the same time from the heights, captured Oenoe, the stronghold which had been fortified in Piraeum, and took possession of all that was within it, and in fact all the soldiers on that day possessed themselves of provisions in abundance from the farms.


4.5.5
1597
οἱ δ’ ἐν τῷ Ἡραίῳ καταπεφευγότες ἐξῇσαν , ἐπιτρέψοντες Ἀγησιλάῳ γνῶναι ὅ τι βούλοιτο περὶ σφῶν .
Meanwhile those who had taken refuge in the Heraeum came out, with the purpose of leaving it to Agesilaus to decide as he chose in regard to them.


4.5.5
1598
ὁ δ’ ἔγνω , ὅσοι μὲν τῶν σφαγέων ἦσαν , παραδοῦναι αὐτοὺς τοῖς φυγάσι , τὰ δ’ ἄλλα πάντα πραθῆναι .
He decided to deliver over to the exiles all those who had a part in the massacre, and that all else should be sold.


4.5.6
1599
ἐκ τούτου δὲ ἐξῄει μὲν ἐκ τοῦ Ἡραίου πάμπολλα τὰ αἰχμάλωτα ·
Thereupon the prisoners came forth from the Heraeum, a very great number of them, together with their property;


4.5.6
1600
πρεσβεῖαι δὲ ἄλλοθέν τε πολλαὶ παρῆσαν καὶ ἐκ Βοιωτῶν ἧκον ἐρησόμενοι τί ἂν ποιοῦντες εἰρήνης τύχοιεν .
and many embassies from various states presented themselves, while from the Boeotians in particular ambassadors had come to ask what they should do in order to obtain peace.


4.5.6
1601
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος μάλα μεγαλοφρόνως τούτους μὲν οὐδ’ ὁρᾶν ἐδόκει , καίπερ Φάρακος τοῦ προξένου παρεστηκότος αὐτοῖς , ὅπως προσαγάγοι ·
Agesilaus, however, in a very lofty way affected not even to see these ambassadors, although Pharax, diplomatic agent for the Thebans at Lacedaemon, was standing beside them for the purpose of presenting them to him;


4.5.6
1602
καθήμενος δ’ ἐπὶ τοῦ περὶ τὴν λίμνην κυκλοτεροῦς οἰκοδομήματος ἐθεώρει πολλὰ τὰ ἐξαγόμενα .
but sitting in the circular structure near the lake, he occupied himself in watching the great quantity of prisoners and property that was being brought out.


4.5.6
1603
τῶν δὲ Λακεδαιμονίων ἀπὸ τῶν ὅπλων σὺν τοῖς δόρασι παρηκολούθουν φύλακες τῶν αἰχμαλώτων , μάλα ὑπὸ τῶν παρόντων θεωρούμενοι ·
Some Lacedaemonians from the camp followed with their spears to guard the prisoners, and were much regarded by the bystanders;


4.5.6
1604
οἱ γὰρ εὐτυχοῦντες καὶ κρατοῦντες ἀεί πως ἀξιοθέατοι δοκοῦσιν εἶναι .
for somehow men who are fortunate and victorious seem ever to be a noteworthy spectacle.


4.5.7
1605
ἔτι δὲ καθημένου Ἀγησιλάου καὶ ἐοικότος ἀγαλλομένῳ τοῖς πεπραγμένοις , ἱππεύς τις προσήλαυνε καὶ μάλα ἰσχυρῶς ἱδρῶντι τῷ ἵππῳ .
But while Agesilaus was still sitting there in the attitude of a man who exulted in what had been accomplished, a horseman rode up, his horse sweating profusely.


4.5.7
1606
ὑπὸ πολλῶν δὲ ἐρωτώμενος ὅ τι ἀγγέλλοι , οὐδενὶ ἀπεκρίνατο , ἀλλ’ ἐπειδὴ ἐγγὺς ἦν τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου , καθαλόμενος ἀπὸ τοῦ ἵππου καὶ προσδραμὼν αὐτῷ μάλα σκυθρωπὸς ὢν λέγει τὸ τῆς ἐν Λεχαίῳ μόρας πάθος .
Being asked by many people what news he brought, he made no reply to anyone, but when he was near Agesilaus, he leaped down from his horse, ran up to him, and with a very gloomy face told him of the disaster to the regiment stationed in Lechaeum.


4.5.7
1607
ὁ δ’ ὡς ἤκουσεν , εὐθύς τε ἐκ τῆς ἕδρας ἀνεπήδησε καὶ τὸ δόρυ ἔλαβε καὶ πολεμάρχους καὶ πεντηκοντῆρας καὶ ξεναγοὺς καλεῖν τὸν κήρυκα ἐκέλευεν .
When Agesilaus heard this, he immediately leaped up from his seat, seized his spear, and ordered the herald to summon the commanders of regiments and of fifties and the leaders of the allies.


4.5.8
1608
ὡς δὲ συνέδραμον οὗτοι , τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις εἶπεν , οὐ γάρ πω ἠριστοποίηντο , ἐμφαγοῦσιν ὅ τι δύναιντο ἥκειν τὴν ταχίστην , αὐτὸς δὲ σὺν τοῖς περὶ δαμοσίαν ὑφηγεῖτο ἀνάριστος .
When they came running together, he told the rest of them to follow along as quickly as possible after swallowing what they could—for they had not yet breakfasted—while he himself with his tent companions went on ahead breakfastless.


4.5.8
1609
καὶ οἱ δορυφόροι τὰ ὅπλα ἔχοντες παρηκολούθουν σπουδῇ , τοῦ μὲν ὑφηγουμένου , τῶν δὲ μετιόντων .
And the spearmen of his body-guard, fully armed, accompanied him with all speed, he leading the way and his tent companions following after him.


4.5.8
1610
ἤδη δ’ ἐκπεπερακότος αὐτοῦ τὰ θερμὰ εἰς τὸ πλατὺ τοῦ Λεχαίου , προσελάσαντες ἱππεῖς τρεῖς ἀγγέλλουσιν ὅτι οἱ νεκροὶ ἀνῃρημένοι εἴησαν .
But when he had already passed the hot springs and come to the plain of Lechaeum, three horsemen rode up and reported that the bodies of the dead had been recovered.


4.5.8
1611
ὁ δ’ ἐπεὶ τοῦτο ἤκουσε , θέσθαι κελεύσας τὰ ὅπλα καὶ ὀλίγον χρόνον ἀναπαύσας , ἀπῆγε πάλιν τὸ στράτευμα ἐπὶ τὸ Ἥραιον ·
When he heard this, he gave the order to ground arms, and after resting the army for a short time, led it back again to the Heraeum;


4.5.8
1612
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ τὰ αἰχμάλωτα διετίθετο .
on the following day he exposed the prisoners and captured property for sale.


4.5.9
1613
οἱ δὲ πρέσβεις τῶν Βοιωτῶν προσκληθέντες καὶ ἐρωτώμενοι ὅ τι ἥκοιεν , περὶ μὲν τῆς εἰρήνης οὐκέτι ἐμέμνηντο , εἶπον δὲ ὅτι εἰ μή τι κωλύοι βούλοιντο εἰς ἄστυ πρὸς τοὺς σφετέρους στρατιώτας παρελθεῖν .
The ambassadors of the Boeotians were now summoned and asked for what purpose they had come.


4.5.9
1614
ὁ δ’ ἐπιγελάσας ·
They made no further mention of peace, but said that if there were nothing to hinder, they desired to pass into the city to join their own soldiers.


4.5.9
1615
ἀλλ’ οἶδα μέν , ἔφη , ὅτι οὐ τοὺς στρατιώτας ἰδεῖν βούλεσθε , ἀλλὰ τὸ εὐτύχημα τῶν φίλων ὑμῶν θεάσασθαι πόσον τι γεγένηται .
Agesilaus said with a laugh,


4.5.9
1616
περιμείνατε οὖν , ἔφη ·
On the contrary, I know that you are not desirous of seeing your soldiers, but of beholding the good fortune of your friends, that you may see how great it has been.


4.5.9
1617
ἐγὼ γὰρ ὑμᾶς αὐτὸς ἄξω , καὶ μᾶλλον μετ’ ἐμοῦ ὄντες γνώσεσθε ποῖόν τι τὸ γεγενημένον ἐστί .
Wait, therefore, he said, for I will conduct you myself, and by being with me you will find out better what manner of thing it is that has happened.


4.5.10
1618
καὶ οὐκ ἐψεύσατο , ἀλλὰ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ θυσάμενος ἦγε πρὸς τὴν πόλιν τὸ στράτευμα .
And he did not belie his words, but on the next day, after offering sacrifice, he led his army to the city.


4.5.10
1619
καὶ τὸ μὲν τροπαῖον οὐ κατέβαλεν , εἰ δέ τι ἦν λοιπὸν δένδρον , κόπτων καὶ κάων ἐπεδείκνυεν ὡς οὐδεὶς ἀντεξῄει .
He did not throw down the trophy, but by cutting down and burning any fruit-tree that was still left, he showed that no one wanted to come out against him.


4.5.10
1620
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο περὶ τὸ Λέχαιον ·
When he had done this, he encamped near Lechaeum;


4.5.10
1621
καὶ τοὺς Θηβαίων μέντοι πρέσβεις εἰς μὲν τὸ ἄστυ οὐκ ἀνῆκε , κατὰ θάλατταν δὲ εἰς Κρεῦσιν ἀπέπεμψεν .
as for the ambassadors of the Thebans, although he did not let them go into the city, yet he sent them home by sea to Creusis.


4.5.10
1622
ἅτε δὲ ἀήθους τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις γεγενημένης τῆς τοιαύτης συμφορᾶς , πολὺ πένθος ἦν κατὰ τὸ Λακωνικὸν στράτευμα , πλὴν ὅσων ἐτέθνασαν ἐν χώρᾳ ἢ υἱοὶ ἢ πατέρες ἢ ἀδελφοί ·
Inasmuch as such a calamity had been unusual with the Lacedaemonians, there was great mourning throughout the Laconian army, except among those whose sons, fathers, or brothers had fallen where they stood;


4.5.10
1623
οὗτοι δ’ ὥσπερ νικηφόροι λαμπροὶ καὶ ἀγαλλόμενοι τῷ οἰκείῳ πάθει περιῇσαν .
they, however, went about like victors, with shining countenances and full of exultation in their own misfortune.


4.5.11
1624
ἐγένετο δὲ τὸ τῆς μόρας πάθος τοιῷδε τρόπῳ .
Now it was in the following way that the disaster to the regiment happened.


4.5.11
1625
οἱ Ἀμυκλαῖοι ἀεί ποτε ἀπέρχονται εἰς τὰ Ὑακίνθια ἐπὶ τὸν παιᾶνα , ἐάν τε στρατοπεδευόμενοι τυγχάνωσιν ἐάν τε ἄλλως πως ἀποδημοῦντες .
The Amyclaeans invariably go back home to the festival of the Hyacinthia for the paean to Apollo, whether they chance to be on a campaign or away from home for any other reason.


4.5.11
1626
καὶ τότε δὴ τοὺς ἐκ πάσης τῆς στρατιᾶς Ἀμυκλαίους κατέλιπε μὲν Ἀγησίλαος ἐν Λεχαίῳ .
Accordingly Agesilaus had on this occasion left behind at Lechaeum all the Amyclaeans in the army.


4.5.11
1627
ὁ δ’ ἐκεῖ φρουρῶν πολέμαρχος τοὺς μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν συμμάχων φρουροὺς παρέταξε φυλάττειν τὸ τεῖχος , αὐτὸς δὲ σὺν τῇ τῶν ὁπλιτῶν καὶ τῇ τῶν ἱππέων μόρᾳ παρὰ τὴν πόλιν τῶν Κορινθίων τοὺς Ἀμυκλαιεῖς παρῆγεν .
Now the polemarch in command of the garrison there detailed the garrison troops of the allies to guard the wall, and himself with the regiment of hoplites and the regiment of horsemen conducted the Amyclaeans along past the city of the Corinthians.


4.5.12
1628
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπεῖχον ὅσον εἴκοσιν ἢ τριάκοντα σταδίους τοῦ Σικυῶνος , ὁ μὲν πολέμαρχος σὺν τοῖς ὁπλίταις οὖσιν ὡς ἑξακοσίοις ἀπῄει πάλιν ἐπὶ τὸ Λέχαιον , τὸν δ’ ἱππαρμοστὴν ἐκέλευσε σὺν τῇ τῶν ἱππέων μόρᾳ , ἐπεὶ προπέμψειαν τοὺς Ἀμυκλαιεῖς μέχρι ὁπόσου αὐτοὶ κελεύοιεν , μεταδιώκειν .
And when they were distant from Sicyon about twenty or thirty stadia, the polemarch with the hoplites, who were about six hundred in number, set out to return to Lechaeum, and ordered the commander of horse to follow after him with the regiment of horsemen after they had escorted the Amyclaeans as far as they themselves directed.


4.5.12
1629
καὶ ὅτι μὲν πολλοὶ ἦσαν ἐν τῇ Κορίνθῳ καὶ πελτασταὶ καὶ ὁπλῖται οὐδὲν ἠγνόουν ·
Now they were by no means unaware that there were many peltasts and many hoplites in Corinth;


4.5.12
1630
κατεφρόνουν δὲ διὰ τὰς ἔμπροσθεν τύχας μηδένα ἂν ἐπιχειρῆσαι σφίσιν .
but on account of their previous successes they contemptuously thought that no one would attack them.


4.5.13
1631
οἱ δ’ ἐκ τῶν Κορινθίων ἄστεως , Καλλίας τε ὁ Ἱππονίκου , τῶν Ἀθηναίων ὁπλιτῶν στρατηγῶν , καὶ Ἰφικράτης , τῶν πελταστῶν ἄρχων , καθορῶντες αὐτοὺς καὶ οὐ πολλοὺς ὄντας καὶ ἐρήμους καὶ πελταστῶν καὶ ἱππέων , ἐνόμισαν ἀσφαλὲς εἶναι ἐπιθέσθαι αὐτοῖς τῷ πελταστικῷ .
But those in the city of the Corinthians, both Callias, the son of Hipponicus, commander of the Athenian hoplites, and Iphicrates, leader of the peltasts, when they descried the Lacedaemonians and saw that they were not only few in number, but also unaccompanied by either peltasts or cavalry, thought that it was safe to attack them with their force of peltasts.


4.5.13
1632
εἰ μὲν γὰρ πορεύοιντο τῇ ὁδῷ , ἀκοντιζομένους ἂν αὐτοὺς εἰς τὰ γυμνὰ ἀπόλλυσθαι ·
For if they should proceed along the road, they could be attacked with javelins on their unprotected side and destroyed;


4.5.13
1633
εἰ δ’ ἐπιχειροῖεν διώκειν , ῥᾳδίως ἂν ἀποφυγεῖν πελτασταῖς τοῖς ἐλαφροτάτοις τοὺς ὁπλίτας .
and if they should undertake to pursue, they with their peltasts, the nimblest of all troops, could easily escape the hoplites.


4.5.14
1634
γνόντες δὲ ταῦτα ἐξάγουσι .
Having come to this conclusion, they led forth their troops.


4.5.14
1635
καὶ ὁ μὲν Καλλίας παρέταξε τοὺς ὁπλίτας οὐ πόρρω τῆς πόλεως , ὁ δὲ Ἰφικράτης λαβὼν τοὺς πελταστὰς ἐπέθετο τῇ μόρᾳ .
And Callias formed his hoplites in line of battle not far from the city, while Iphicrates with his peltasts attacked the Lacedaemonian regiment.


4.5.14
1636
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐπεὶ ἠκοντίζοντο καὶ ὁ μέν τις ἐτέτρωτο , ὁ δὲ καὶ ἐπεπτώκει , τούτους μὲν ἐκέλευον τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς ἀραμένους ἀποφέρειν εἰς Λέχαιον ·
Now when the Lacedaemonians were being attacked with javelins, and several men had been wounded and several others slain, they directed the shield-bearers to take up these wounded men and carry them back to Lechaeum;


4.5.14
1637
καὶ οὗτοι μόνοι τῆς μόρας τῇ ἀληθεία ἐσώθησαν ·
and these were the only men in the regiment who were really saved.


4.5.14
1638
ὁ δὲ πολέμαρχος ἐκέλευσε τὰ δέκα ἀφ’ ἥβης ἀποδιῶξαι τοὺς προειρημένους .
Then the polemarch ordered the first ten year-classes to drive off their assailants.


4.5.15
1639
ὡς δὲ ἐδίωκον , ᾕρουν τε οὐδένα ἐξ ἀκοντίου βολῆς ὁπλῖται ὄντες πελταστάς ·
But when they pursued, they caught no one, since they were hoplites pursuing peltasts at the distance of a javelin’s cast;


4.5.15
1640
καὶ γὰρ ἀναχωρεῖν αὐτοὺς ἐκέλευε , πρὶν τοὺς ὁπλίτας ὁμοῦ γίγνεσθαι ·
for Iphicrates had given orders to the peltasts to retire before the hoplites got near them;


4.5.15
1641
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀνεχώρουν ἐσπαρμένοι , ἅτε διώξαντες ὡς τάχους ἕκαστος εἶχεν , ἀναστρέφοντες οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἰφικράτην , οἵ τε ἐκ τοῦ ἐναντίου πάλιν ἠκόντιζον καὶ ἄλλοι ἐκ πλαγίου παραθέοντες εἰς τὰ γυμνά .
and further, when the Lacedaemonians were retiring from the pursuit, being scattered because each man had pursued as swiftly as he could, the troops of Iphicrates turned about, and not only did those in front again hurl javelins upon the Lacedaemonians, but also others on the flank, running along to reach their unprotected side.


4.5.15
1642
καὶ εὐθὺς μὲν ἐπὶ τῇ πρώτῃ διώξει κατηκόντιζον ἐννέα ἢ δέκα αὐτῶν .
Indeed, at the very first pursuit the peltasts shot down nine or ten of them.


4.5.15
1643
ὡς δὲ τοῦτο ἐγένετο , πολὺ ἤδη θρασύτερον ἐπέκειντο .
And as soon as this happened, they began to press the attack much more boldly.


4.5.16
1644
ἐπεὶ δὲ κακῶς ἔπασχον , πάλιν ἐκέλευσεν ὁ πολέμαρχος διώκειν τὰ πεντεκαίδεκα ἀφ’ ἥβης .
Then, as the Lacedaemonians continued to suffer losses, the polemarch again ordered the first fifteen year-classes to pursue.


4.5.16
1645
ἀναχωροῦντες δὲ ἔτι πλείους αὐτῶν ἢ τὸ πρῶτον ἔπεσον .
But when these fell back, even more of them were shot down than at the first retirement.


4.5.16
1646
ἤδη δὲ τῶν βελτίστων ἀπολωλότων , οἱ ἱππεῖς αὐτοῖς παραγίγνονται καὶ σὺν τούτοις αὖθις δίωξιν ἐποιήσαντο .
And now that the best men had already been killed, the horsemen joined them, and with the horsemen they again undertook a pursuit.


4.5.16
1647
ὡς δ’ ἐνέκλιναν οἱ πελτασταί , ἐν τούτῳ κακῶς οἱ ἱππεῖς ἐπέθεντο ·
But when the peltasts turned to flight, at that moment the horsemen managed their attack badly;


4.5.16
1648
οὐ γὰρ ἕως ἀπέκτεινάν τινας αὐτῶν ἐδίωξαν , ἀλλὰ σὺν τοῖς ἐκδρόμοις ἰσομέτωποι καὶ ἐδίωκον καὶ ἐπέστρεφον .
for they did not chase the enemy until they had killed some of them, but both in the pursuit and in the turning backward kept an even front with the hoplites.


4.5.16
1649
ποιοῦντες δὲ καὶ πάσχοντες τὰ ὅμοια τούτοις καὶ αὖθις , αὐτοὶ μὲν ἀεὶ ἐλάττους τε καὶ μαλακώτεροι ἐγίγνοντο , οἱ δὲ πολέμιοι θρασύτεροί τε καὶ ἀεὶ πλείους οἱ ἐγχειροῦντες .
And what with striving and suffering in this way again and again, the Lacedaemonians themselves kept continually becoming fewer and fainter of heart, while their enemies were becoming bolder, and those who attacked them continually more numerous.


4.5.17
1650
ἀποροῦντες δὴ συνίστανται ἐπὶ βραχύν τινα γήλοφον , ἀπέχοντα τῆς μὲν θαλάττης ὡς δύο στάδια , τοῦ δὲ Λεχαίου ὡς ἓξ ἢ ἑπτὰ καὶ δέκα στάδια .
Therefore in desperation they gathered together on a small hill, distant from the sea about two stadia, and from Lechaeum about sixteen or seventeen stadia.


4.5.17
1651
αἰσθόμενοι δ’ οἱ ἀπὸ τοῦ Λεχαίου , εἰσβάντες εἰς πλοιάρια παρέπλεον , ἕως ἐγένοντο κατὰ τὸν γήλοφον .
And the men in Lechaeum, upon perceiving them, embarked in small boats and coasted along until they came opposite the hill.


4.5.17
1652
οἱ δ’ ἀποροῦντες ἤδη , ὅτι ἔπασχον μὲν κακῶς καὶ ἀπέθνῃσκον , ποιεῖν δὲ οὐδὲν ἐδύναντο , πρὸς τούτοις δὲ ὁρῶντες καὶ τοὺς ὁπλίτας ἐπιόντας , ἐγκλίνουσι .
Then the troops, being now desperate, because they were suffering and being slain, while unable to inflict any harm themselves, and, besides this, seeing the Athenian hoplites also coming against them, took to flight.


4.5.17
1653
καὶ οἱ μὲν ἐμπίπτουσιν αὐτῶν εἰς τὴν θάλατταν , ὀλίγοι δέ τινες μετὰ τῶν ἱππέων εἰς Λέχαιον ἐσώθησαν .
And some of them plunged into the sea, and some few made their escape with the horsemen to Lechaeum.


4.5.17
1654
ἐν πάσαις δὲ ταῖς μάχαις καὶ τῇ φυγῇ ἀπέθανον περὶ πεντήκοντα καὶ διακοσίους .
But in all the battles and in the flight about two hundred and fifty of them were killed.


4.5.18
1655
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν οὕτως ἐπέπρακτο .
Thus it was that these events took place.


4.5.18
1656
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ὁ Ἀγησίλαος τὴν μὲν σφαλεῖσαν μόραν ἔχων ἀπῄει , ἄλλην δὲ κατέλιπεν ἐν τῷ Λεχαίῳ .
After this Agesilaus departed with the defeated regiment, and left another behind him in Lechaeum.


4.5.18
1657
διιὼν δὲ ἐπ’ οἴκου ὡς μὲν ἐδύνατο ὀψιαίτατα κατήγετο εἰς τὰς πόλεις , ὡς δ’ ἐδύνατο πρῳαίτατα ἐξωρμᾶτο .
And as he passed along homeward, he led his troops into the cities as late in the day as he could and set out again in the morning as early as he could.


4.5.18
1658
παρὰ δὲ Μαντίνειαν ἐξ Ὀρχομενοῦ ὄρθρου ἀναστὰς ἔτι σκοταῖος παρῆλθεν .
When he approached Mantinea, by leaving Orchomenus before dawn he passed by that city while it was still dark:


4.5.18
1659
οὕτω χαλεπῶς ἂν ἐδόκουν οἱ στρατιῶται τοὺς Μαντινέας ἐφηδομένους τῷ δυστυχήματι θεάσασθαι .
so hard, he thought, would the soldiers find it to see the Mantineans rejoicing at their misfortune.


4.5.19
1660
ἐκ τούτου δὲ μάλα καὶ τ- ἄλλα ἐπετύγχανεν Ἰφικράτης .
After this, Iphicrates was very successful in his other undertakings also.


4.5.19
1661
καθεστηκότων γὰρ φρουρῶν ἐν Σιδοῦντι μὲν καὶ Κρομμυῶνι ὑπὸ Πραξίτου , ὅτε ἐκεῖνος εἷλε ταῦτα τὰ τείχη , ἐν Οἰνόῃ δὲ ὑπὸ Ἀγησιλάου , ὅτεπερ τὸ Πείραιον ἑάλω , πάνθ’ εἷλε ταῦτα τὰ χωρία .
For although garrisons had been stationed in Sidus and Crommyon by Praxitas when he captured these strongholds, and in Oenoe by Agesilaus at the time when Piraeum was taken, Iphicrates captured all these places.


4.5.19
1662
τὸ μέντοι Λέχαιον ἐφρούρουν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι .
In Lechaeum, however, the Lacedaemonians and their allies maintained their garrison.


4.5.19
1663
οἱ φυγάδες δὲ τῶν Κορινθίων , οὐκέτι πεζῇ παριόντες ἐκ Σικυῶνος διὰ τὴν τῆς μόρας δυστυχίαν , ἀλλὰ παραπλέοντες καὶ ἐντεῦθεν ὁρμώμενοι πράγματα εἶχόν τε καὶ παρεῖχον τοῖς ἐν τῷ ἄστει .
And the Corinthian exiles, no longer proceeding by land from Sicyon past Corinth, on account of the disaster to the regiment, but sailing along the coast to Lechaeum and sallying forth from there, caused annoyance to the people in the city even as they suffered annoyance themselves.


4.6.1
1664
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο οἱ Ἀχαιοὶ ἔχοντες Καλυδῶνα , ἣ τὸ παλαιὸν Αἰτωλίας ἦν , καὶ πολίτας πεποιημένοι τοὺς Καλυδωνίους , φρουρεῖν ἠναγκάζοντο ἐν αὐτῇ .
After this the Achaeans, who were in possession of Calydon—in ancient times an Aetolian town—and had made the people of Calydon Achaean citizens, were compelled to keep a garrison there.


4.6.1
1665
οἱ γὰρ Ἀκαρνᾶνες ἐπεστράτευον , καὶ τῶν Ἀθηναίων δὲ καὶ Βοιωτῶν συμπαρῆσάν τινες αὐτοῖς διὰ τὸ συμμάχους εἶναι .
For the Acarnanians made an expedition against the city, and some of the Athenians and Boeotians joined with them, because the Acarnanians were their allies.


4.6.1
1666
πιεζόμενοι οὖν ὑπ’ αὐτῶν οἱ Ἀχαιοὶ πρέσβεις πέμπουσιν εἰς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα .
Therefore, being hard pressed by them, the Achaeans sent ambassadors to Lacedaemon.


4.6.1
1667
οἱ δ’ ἐλθόντες ἔλεγον ὅτι οὐ δίκαια πάσχοιεν ὑπὸ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων .
And upon reaching there the ambassadors said that they were not receiving fair treatment from the Lacedaemonians.


4.6.2
1668
ἡμεῖς μὲν γάρ , ἔφασαν , ὑμῖν , ὦ ἄνδρες , ὅπως ἂν ὑμεῖς παραγγέλλητε συστρατευόμεθα καὶ ἑπόμεθα ὅποι ἂν ἡγῆσθε ·
For, gentlemen, they said, we serve with you howsoever you direct and follow whithersoever you lead;


4.6.2
1669
ὑμεῖς δὲ πολιορκουμένων ἡμῶν ὑπὸ Ἀκαρνάνων καὶ τῶν συμμάχων αὐτοῖς Ἀθηναίων καὶ Βοιωτῶν οὐδεμίαν ἐπιμέλειαν ποιεῖσθε .
but now that we are besieged by the Acarnanians and their allies, the Athenians and Boeotians, you take no thought for us.


4.6.2
1670
οὐκ ἂν οὖν δυναίμεθα ἡμεῖς τούτων οὕτω γιγνομένων ἀντέχειν , ἀλλ’ ἢ ἐάσαντες τὸν ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ πόλεμον διαβάντες πάντες πολεμήσομεν Ἀκαρνᾶσί τε καὶ τοῖς συμμάχοις αὐτῶν , ἢ εἰρήνην ποιησόμεθα ὁποίαν ἄν τινα δυνώμεθα .
Now we cannot hold out if these things go on in this way, but either we shall abandon the war in Peloponnesus and all of us cross over and make war against the Acarnanians and their allies, or else we shall make peace on whatever terms we can.


4.6.3
1671
ταῦτα δ’ ἔλεγον ὑπαπειλοῦντες τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ἀπαλλαγήσεσθαι τῆς συμμαχίας , εἰ μὴ αὐτοῖς ἀντεπικουρήσουσι .
Now they said this by way of covertly threatening to withdraw from their alliance with the Lacedaemonians unless the latter should help them in return.


4.6.3
1672
τούτων δὲ λεγομένων ἔδοξε τοῖς τ’ ἐφόροις καὶ τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ ἀναγκαῖον εἶναι στρατεύεσθαι μετὰ τῶν Ἀχαιῶν ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἀκαρνᾶνας .
In view of this statement, it seemed to the ephors and the assembly that it was necessary to undertake a campaign with the Achaeans against the Acarnanians.


4.6.3
1673
καὶ ἐκπέμπουσιν Ἀγησίλαον , δύο μόρας ἔχοντα καὶ τῶν συμμάχων τὸ μέρος .
And they sent out Agesilaus, with two Lacedaemonian regiments and the corresponding contingent of the allies.


4.6.3
1674
οἱ μέντοι Ἀχαιοὶ πανδημεὶ συνεστρατεύοντο .
The Achaeans, however, joined in the campaign with their entire force.


4.6.4
1675
ἐπεὶ δὲ διέβη ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , πάντες μὲν οἱ ἐκ τῶν ἀγρῶν Ἀκαρνᾶνες ἔφυγον εἰς τὰ ἄστη , πάντα δὲ τὰ βοσκήματα ἀπεχώρησε πόρρω , ὅπως μὴ ἁλίσκηται ὑπὸ τοῦ στρατεύματος .
Now when Agesilaus crossed over, all the Acarnanians of the country districts fled to the walled towns, and all their cattle were driven off to remote parts to prevent their being captured by the army.


4.6.4
1676
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος ἐπειδὴ ἐγένετο ἐν τοῖς ὁρίοις τῆς πολεμίας , πέμψας εἰς Στράτον πρὸς τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Ἀκαρνάνων εἶπεν ὡς , εἰ μὴ παυσάμενοι τῆς πρὸς Βοιωτοὺς καὶ Ἀθηναίους συμμαχίας ἑαυτοὺς καὶ τοὺς συμμάχους αἱρήσονται , δῃώσει πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν αὐτῶν ἐφεξῆς καὶ παραλείψει οὐδέν .
But when Agesilaus arrived at the borders of the enemy’s country, he sent to the general assembly of the Acarnanians at Stratus and said that unless they discontinued their alliance with the Boeotians and Athenians and chose his people and the Achaeans as allies, he would lay waste their whole territory, one portion after another, and would not spare any portion of it.


4.6.5
1677
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐκ ἐπείθοντο , οὕτως ἐποίει , καὶ κόπτων συνεχῶς τὴν χώραν οὐ προῄει πλέον τῆς ἡμέρας ἢ δέκα ἢ δώδεκα σταδίων .
Then, upon their refusing to obey him, he proceeded to do so, continually devastating the land as he went and hence advancing not more than ten or twelve stadia a day.


4.6.5
1678
οἱ μὲν οὖν Ἀκαρνᾶνες , ἡγησάμενοι ἀσφαλὲς εἶναι διὰ τὴν βραδυτῆτα τοῦ στρατεύματος , τά τε βοσκήματα κατεβίβαζον ἐκ τῶν ὀρῶν καὶ τῆς χώρας τὰ πλεῖστα εἰργάζοντο .
The Acarnanians, therefore, deeming it safe on account of the slow progress of the army, brought down their cattle from the mountains and continued to till the greater part of their land.


4.6.6
1679
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐδόκουν τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ πάνυ ἤδη θαρρεῖν , ἡμέρᾳ πέμπτῃ ἢ ἕκτῃ καὶ δεκάτῃ ἀφ’ ἧς εἰσέβαλε , θυσάμενος πρῲ διεπορεύθη πρὸ δείλης ἑξήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν στάδια ἐπὶ τὴν λίμνην περὶ ἣν τὰ βοσκήματα τῶν Ἀκαρνάνων σχεδὸν πάντα ἦν , καὶ ἔλαβε παμπλήθη καὶ βουκόλια καὶ ἱπποφόρβια καὶ ἄλλα παντοδαπὰ βοσκήματα καὶ ἀνδράποδα πολλά .
But when it seemed to Agesilaus that they were now very bold, on the fifteenth or sixteenth day from the time when he entered the country, he offered sacrifice in the morning and accomplished before evening a march of one hundred and sixty stadia to the lake on whose banks were almost all the cattle of the Acarnanians, and he captured herds of cattle and droves of horses in large numbers besides all sorts of other stock and great numbers of slaves.


4.6.6
1680
λαβὼν δὲ καὶ μείνας αὐτοῦ τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν ἡμέραν διεπώλει τὰ αἰχμάλωτα .
And after effecting this capture and remaining there through the ensuing day, he made public sale of the booty.


4.6.7
1681
τῶν μέντοι Ἀκαρνάνων πολλοὶ πελτασταὶ ἦλθον , καὶ πρὸς τῷ ὄρει σκηνοῦντος τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου βάλλοντες καὶ σφενδονῶντες ἀπὸ τῆς ἀκρωνυχίας τοῦ ὄρους ἔπασχον μὲν οὐδέν , κατεβίβασαν δὲ εἰς τὸ ὁμαλὲς τὸ στρατόπεδον , καίπερ ἤδη περὶ δεῖπνον παρασκευαζόμενον .
Now, however, many peltasts of the Acarnanians came up, and, inasmuch as Agesilaus was encamped on the mountain-side, by throwing stones and discharging their slings from the ridge of the mountain they succeeded, without suffering any harm themselves, in forcing the army to descend to the plain, even though the men were already making preparations for dinner.


4.6.7
1682
εἰς δὲ τὴν νύκτα οἱ μὲν Ἀκαρνᾶνες ἀπῆλθον , οἱ δὲ στρατιῶται φυλακὰς καταστησάμενοι ἐκάθευδον .
But at night the Acarnanians departed, and the troops posted sentinels and lay down to rest.


4.6.8
1683
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἀπῆγεν ὁ Ἀγησίλαος τὸ στράτευμα .
On the next day Agesilaus undertook to lead his army away.


4.6.8
1684
καὶ ἦν μὲν ἡ ἔξοδος ἐκ τοῦ περὶ τὴν λίμνην λειμῶνός τε καὶ πεδίου στενὴ διὰ τὰ κύκλῳ περιέχοντα ὄρη ·
Now the road which led out from the meadow and plain surrounding the lake was narrow on account of the mountains which encircled it round;


4.6.8
1685
καταλαβόντες δὲ οἱ Ἀκαρνᾶνες ἐκ τῶν ὑπερδεξίων ἔβαλλόν τε καὶ ἠκόντιζον , καὶ ὑποκαταβαίνοντες εἰς τὰ κράσπεδα τῶν ὀρῶν προσέκειντο καὶ πράγματα παρεῖχον , ὥστε οὐκέτι ἐδύνατο τὸ στράτευμα πορεύεσθαι .
and the Acarnanians, taking possession of these mountains, threw stones and javelins upon the Lacedaemonians from the heights upon their right, and descending gradually to the spurs of the mountains pressed the attack and caused trouble to such an extent that the army was no longer able to proceed.


4.6.9
1686
ἐπιδιώκοντες δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς φάλαγγος οἵ τε ὁπλῖται καὶ οἱ ἱππεῖς τοὺς ἐπιτιθεμένους οὐδὲν ἔβλαπτον ·
And when the hoplites and the horsemen left the phalanx and pursued their assailants, they could never do them any harm;


4.6.9
1687
ταχὺ γὰρ ἦσαν , ὁπότε ἀποχωροῖεν , πρὸς τοῖς ἰσχυροῖς οἱ Ἀκαρνᾶνες .
for when the Acarnanians fell back, they were speedily in safe places.


4.6.9
1688
χαλεπὸν δ’ ἡγησάμενος ὁ Ἀγησίλαος διὰ τοῦ στενοπόρου ἐξελθεῖν ταῦτα πάσχοντας , ἔγνω διώκειν τοὺς ἐκ τῶν εὐωνύμων προσκειμένους , μάλα πολλοὺς ὄντας ·
Then Agesilaus, thinking it a difficult matter for his troops to go out through the narrow pass under these attacks, decided to pursue the men who were attacking them on the left, very many in number;


4.6.9
1689
εὐβατώτερον γὰρ ἦν τοῦτο τὸ ὄρος καὶ ὁπλίταις καὶ ἵπποις .
for the mountain on this side was more accessible both for hoplites and horses.


4.6.10
1690
καὶ ἐν ᾧ μὲν ἐσφαγιάζετο , μάλα κατεῖχον βάλλοντες καὶ ἀκοντίζοντες οἱ Ἀκαρνᾶνες , καὶ ἐγγὺς προσιόντες πολλοὺς ἐτίτρωσκον .
Now while he was sacrificing, the Acarnanians pressed them very hard with throwing stones and javelins, and coming close up to them wounded many.


4.6.10
1691
ἐπεὶ δὲ παρήγγειλεν , ἔθει μὲν ἐκ τῶν ὁπλιτῶν τὰ πεντεκαίδεκα ἀφ’ ἥβης , ἤλαυνον δὲ οἱ ἱππεῖς , αὐτὸς δὲ σὺν τοῖς ἄλλοις ἠκολούθει .
But when he gave the word, the first fifteen year-classes of the hoplites ran forth, the horsemen charged, and he himself with the other troops followed.


4.6.11
1692
οἱ μὲν οὖν ὑποκαταβεβηκότες τῶν Ἀκαρνάνων καὶ ἀκροβολιζόμενοι ταχὺ ἐνέκλιναν καὶ ἀπέθνῃσκον φεύγοντες πρὸς τὸ ἄναντες ·
Then those among the Acarnanians who had come down the mountains and were throwing missiles quickly gave way and, as they tried to escape uphill, were killed one after another;


4.6.11
1693
ἐπὶ μέντοι τοῦ ἀκροτάτου οἱ ὁπλῖται ἦσαν τῶν Ἀκαρνάνων παρατεταγμένοι καὶ τῶν πελταστῶν τὸ πολύ , καὶ ἐνταῦθα ἐπέμενον , καὶ τά τε ἄλλα βέλη ἠφίεσαν καὶ τοῖς δόρασιν ἐξακοντίζοντες ἱππέας τε κατέτρωσαν καὶ ἵππους τινὰς ἀπέκτειναν .
on the summit, however, were the hoplites of the Acarnanians, drawn up in line of battle, and the greater part of the peltasts, and there they stood firm, and not only discharged their other missiles, but by hurling their spears struck down horsemen and killed some horses.


4.6.11
1694
ἐπεὶ μέντοι μικροῦ ἔδεον ἤδη ἐν χερσὶ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ὁπλιτῶν εἶναι , ἐνέκλιναν , καὶ ἀπέθανον αὐτῶν ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ περὶ τριακοσίους .
But when they were now almost at close quarters with the Lacedaemonian hoplites, they gave way, and there fell on that day about three hundred of them.


4.6.12
1695
τούτων δὲ γενομένων ὁ Ἀγησίλαος τροπαῖον ἐστήσατο .
When these things had taken place, Agesilaus set up a trophy.


4.6.12
1696
καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τούτου περιιὼν κατὰ τὴν χώραν ἔκοπτε καὶ ἔκαε ·
And afterwards, going about through the country, he laid it waste with axe and fire;


4.6.12
1697
πρὸς ἐνίας δὲ τῶν πόλεων καὶ προσέβαλλεν , ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀχαιῶν ἀναγκαζόμενος , οὐ μὴν εἷλέ γε οὐδεμίαν .
he also made assaults upon some of the cities, being compelled by the Achaeans to do so, but did not capture any one of them.


4.6.12
1698
ἡνίκα δὲ ἤδη ἐπεγίγνετο τὸ μετόπωρον , ἀπῄει ἐκ τῆς χώρας .
And when at length autumn was coming on, he set about departing from the country.


4.6.13
1699
οἱ δὲ Ἀχαιοὶ πεποιηκέναι τε οὐδὲν ἐνόμιζον αὐτόν , ὅτι πόλιν οὐδεμίαν προσειλήφει οὔτε ἑκοῦσαν οὔτε ἄκουσαν , ἐδέοντό τε , εἰ μή τι ἄλλο , ἀλλὰ τοσοῦτόν γε χρόνον καταμεῖναι αὐτόν , ἕως ἂν τὸν σπορητὸν διακωλύσῃ τοῖς Ἀκαρνᾶσιν .
The Achaeans, however, thought that he had accomplished nothing because he had gained possession of no city, with or without its consent, and they begged him, even if he did nothing else, at least to stay long enough to prevent the Acarnanians from sowing their seed.


4.6.13
1700
ὁ δὲ ἀπεκρίνατο ὅτι τὰ ἐναντία λέγοιεν τοῦ συμφέροντος .
He replied that what they were proposing was the opposite of the advantageous course.


4.6.13
1701
ἐγὼ μὲν γάρ , ἔφη , στρατεύομαι πάλιν δεῦρο εἰς τὸ ἐπιὸν θέρος ·
For, he said, I shall again lead an expedition hither next summer;


4.6.13
1702
οὗτοι δὲ ὅσῳ ἂν πλείω σπείρωσι , τοσούτῳ μᾶλλον τῆς εἰρήνης ἐπιθυμήσουσι .
and the more these people sow, the more they will desire peace.


4.6.14
1703
ταῦτα δ’ εἰπὼν ἀπῄει πεζῇ δι’ Αἰτωλίας τοιαύτας ὁδοὺς ἃς οὔτε πολλοὶ οὔτε ὀλίγοι δύναιντ’ ἂν ἀκόντων Αἰτωλῶν πορεύεσθαι ·
Having said this, he departed overland through Aetolia by such roads as neither many nor few could traverse against the will of the Aetolians;


4.6.14
1704
ἐκεῖνον μέντοι εἴασαν διελθεῖν ·
they allowed him, however, to pass through;


4.6.14
1705
ἤλπιζον γὰρ Ναύπακτον αὐτοῖς συμπράξειν ὥστ’ ἀπολαβεῖν .
for they hoped that he would aid them to recover Naupactus.


4.6.14
1706
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἐγένετο κατὰ τὸ Ῥίον , ταύτῃ διαβὰς οἴκαδε ἀπῆλθε ·
And when he reached the point opposite Rhium, he crossed over at that point and returned home;


4.6.14
1707
καὶ γὰρ τὸν ἐκ Καλυδῶνος ἔκπλουν εἰς Πελοπόννησον οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐκώλυον τριήρεσιν ὁρμώμενοι ἐξ Οἰνιαδῶν .
for the Athenians barred the passage from Calydon to Peloponnesus with their triremes, using Oeniadae as a base.


4.7.1
1708
παρελθόντος δὲ τοῦ χειμῶνος , ὥσπερ ὑπέσχετο τοῖς Ἀχαιοῖς , εὐθὺς ἀρχομένου τοῦ ἦρος πάλιν φρουρὰν ἔφαινεν ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἀκαρνᾶνας .
When the winter had passed, at the very beginning of spring Agesilaus again called out the ban against the Acarnanians, in accordance with his promise to the Achaeans.


4.7.1
1709
οἱ δὲ αἰσθόμενοι , καὶ νομίσαντες διὰ τὸ ἐν μεσογείᾳ σφίσι τὰς πόλεις εἶναι ὁμοίως ἂν πολιορκεῖσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν τὸν σῖτον φθειρόντων ὥσπερ εἰ περιεστρατοπεδευμένοι πολιορκοῖντο , ἔπεμψαν πρέσβεις εἰς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα , καὶ εἰρήνην μὲν πρὸς τοὺς Ἀχαιούς , συμμαχίαν δὲ πρὸς τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἐποιήσαντο .
But the Acarnanians, learning of this and thinking that inasmuch as their cities were in the interior they would be just as truly besieged by the people who destroyed their corn as if they were besieged by an army encamped around them, sent ambassadors to Lacedaemon and concluded peace with the Achaeans and an alliance with the Lacedaemonians.


4.7.1
1710
καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Ἀκαρνᾶνας οὕτω διεπέπρακτο .
Thus ended the affair of the Acarnanians.


4.7.2
1711
ἐκ δὲ τούτου τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις τὸ μὲν ἐπ’ Ἀθηναίους ἢ ἐπὶ Βοιωτοὺς στρατεύειν οὐκ ἐδόκει ἀσφαλὲς εἶναι ὄπισθεν καταλιπόντας ὅμορον τῇ Λακεδαίμονι πολεμίαν καὶ οὕτω μεγάλην τὴν τῶν Ἀργείων πόλιν , εἰς δὲ τὸ Ἄργος φρουρὰν φαίνουσιν .
After this it seemed to the Lacedaemonians that it was not safe for them to undertake a campaign against the Athenians or against the Boeotians while leaving in their rear a hostile state bordering upon Lacedaemon and one so large as that of the Argives; they accordingly called out the ban against Argos.


4.7.2
1712
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίπολις ἐπεὶ ἔγνω ὅτι εἴη αὐτῷ ἡγητέον τῆς φρουρᾶς καὶ τὰ διαβατήρια θυομένῳ ἐγένετο , ἐλθὼν εἰς Ὀλυμπίαν καὶ χρηστηριαζόμενος ἐπηρώτα τὸν θεὸν εἰ ὁσίως ἂν ἔχοι αὐτῷ μὴ δεχομένῳ τὰς σπονδὰς τῶν Ἀργείων , ὅτι οὐχ ὁπότε καθήκοι ὁ χρόνος , ἀλλ’ ὁπότε ἐμβάλλειν μέλλοιεν Λακεδαιμόνιοι , τότε ὑπέφερον τοὺς μῆνας .
Now when Agesipolis learned that he was to lead the ban, and when the sacrifices which he offered at the frontier proved favourable, he went to Olympia and consulted the oracle of the god, asking whether it would be consistent with piety if he did not acknowledge the holy truce claimed by the Argives; for, he urged, it was not when the appointed time came, but when the Lacedaemonians were about to invade their territory, that they pleaded the sacred months.


4.7.2
1713
ὁ δὲ θεὸς ἐπεσήμαινεν αὐτῷ ὅσιον εἶναι μὴ δεχομένῳ σπονδὰς ἀδίκως ὑποφερομένας .
And the god signified to him that it was consistent with piety for him not to acknowledge a holy truce which was pleaded unjustly.


4.7.2
1714
ἐκεῖθεν δ’ εὐθὺς πορευθεὶς εἰς Δελφοὺς ἐπήρετο αὖ τὸν Ἀπόλλω εἰ κ- ἐκείνῳ δοκοίη περὶ τῶν σπονδῶν καθάπερ τῷ πατρί .
Then Agesipolis proceeded straight from there to Delphi and asked Apollo in his turn whether he also held the same opinion as his father Zeus in regard to the truce.


4.7.2
1715
ὁ δὲ ἀπεκρίνατο καὶ μάλα κατὰ τ- αὐτά .
And Apollo answered that he did hold quite the same opinion.


4.7.3
1716
καὶ οὕτω δὴ Ἀγησίπολις ἀναλαβὼν ἐκ Φλειοῦντος τὸ στράτευμα , ἐκεῖσε γὰρ αὐτῷ συνελέγετο , ἕως πρὸς τὰ ἱερὰ ἀπεδήμει , ἐνέβαλε διὰ Νεμέας .
Under these circumstances Agesipolis led forth his army from Phlius—for it had been assembling for him there while he was away visiting the holy places—and entered the territory of Argos by way of Nemea.


4.7.3
1717
οἱ δ’ Ἀργεῖοι ἐπεὶ ἔγνωσαν οὐ δυνησόμενοι κωλύειν , ἔπεμψαν , ὥσπερ εἰώθεσαν , ἐστεφανωμένους δύο κήρυκας ὑποφέροντας σπονδάς .
And when the Argives realized that they would not be able to hinder the invasion, they sent, as they were wont to do, two heralds, garlanded, pleading a holy truce.


4.7.3
1718
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίπολις , ἀποκρινάμενος ὅτι οὐ δοκοῖεν τοῖς θεοῖς δικαίως ὑποφέρειν , οὐκ ἐδέχετο τὰς σπονδάς , ἀλλ’ ἐνέβαλε καὶ πολλὴν ἀπορίαν καὶ ἔκπληξιν κατά τε τοὺς ἀγροὺς καὶ ἐν τῇ πόλει ἐποίησε .
But Agesipolis in reply said that the gods did not think they were making this plea justly, and so he refused to acknowledge the truce, but advanced into their territory and caused great distress and terror both in the country and in the city.


4.7.4
1719
δειπνοποιουμένου δ’ αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ Ἀργείᾳ τῇ πρώτῃ ἑσπέρᾳ , καὶ σπονδῶν τῶν μετὰ δεῖπνον ἤδη γιγνομένων , ἔσεισεν ὁ θεός .
Now while he was at dinner in the land of the Argives, on the first evening of his stay there, and when the after-dinner libations had just been made, the god sent an earthquake;


4.7.4
1720
καὶ οἱ μὲν Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀρξαμένων τῶν ἀπὸ δαμοσίας πάντες ὕμνησαν τὸν περὶ τὸν Ποσειδῶ παιᾶνα ·
and all the Lacedaemonians, those in the royal tent taking the lead, struck up the paean to Poseidon;


4.7.4
1721
οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι στρατιῶται ᾤοντο ἀπιέναι , ὅτι καὶ Ἆγις σεισμοῦ ποτε γενομένου ἀπήγαγεν ἐξ Ἤλιδος .
and the rest of the soldiers expected to retire from the country, because Agis likewise, on an occasion when an earthquake took place, had withdrawn his army from Elis.


4.7.4
1722
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίπολις εἰπὼν ὅτι εἰ μὲν μέλλοντος αὐτοῦ ἐμβάλλειν σείσειε , κωλύειν ἂν αὐτὸν ἡγεῖτο ·
But Agesipolis said that if the god had sent an earthquake when he was about to invade, he should have thought that he was forbidding the invasion;


4.7.4
1723
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐμβεβληκότος , ἐπικελεύειν νομίζοι ·
but since he sent it after he had invaded, he believed that he was urging him on;


4.7.5
1724
καὶ οὕτω τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ θυσάμενος τῷ Ποσειδῶνι ἡγεῖτο οὐ πόρρω εἰς τὴν χώραν .
accordingly, on the next day, after offering sacrifices to Poseidon, he again led on his forces, advancing far into the country.


4.7.5
1725
ἅτε δὲ νεωστὶ τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου ἐστρατευμένου εἰς τὸ Ἄργος , πυνθανόμενος ὁ Ἀγησίπολις τῶν στρατιωτῶν μέχρι μὲν ποῖ πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος ἤγαγεν ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , μέχρι δὲ ποῖ τὴν χώραν ἐδῄωσεν , ὥσπερ πένταθλος πάντῃ ἐπὶ τὸ πλέον ὑπερβάλλειν ἐπειρᾶτο .
And inasmuch as Agesilaus had lately made an expedition into Argos, Agesipolis, finding out from the soldiers how far Agesilaus had led his army in the direction of the wall, and how far he had laid waste the land, endeavoured, like an athlete in the pentathlum, to go beyond him at every point.


4.7.6
1726
καὶ ἤδη μέν ποτε βαλλόμενος ἀπὸ τῶν τύρσεων τὰς περὶ τὸ τεῖχος τάφρους πάλιν διέβη ·
On one occasion it was only when he was being pelted with missiles from the towers that he recrossed the trenches around the city wall;


4.7.6
1727
ἦν δ’ ὅτε οἰχομένων τῶν πλείστων Ἀργείων εἰς τὴν Λακωνικὴν οὕτως ἐγγὺς πυλῶν προσῆλθεν ὥστε οἱ πρὸς ταῖς πύλαις ὄντες τῶν Ἀργείων ἀπέκλεισαν τοὺς τῶν Βοιωτῶν ἱππέας εἰσελθεῖν βουλομένους , δείσαντες μὴ συνεισπέσοιεν κατὰ τὰς πύλας οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ·
and once, when most of the Argives were away in Laconia, he approached so near the gates that the Argives who were at the gates shut out the horsemen of the Boeotians who wanted to enter, through fear that the Lacedaemonians would rush in at the gates along with them;


4.7.6
1728
ὥστ’ ἠναγκάσθησαν οἱ ἱππεῖς ὥσπερ νυκτερίδες πρὸς τοῖς τείχεσιν ὑπὸ ταῖς ἐπάλξεσι προσαραρέναι .
so that the horsemen were compelled to cling, like bats, tight to the walls beneath the battlements.


4.7.6
1729
καὶ εἰ μὴ ἔτυχον τότε οἱ Κρῆτες εἰς Ναυπλίαν καταδεδραμηκότες , πολλοὶ ἂν καὶ ἄνδρες καὶ ἵπποι κατετοξεύθησαν .
And if it had not chanced that the Cretans were off on a plundering expedition to Nauplia at that time, many men and horses would have been shot down by their arrows.


4.7.7
1730
ἐκ δὲ τούτου περὶ τὰς εἰρκτὰς στρατοπεδευομένου αὐτοῦ πίπτει κεραυνὸς εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον ·
After this, while Agesipolis was encamping near the enclosed space, a thunderbolt fell into his camp;


4.7.7
1731
καὶ οἱ μέν τινες πληγέντες , οἱ δὲ καὶ ἐμβροντηθέντες ἀπέθανον .
and some men were killed by being struck, others by the shock.


4.7.7
1732
ἐκ δὲ τούτου βουλόμενος τειχίσαι φρούριόν τι ἐπὶ ταῖς παρὰ Κηλοῦσαν ἐμβολαῖς , ἐθύετο ·
After this, desiring to fortify a garrison post at the entrance to the Argive country which leads past Mount Celusa, he offered sacrifice;


4.7.7
1733
καὶ ἐφάνη αὐτῷ τὰ ἱερὰ ἄλοβα .
and the livers of the victims were found to be lacking a lobe.


4.7.7
1734
ὡς δὲ τοῦτο ἐγένετο , ἀπήγαγε τὸ στράτευμα καὶ διέλυσε , μάλα πολλὰ βλάψας τοὺς Ἀργείους , ἅτε ἀπροσδοκήτως αὐτοῖς ἐμβαλών .
When this happened, he led his army away and disbanded it, having inflicted very great harm upon the Argives because he had invaded their land unexpectedly.


4.8.1
1735
καὶ ὁ μὲν δὴ κατὰ γῆν πόλεμος οὕτως ἐπολεμεῖτο .
As for the war by land, it was being waged in the manner described.


4.8.1
1736
ἐν ᾧ δὲ πάντα ταῦτα ἐπράττετο , τὰ κατὰ θάλατταν αὖ καὶ τὰς πρὸς θαλάττῃ πόλεις γενόμενα διηγήσομαι , καὶ τῶν πράξεων τὰς μὲν ἀξιομνημονεύτους γράψω , τὰς δὲ μὴ ἀξίας λόγου παρήσω .
I will now recount what happened by sea and in the cities on the coast while all these things were going on, and will describe such of the events as are worthy of record, while those which do not deserve mention I will pass over.


4.8.1
1737
πρῶτον μὲν τοίνυν Φαρνάβαζος καὶ Κόνων , ἐπεὶ ἐνίκησαν τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ , περιπλέοντες καὶ τὰς νήσους καὶ πρὸς τὰς ἐπιθαλαττιδίας πόλεις τούς τε Λακωνικοὺς ἁρμοστὰς ἐξήλαυνον καὶ παρεμυθοῦντο τὰς πόλεις ὡς οὔτε ἀκροπόλεις ἐντειχίσοιεν ἐάσοιέν τε αὐτονόμους .
In the first place, then, Pharnabazus and Conon, after defeating the Lacedaemonians in the naval battle, made a tour of the islands and the cities on the sea coast, drove out the Laconian governors, and encouraged the cities by saying that they would not establish fortified citadels within their walls and would leave them independent.


4.8.2
1738
οἱ δ’ ἀκούοντες ταῦτα ἥδοντό τε καὶ ἐπῄνουν καὶ ξένια προθύμως ἔπεμπον τῷ Φαρναβάζῳ .
And the people of the cities received this announcement with joy and approval, and enthusiastically sent gifts of friendship to Pharnabazus.


4.8.2
1739
καὶ γὰρ ὁ Κόνων τὸν Φαρνάβαζον ἐδίδασκεν ὡς οὕτω μὲν ποιοῦντι πᾶσαι αὐτῷ αἱ πόλεις φίλιαι ἔσοιντο , εἰ δὲ δουλοῦσθαι βουλόμενος φανερὸς ἔσοιτο , ἔλεγεν ὡς μία ἑκάστη πολλὰ πράγματα ἱκανὴ εἴη παρέχειν καὶ κίνδυνος εἴη μὴ καὶ οἱ Ἕλληνες , εἰ ταῦτα αἴσθοιντο , συσταῖεν .
Conon, it seems, was advising Pharnabazus that if he acted in this way, all the cities would be friendly to him, but if it should be evident that he wanted to enslave them, he said that each single city was capable of making a great deal of trouble and that there was danger that the people of Greece also, if they learned of this, would become united.


4.8.3
1740
ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπείθετο ὁ Φαρνάβαζος .
Pharnabazus was accordingly accepting this counsel.


4.8.3
1741
ἀποβὰς δ’ εἰς Ἔφεσον τῷ μὲν Κόνωνι δοὺς τετταράκοντα τριήρεις εἰς Σηστὸν εἶπεν ἀπαντᾶν , αὐτὸς δὲ πεζῇ παρῄει ἐπὶ τὴν αὑτοῦ ἀρχήν .
Then, disembarking at Ephesus, he gave Conon forty triremes and told him to meet him at Sestus, while he himself proceeded by land along the coast to his own province.


4.8.3
1742
καὶ γὰρ ὁ Δερκυλίδας , ὅσπερ καὶ πάλαι πολέμιος ἦν αὐτῷ , ἔτυχεν ἐν Ἀβύδῳ ὤν , ὅτε ἡ ναυμαχία ἐγένετο , καὶ οὐχ ὥσπερ οἱ ἄλλοι ἁρμοσταὶ ἐξέλιπεν , ἀλλὰ κατέσχε τὴν Ἄβυδον καὶ διέσῳζε φίλην τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις .
For Dercylidas, who had long been an enemy of his, chanced to be in Abydus at the time when the naval battle took place, and he did not, like the other Lacedaemonian governors, quit the city, but took possession of Abydus and was keeping it friendly to the Lacedaemonians.


4.8.3
1743
καὶ γὰρ συγκαλέσας τοὺς Ἀβυδηνοὺς ἔλεξε τοιάδε .
For he called together the people of the town and spoke as follows:


4.8.4
1744
ὦ ἄνδρες , νῦν ἔξεστιν ὑμῖν καὶ πρόσθεν φίλοις οὖσι τῇ πόλει ἡμῶν εὐεργέτας φανῆναι τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων .
Gentlemen, at this moment it is possible for you, who even in former days have been friends of our state, to show yourselves benefactors of the Lacedaemonians.


4.8.4
1745
καὶ γὰρ τὸ μὲν ἐν ταῖς εὐπραξίαις πιστοὺς φαίνεσθαι οὐδὲν θαυμαστόν ·
For showing loyalty in the midst of prosperity calls for no particular admiration,


4.8.4
1746
ὅταν δέ τινες ἐν συμφοραῖς γενομένων φίλων βέβαιοι φανῶσι , τοῦτ’ εἰς τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον μνημονεύεται .
but always, if men show themselves steadfast when friends have fallen upon misfortunes, this is remembered for all time.


4.8.4
1747
ἔστι δὲ οὐχ οὕτως ἔχον ὡς , εἰ τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ ἐκρατήθημεν , οὐδὲν ἄρα ἔτι ἐσμέν ·
Do not suppose that just because we have been defeated in the naval battle, we are therefore ever afterward to be counted for naught.


4.8.4
1748
ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ πρόσθεν δήπου , Ἀθηναίων ἀρχόντων τῆς θαλάττης , ἱκανὴ ἦν ἡ ἡμετέρα πόλις καὶ εὖ φίλους καὶ κακῶς ἐχθροὺς ποιεῖν .
Nay, even in former times, you recall, when the Athenians were rulers of the sea, our state was able both to confer benefit upon friends and to inflict harm upon enemies.


4.8.4
1749
ὅσῳ δὲ μᾶλλον αἱ ἄλλαι πόλεις σὺν τῇ τύχῃ ἀπεστράφησαν ἡμῶν , τοσούτῳ ὄντως ἡ ὑμετέρα πιστότης μείζων φανείη ἄν .
And the greater the extent to which the other cities have, along with fortune, turned away from us, by so much the greater in reality would your fidelity be made manifest.


4.8.4
1750
εἰ δέ τις τοῦτο φοβεῖται , μὴ καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν ἐνθάδε πολιορκώμεθα , ἐννοείτω ὅτι Ἑλληνικὸν μὲν οὔπω ναυτικόν ἐστιν ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ , οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι εἰ ἐπιχειρήσουσι τῆς θαλάττης ἄρχειν , οὐκ ἀνέξεται ταῦτα ἡ Ἑλλάς ·
But if anyone is afraid that we may be besieged here both by land and by sea, let him reflect that there is not yet a Greek fleet on the sea, and if the barbarians shall undertake to rule the sea, Greece will not tolerate this;


4.8.4
1751
ὥσθ’ ἑαυτῇ ἐπικουροῦσα καὶ ὑμῖν σύμμαχος γενήσεται .
The result was that in helping herself she will also become your ally.


4.8.5
1752
οἱ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἀκούοντες οὐκ ἀκόντως ἀλλὰ προθύμως ἐπείσθησαν ·
Upon hearing these words, the Abydenes yielded compliance, not unwillingly, but with enthusiasm, and they received kindly the Lacedaemonian governors who came to Abydus and sent for those who were elsewhere.


4.8.5
1753
καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἰόντας ἁρμοστὰς φίλως ἐδέχοντο , τοὺς δὲ ἀπόντας μετεπέμποντο .
Then, after many good men had been collected in the city, Dercylidas crossed over to Sestus, which is opposite Abydus and distant not more than eight stadia, gathered together all who had obtained land in the Chersonese through the Lacedaemonians, and received also all those governors who had been driven out in like fashion from the cities on the European side,


4.8.5
1754
ὁ δὲ Δερκυλίδας , ὡς συνελέγησαν πολλοὶ καὶ χρήσιμοι ἄνδρες εἰς τὴν πόλιν , διαβὰς καὶ εἰς Σηστόν , καταντικρὺ ὄντα Ἀβύδου καὶ ἀπέχοντα οὐ πλέον ὀκτὼ σταδίων , ὅσοι τε διὰ Λακεδαιμονίους γῆν ἔσχον ἐν Χερρονήσῳ , ἥθροιζε , καὶ ὅσοι αὖ ἐκ τῶν ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ πόλεων ἁρμοσταὶ ἐξέπιπτον , καὶ τούτους ἐδέχετο , λέγων ὅτι οὐδ’ ἐκείνους ἀθυμεῖν δεῖ , ἐννοουμένους ὅτι καὶ ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ , ἣ ἐξ ἀρχῆς βασιλέως ἐστί , καὶ Τῆμνος , οὐ μεγάλη πόλις , καὶ Αἰγαιεῖς καὶ ἄλλα γε χωρία δύνανται οἰκεῖν οὐχ ὑπήκοοι ὄντες βασιλέως .
saying to them that they ought not to be discouraged, either, when they reflected that even in Asia, which had belonged from all time to the King, there was Temnus—not a large city—and Aegae and other places in which people were able to dwell without being subject to the King.


4.8.5
1755
καίτοι , ἔφη , ποῖον μὲν ἂν ἰσχυρότερον Σηστοῦ λάβοιτε χωρίον , ποῖον δὲ δυσπολιορκητότερον ;
In any event, he said, what stronger place could you find than Sestus, what place harder to capture by siege?


4.8.5
1756
ὃ καὶ νεῶν καὶ πεζῶν δεῖται , εἰ μέλλοι πολιορκηθήσεσθαι .
For it is a place which requires both ships and troops if it is to be besieged.


4.8.6
1757
τούτους αὖ τοιαῦτα λέγων ἔσχε τοῦ ἐκπεπλῆχθαι .
By such words he kept these men also from being panic-stricken.


4.8.6
1758
ὁ δὲ Φαρνάβαζος ἐπεὶ ηὗρε τήν τε Ἄβυδον καὶ τὸν Σηστὸν οὕτως ἔχοντα , προηγόρευεν αὐτοῖς ὡς εἰ μὴ ἐκπέμψοιεν τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους , πόλεμον ἐξοίσει πρὸς αὐτούς .
Now when Pharnabazus found both Abydus and Sestus in this condition, he made proclamation to their inhabitants that if they did not expel the Lacedaemonians he would make war upon them.


4.8.6
1759
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐκ ἐπείθοντο , Κόνωνι μὲν προσέταξε κωλύειν αὐτοὺς τὴν θάλατταν πλεῖν , αὐτὸς δὲ ἐδῄου τὴν τῶν Ἀβυδηνῶν χώραν .
And upon their refusing to obey, he directed Conon to prevent them from sailing the sea, while he himself proceeded to lay waste the territory of the Abydenes.


4.8.6
1760
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐδὲν ἐπέραινε πρὸς τὸ καταστρέφεσθαι , αὐτὸς μὲν ἐπ’ οἴκου ἀπῆλθε , τὸν δὲ Κόνωνα ἐκέλευεν εὐτρεπίζεσθαι τὰς καθ’ Ἑλλήσποντον πόλεις , ὅπως εἰς τὸ ἔαρ ὅτι πλεῖστον ναυτικὸν ἁθροισθείη .
But failing to make any progress toward subduing them, he himself went back home, ordering Conon to try to win over the cities along the Hellespont, to the end that as large a fleet as possible might be gathered together by the coming of the spring.


4.8.6
1761
ὀργιζόμενος γὰρ τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ἀνθ’ ὧν ἐπεπόνθει περὶ παντὸς ἐποιεῖτο ἐλθεῖν τε εἰς τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν καὶ τιμωρήσασθαι ὅ τι δύναιτο .
For he was angry with the Lacedaemonians on account of what he had suffered at their hands, and therefore desired above all things to go to their country and take what vengeance upon them he could.


4.8.7
1762
καὶ τὸν μὲν χειμῶνα ἐν τοιούτοις ὄντες διῆγον ·
In such occupations, accordingly, they passed the winter;


4.8.7
1763
ἅμα δὲ τῷ ἔαρι ναῦς τε πολλὰς συμπληρώσας καὶ ξενικὸν προσμισθωσάμενος ἔπλευσεν ὁ Φαρνάβαζός τε καὶ ὁ Κόνων μετ’ αὐτοῦ διὰ νήσων εἰς Μῆλον , ἐκεῖθεν δὲ ὁρμώμενοι εἰς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα .
but at the opening of spring, having fully manned a large number of ships and hired a force of mercenaries besides, Pharnabazus, and Conon with him, sailed through the islands to Melos, and making that their base, went on to Lacedaemon.


4.8.7
1764
καταπλεύσας δὲ πρῶτον μὲν εἰς Φαρὰς ἐδῄωσε ταύτην τὴν χώραν , ἔπειτα καὶ ἄλλοσε ἀποβαίνων τῆς παραθαλαττίας ἐκακούργει ὅ τι ἐδύνατο .
And first Pharnabazus put in at Pherae and laid waste this region; then he made descents at one point and another of the coast and did whatever harm he could.


4.8.7
1765
φοβούμενος δὲ τήν τε ἀλιμενότητα τῆς χώρας καὶ τὰ τῆς βοηθείας καὶ τὴν σπανοσιτίαν , ταχύ τε ἀνέστρεψε καὶ ἀποπλέων ὡρμίσθη τῆς Κυθηρίας εἰς Φοινικοῦντα .
But being fearful because the country was destitute of harbours, because the Lacedaemonians might send relief forces, and because provisions were scarce in the land, he quickly turned about, and sailing away, came to anchor at Phoenicus in the island of Cythera.


4.8.8
1766
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ ἔχοντες τὴν πόλιν τῶν Κυθηρίων φοβηθέντες μὴ κατὰ κράτος ἁλοῖεν ἐξέλιπον τὰ τείχη , ἐκείνους μὲν ὑποσπόνδους ἀφῆκεν εἰς τὴν Λακωνικήν , αὐτὸς δ’ ἐπισκευάσας τὸ τῶν Κυθηρίων τεῖχος φρουρούς τε καὶ Νικόφημον Ἀθηναῖον ἁρμοστὴν ἐν τοῖς Κυθήροις κατέλιπε .
And when those who held possession of the city of the Cytherians abandoned their walls through fear of being captured by storm, he allowed them to depart to Laconia under a truce, and having repaired the wall of the Cytherians, left in Cythera a garrison of his own and Nicophemus, an Athenian, as governor.


4.8.8
1767
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας καὶ εἰς Ἰσθμὸν τῆς Κορινθίας καταπλεύσας , καὶ παρακελευσάμενος τοῖς συμμάχοις προθύμως τε πολεμεῖν καὶ ἄνδρας πιστοὺς φαίνεσθαι βασιλεῖ , καταλιπὼν αὐτοῖς χρήματα ὅσα εἶχεν , ᾤχετο ἐπ’ οἴκου ἀποπλέων .
After doing these things and sailing to the Isthmus of Corinth and there exhorting the allies to carry on the war zealously and show themselves men faithful to the King, he left them all the money that he had and sailed off homeward.


4.8.9
1768
λέγοντος δὲ τοῦ Κόνωνος ὡς εἰ ἐῴη αὐτὸν ἔχειν τὸ ναυτικόν , θρέψοι μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν νήσων , καταπλεύσας δ’ εἰς τὴν πατρίδα συναναστήσοι τά τε μακρὰ τείχη τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις καὶ τὸ περὶ τὸν Πειραιᾶ τεῖχος , οὗ εἰδέναι ἔφη ὅτι Λακεδαιμονίοις οὐδὲν ἂν βαρύτερον γένοιτο , καὶ τοῦτο οὖν , ἔφη , σὺ τοῖς μὲν Ἀθηναίοις κεχαρισμένος ἔσει , τοὺς δὲ Λακεδαιμονίους τετιμωρημένος ·
But when Conon said that if he would allow him to have the fleet, he would maintain it by contributions from the islands and would meanwhile put in at Athens and aid the Athenians in rebuilding their long walls and the wall around Piraeus, adding that he knew nothing could be a heavier blow to the Lacedaemonians than this.


4.8.9
1769
ἐφ’ ᾧ γὰρ πλεῖστα ἐπόνησαν , ἀτελὲς αὐτοῖς ποιήσεις .
And by this act, therefore, he said, you will have conferred a favour upon the Athenians and have taken vengeance upon the Lacedaemonians, inasmuch as you will undo for them the deed for whose accomplishment they underwent the most toil and trouble.


4.8.9
1770
ὁ δὲ Φαρνάβαζος ἀκούσας ταῦτα ἀπέστειλεν αὐτὸν προθύμως εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας , καὶ χρήματα προσέθηκεν αὐτῷ εἰς τὸν ἀνατειχισμόν .
Pharnabazus, upon hearing this, eagerly dispatched him to Athens and gave him additional money for the rebuilding of the walls.


4.8.10
1771
ὁ δὲ ἀφικόμενος πολὺ τοῦ τείχους ὤρθωσε , τά τε αὑτοῦ πληρώματα παρέχων καὶ τέκτοσι καὶ λιθολόγοις μισθὸν διδούς , καὶ ἄλλο εἴ τι ἀναγκαῖον ἦν , δαπανῶν .
Upon his arrival Conon erected a large part of the wall, giving his own crews for the work, paying the wages of carpenters and masons, and meeting whatever other expense was necessary.


4.8.10
1772
ἦν μέντοι τοῦ τείχους ἃ καὶ αὐτοὶ Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ Βοιωτοὶ καὶ ἄλλαι πόλεις ἐθελούσιαι συνετείχισαν .
There were some parts of the wall, however, which the Athenians themselves, as well as volunteers from Boeotia and from other states, aided in building.


4.8.10
1773
οἱ μέντοι Κορίνθιοι ἀφ’ ὧν ὁ Φαρνάβαζος κατέλιπε χρημάτων ναῦς πληρώσαντες καὶ Ἀγαθῖνον ναύαρχον ἐπιστήσαντες ἐθαλαττοκράτουν ἐν τῷ περὶ Ἀχαΐαν καὶ Λέχαιον κόλπῳ .
The Corinthians, on the other hand, manned ships with the money which Pharnabazus left, appointed Agathinus as admiral, and established their mastery of the sea in the gulf around Achaea and Lechaeum.


4.8.10
1774
ἀντεπλήρωσαν δὲ καὶ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ναῦς , ὧν Ποδάνεμος ἦρχεν .
And the Lacedaemonians on their side manned ships, which Podanemus commanded.


4.8.11
1775
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὗτος ἐν προσβολῇ τινι γενομένῃ ἀπέθανε , καὶ Πόλλις αὖ ἐπιστολεὺς ὢν τρωθεὶς ἀπῆλθεν , Ἡριππίδας ταύτας ἀναλαμβάνει τὰς ναῦς .
But when he was killed in an attack which took place, and Pollis in his turn, who was vice-admiral, was wounded and went home, Herippidas took command of these ships.


4.8.11
1776
Πρόαινος μέντοι Κορίνθιος τὰς παρ’ Ἀγαθίνου παραλαβὼν ναῦς ἐξέλιπε τὸ Ῥίον ·
Proaenus, the Corinthian, however, who had succeeded to the command of the ships of Agathinus, abandoned Rhium.


4.8.11
1777
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δ’ αὐτὸ παρέλαβον .
The Lacedaemonians took it over.


4.8.11
1778
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο Τελευτίας ἐπὶ τὰς Ἡριππίδου ναῦς ἦλθε , καὶ οὗτος αὖ τοῦ κόλπου πάλιν ἐκράτει .
After this Teleutias came to assume charge of the ships of Herippidas, and he in his turn was now master of the gulf.


4.8.12
1779
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀκούοντες ὅτι Κόνων καὶ τὸ τεῖχος τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις ἐκ τῶν βασιλέως χρημάτων ἀνορθοίη καὶ τὸ ναυτικὸν ἀπὸ τῶν ἐκείνου τρέφων τάς τε νήσους καὶ τὰς ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ παρὰ θάλατταν πόλεις Ἀθηναίοις εὐτρεπίζοι , ἐνόμισαν , εἰ ταῦτα διδάσκοιεν Τιρίβαζον βασιλέως ὄντα στρατηγόν , ἢ καὶ ἀποστῆσαι ἂν πρὸς ἑαυτοὺς τὸν Τιρίβαζον ἢ παῦσαί γ’ ἂν τὸ Κόνωνος ναυτικὸν τρέφοντα .
Now the Lacedaemonians, upon hearing that Conon was not only rebuilding their wall for the Athenians out of the King’s money, but was also, while maintaining his fleet from the latter’s funds, engaged in winning over the islands and the coast cities on the mainland to the Athenians, conceived the idea that if they informed Tiribazus, who was the King’s general, of these things, they could either bring Tiribazus over entirely to their side or at least put an end to his maintaining Conon’s fleet.


4.8.12
1780
γνόντες δὲ οὕτω , πέμπουσιν Ἀνταλκίδαν πρὸς τὸν Τιρίβαζον , προστάξαντες αὐτῷ ταῦτα διδάσκειν καὶ πειρᾶσθαι εἰρήνην τῇ πόλει ποιεῖσθαι πρὸς βασιλέα .
Having come to this conclusion, they sent Antalcidas to Tiribazus with instructions to inform Tiribazus of these facts, and to endeavour to make peace between the state and the King.


4.8.13
1781
αἰσθόμενοι δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἀντιπέμπουσι πρέσβεις μετὰ Κόνωνος Ἑρμογένη καὶ Δίωνα καὶ Καλλισθένη καὶ Καλλιμέδοντα .
But when the Athenians learned of this, they likewise sent ambassadors,—Conon at their head, and Hermogenes, Dion, Callisthenes, and Callimedon.


4.8.13
1782
συμπαρεκάλεσαν δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν συμμάχων πρέσβεις ·
They also invited ambassadors from their allies to go with them;


4.8.13
1783
καὶ παρεγένοντο ἀπό τε Βοιωτῶν καὶ Κορίνθου καὶ Ἄργους .
and ambassadors did come from the Boeotians, from Corinth, and from Argos.


4.8.14
1784
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐκεῖ ἦσαν , ὁ μὲν Ἀνταλκίδας ἔλεγε πρὸς τὸν Τιρίβαζον ὅτι εἰρήνης δεόμενος ἥκοι τῇ πόλει πρὸς βασιλέα , καὶ ταύτης οἵασπερ βασιλεὺς ἐπεθύμει .
When they had reached their destination, Antalcidas said to Tiribazus that he had come desiring peace between his state and the King, and, furthermore, just such a peace as the King had wished for.


4.8.14
1785
τῶν τε γὰρ ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ Ἑλληνίδων πόλεων Λακεδαιμονίους βασιλεῖ οὐκ ἀντιποιεῖσθαι , τάς τε νήσους ἁπάσας καὶ τὰς ἄλλας πόλεις ἀρκεῖν σφίσιν αὐτονόμους εἶναι .
For the Lacedaemonians, he said, urged no claim against the King to the Greek cities in Asia and they were content that all the islands and the Greek cities in general should be independent.


4.8.14
1786
καίτοι , ἔφη , τοιαῦτα ἐθελόντων ἡμῶν , τίνος ἂν ἕνεκα πρὸς ἡμᾶς οἱ Ἕλληνες ἢ βασιλεὺς πολεμίη ἢ χρήματα δαπανῴη ;
And yet, he said, if we are ready to agree to such conditions, why should the King be at war with us or be spending money?


4.8.14
1787
καὶ γὰρ οὐδ’ ἐπὶ βασιλέα στρατεύεσθαι δυνατὸν οὔτε Ἀθηναίοις μὴ ἡγουμένων ἡμῶν οὔθ’ ἡμῖν αὐτονόμων οὐσῶν τῶν πόλεων .
Indeed, if such terms were made, we could not take the field against the King, either; the Athenians could not unless we assumed the leadership, and we could not if the cities were independent.


4.8.15
1788
τῷ μὲν δὴ Τιριβάζῳ ἀκούοντι ἰσχυρῶς ἤρεσκον οἱ τοῦ Ἀνταλκίδου λόγοι ·
Now Tiribazus was mightily pleased at hearing the words of Antalcidas;


4.8.15
1789
τοῖς δὲ ἐναντίοις λόγοι ταῦτ’ ἦν .
but to the opponents of Antalcidas these proposals went no further than words.


4.8.15
1790
οἵ τε γὰρ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐφοβοῦντο συνθέσθαι αὐτονόμους εἶναι τὰς νήσους , μὴ Λήμνου καὶ Ἴμβρου καὶ Σκύρου στερηθεῖεν , οἵ τε Θηβαῖοι , μὴ ἀναγκασθείησαν ἀφεῖναι τὰς Βοιωτίας πόλεις αὐτονόμους , οἵ τ’ Ἀργεῖοι , οὗ ἐπεθύμουν , οὐκ ἐνόμιζον ἂν τὴν Κόρινθον δύνασθαι ὡς Ἄργος ἔχειν τοιούτων συνθηκῶν καὶ σπονδῶν γενομένων .
For the Athenians were afraid to agree that the cities and the islands should be independent lest they should be deprived of Lemnos, Imbros, and Scyros; and the Thebans, lest they should be compelled to leave the Boeotian cities independent; while the Argives thought that they could not keep Corinth as Argos, a thing which they desired, if such an agreement and peace were concluded.


4.8.15
1791
αὕτη μὲν ἡ εἰρήνη οὕτως ἐγένετο ἀτελής , καὶ ἀπῆλθον οἴκαδε ἕκαστος .
So it was that this project of peace came to naught, and the ambassadors returned to their several homes.


4.8.16
1792
ὁ μέντοι Τιρίβαζος τὸ μὲν ἄνευ βασιλέως μετὰ Λακεδαιμονίων γενέσθαι οὐκ ἀσφαλὲς αὑτῷ ἡγεῖτο εἶναι ·
As for Tiribazus, he thought that it was not safe for him to take the side of the Lacedaemonians without the King’s approval;


4.8.16
1793
λάθρᾳ γε μέντοι ἔδωκε χρήματα Ἀνταλκίδᾳ , ὅπως ἂν πληρωθέντος ναυτικοῦ ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων οἵ τε Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι αὐτῶν μᾶλλον τῆς εἰρήνης προσδέοιντο , καὶ τὸν Κόνωνα ὡς ἀδικοῦντά τε βασιλέα καὶ ἀληθῆ λεγόντων Λακεδαιμονίων εἶρξε .
in secret, however, he gave money to Antalcidas, to the end that a fleet might be manned by the Lacedaemonians and thus the Athenians and their allies be made more desirous of peace, and he also imprisoned Conon, on the ground that he was wronging the King and that the charges made by the Lacedaemonians were true.


4.8.16
1794
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας ἀνέβαινε πρὸς βασιλέα , φράσων ἅ τε λέγοιεν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ ὅτι Κόνωνα συνειληφὼς εἴη ὡς ἀδικοῦντα , καὶ ἐρωτήσων τί χρὴ ποιεῖν περὶ τούτων ἁπάντων .
After doing these things he proceeded to go up to the King for the purpose of telling him not only the proposals of the Lacedaemonians, but also that he had arrested Conon as a wrong-doer, and likewise to ask the King what he should do about all these matters.


4.8.17
1795
καὶ βασιλεὺς μέν , ὡς Τιρίβαζος ἄνω παρ’ αὐτῷ ἦν , Στρούθαν καταπέμπει ἐπιμελησόμενον τῶν κατὰ θάλατταν .
Now the King, when Tiribazus had arrived at his capital in the interior, sent down Struthas to take charge of affairs on the coast.


4.8.17
1796
ὁ μέντοι Στρούθας ἰσχυρῶς τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις καὶ τοῖς συμμάχοις τὴν γνώμην προσεῖχε , μεμνημένος ὅσα κακὰ ἐπεπόνθει ἡ βασιλέως χώρα ὑπ’ Ἀγησιλάου .
Struthas, however, devoted himself assiduously to the Athenians and their allies, remembering all the harm which the King’s country had suffered at the hands of Agesilaus.


4.8.17
1797
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐπεὶ ἑώρων τὸν Στρούθαν πρὸς ἑαυτοὺς μὲν πολεμικῶς ἔχοντα , πρὸς δὲ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους φιλικῶς , Θίβρωνα πέμπουσιν ἐπὶ πολέμῳ πρὸς αὐτόν .
The Lacedaemonians accordingly, when they saw that Struthas was hostile to them and friendly to the Athenians, sent Thibron to make war upon him.


4.8.17
1798
ὁ δὲ διαβάς τε καὶ ὁρμώμενος ἐξ Ἐφέσου τε καὶ τῶν ἐν Μαιάνδρου πεδίῳ πόλεων Πριήνης τε καὶ Λευκόφρυος καὶ Ἀχιλλείου , ἔφερε καὶ ἦγε τὴν βασιλέως .
And Thibron, crossing over to Asia and employing as a base of operations not only Ephesus, but also the cities in the plain of the Maeander—Priene, Leucophrys, and Achilleum,—proceeded to plunder the territory of the King.


4.8.18
1799
προϊόντος δὲ τοῦ χρόνου κατανοήσας ὁ Στρούθας ὅτι Θίβρων βοηθοίη ἑκάστοτε ἀτάκτως καὶ καταφρονητικῶς , ἔπεμψεν ἱππέας εἰς τὸ πεδίον καὶ καταδραμόντας ἐκέλευσε περιβαλλομένους ἐλαύνειν ὅ τι δύναιντο .
As time went on, however, Struthas, who had observed that the raiding expeditions of Thibron were in every case carried out in a disorderly and disdainful fashion, sent horsemen to the plain and ordered them to rush upon the enemy and surround and carry off whatever they could.


4.8.18
1800
ὁ δὲ Θίβρων ἐτύγχανεν ἐξ ἀρίστου διασκηνῶν μετὰ Θερσάνδρου τοῦ αὐλητοῦ .
Now it chanced that Thibron, having finished breakfast, was engaged in throwing the discus with Thersander, the flute-player.


4.8.18
1801
ἦν γὰρ ὁ Θέρσανδρος οὐ μόνον αὐλητὴς ἀγαθός , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀλκῆς ἰσχύος , ἅτε λακωνίζων , ἀντεποιεῖτο .
For Thersander was not only a good flute-player, but he also laid claim to physical strength, inasmuch as he was an imitator of things Lacedaemonian.


4.8.19
1802
ὁ δὲ Στρούθας , ἰδὼν ἀτάκτως τε βοηθοῦντας καὶ ὀλίγους τοὺς πρώτους , ἐπιφαίνεται πολλούς τε ἔχων καὶ συντεταγμένους ἱππέας .
Then Struthas, upon seeing that the enemy were making their raid in disorder, and that the foremost of them were few in number, appeared upon the scene with a large force of horsemen, drawn up in good order.


4.8.19
1803
καὶ Θίβρωνα μὲν καὶ Θέρσανδρον πρώτους ἀπέκτειναν ·
And the first whom they killed were Thibron and Thersander;


4.8.19
1804
ἐπεὶ δ’ οὗτοι ἔπεσον , ἐτρέψαντο καὶ τὸ ἄλλο στράτευμα , καὶ διώκοντες παμπλήθεις κατέβαλον , ἦσαν δὲ καὶ οἳ ἐσώθησαν αὐτῶν εἰς τὰς φιλίας πόλεις , καὶ πλείους διὰ τὸ ὀψὲ αἰσθέσθαι τῆς βοηθείας .
and when these men fell they put to flight the rest of the army also, and in the pursuit struck down a very great many. Some of Thibron’s men, however, made their escape to the friendly cities and a larger number had been left in camp because they had learned of the expedition too late.


4.8.19
1805
πολλάκις γάρ , καὶ τότε , οὐδὲ παραγγείλας τὴν βοήθειαν ἐποιήσατο .
For frequently, as in this case also, Thibron undertook his expeditions without even sending out orders.


4.8.19
1806
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν οὕτως ἐγεγένητο .
Thus ended these events.


4.8.20
1807
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἦλθον εἰς Λακεδαίμονα οἱ ἐκπεπτωκότες Ῥοδίων ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου , ἐδίδασκον ὡς οὐκ ἄξιον εἴη περιιδεῖν Ἀθηναίους Ῥόδον καταστρεψαμένους καὶ τοσαύτην δύναμιν συνθεμένους .
Now when those of the Rhodians who had been banished by the democratic faction came to Lacedaemon, they set forth that it was not expedient for the Lacedaemonians to allow the Athenians to subdue Rhodes and thus gain for themselves so great a power.


4.8.20
1808
γνόντες οὖν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὡς εἰ μὲν ὁ δῆμος κρατήσοι , Ἀθηναίων ἔσται Ῥόδος ἅπασα , εἰ δὲ οἱ πλουσιώτεροι , ἑαυτῶν , ἐπλήρωσαν αὐτοῖς ναῦς ὀκτώ , ναύαρχον δὲ Ἔκδικον ἐπέστησαν .
The Lacedaemonians, therefore, realizing that if the commons should prevail, all Rhodes would belong to the Athenians, while if the wealthier classes should prevail, it would be their own possession, manned for them eight ships and appointed Ecdicus as admiral to command them.


4.8.21
1809
συνεξέπεμψαν δ’ ἐπὶ τούτων τῶν νεῶν καὶ Διφρίδαν .
They sent out Diphridas also on board these ships,


4.8.21
1810
ἐκέλευσαν δ’ αὐτὸν διαβάντα εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν τάς τε Θίβρωνα ὑποδεξαμένας πόλεις διασῴζειν , καὶ στράτευμα τὸ περισωθὲν ἀναλαβόντα καὶ ἄλλο , εἴ ποθεν δύναιτο , συλλέξαντα πολεμεῖν πρὸς Στρούθαν .
and ordered him to cross over into Asia and to keep safe the cities which had received Thibron, and then, after assuming command of that part of Thibron’s army which was left alive, and after gathering another army from wherever he could, to make war upon Struthas.


4.8.21
1811
ὁ μὲν δὴ Διφρίδας ταῦτ’ ἐποίει , καὶ τά τ’ ἄλλα ἐπετύγχανε καὶ Τιγράνην τὸν τὴν Στρούθα ἔχοντα θυγατέρα πορευόμενον εἰς Σάρδεις λαμβάνει σὺν αὐτῇ τῇ γυναικί , καὶ χρημάτων πολλῶν ἀπέλυσεν ·
Diphridas accordingly set about these things, and he was successful not only in his other undertakings, but particularly in capturing Tigranes, the husband of Struthas’ daughter, and his wife also, as they were journeying to Sardis, and in obtaining a large ransom for their release,


4.8.21
1812
ὥστ’ εὐθὺς ἐντεῦθεν εἶχε μισθοδοτεῖν .
so that he was at once able to hire mercenaries with the money thus obtained.


4.8.22
1813
ἦν δ’ οὗτος ἁνὴρ εὔχαρίς τε οὐχ ἧττον τοῦ Θίβρωνος , μᾶλλόν τε συντεταγμένος καὶ ἐγχειρητικώτερος στρατηγός .
This Diphridas was as a man no less attractive than Thibron, and as a general he was more self-controlled and enterprising.


4.8.22
1814
οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐκράτουν αὐτοῦ αἱ τοῦ σώματος ἡδοναί , ἀλλ’ ἀεὶ πρὸς ᾧ εἴη ἔργῳ , τοῦτο ἔπραττεν .
For the pleasures of the body did not hold the mastery over him, but in whatever task he was engaged, he always gave himself wholly to it.


4.8.22
1815
ὁ δ’ Ἔκδικος ἐπεὶ εἰς τὴν Κνίδον ἔπλευσε καὶ ἐπύθετο τὸν ἐν τῇ Ῥόδῳ δῆμον πάντα κατέχοντα , καὶ κρατοῦντα καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν διέπλεον διπλασίαις τριήρεσιν ἢ αὐτὸς εἶχεν , ἡσυχίαν ἦγεν ἐν τῇ Κνίδῳ .
As for Ecdicus, after sailing to Cnidos and learning that the commons in Rhodes were in possession of everything, and were masters both by land and by sea, having twice as many triremes as he had himself, he remained quiet in Cnidos.


4.8.23
1816
οἱ δ’ αὖ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐπεὶ ᾔσθοντο αὐτὸν ἐλάττω ἔχοντα δύναμιν ἢ ὥστε τοὺς φίλους ὠφελεῖν , ἐκέλευσαν τὸν Τελευτίαν σὺν ταῖς δώδεκα ναυσὶν αἷς εἶχεν ἐν τῷ περὶ Ἀχαΐαν καὶ Λέχαιον κόλπῳ περιπλεῖν πρὸς τὸν Ἔκδικον , κ- ἐκεῖνον μὲν ἀποπέμψαι , αὐτὸν δὲ τῶν τε βουλομένων φίλων εἶναι ἐπιμελεῖσθαι καὶ τοὺς πολεμίους ὅ τι δύναιτο κακὸν ποιεῖν .
The Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, when they found that he had too small a force to be of service to their friends, ordered Teleutias, with the twelve ships which he had under his command in the gulf round Achaea and Lechaeum, to sail around to Ecdicus, send him back home, and himself look after the interests of those who wished to be their friends, and do whatever harm he could to their enemies.


4.8.23
1817
ὁ δὲ Τελευτίας ἐπειδὴ ἀφίκετο εἰς τὴν Σάμον , προσλαβὼν ἐκεῖθεν ναῦς ἔπλευσεν εἰς Κνίδον , ὁ δ’ Ἔκδικος οἴκαδε .
And when Teleutias arrived at Samos he obtained from there seven more ships and sailed on to Cnidos, while Ecdicus returned home.


4.8.24
1818
αὐτὸς δ’ ἔπλει εἰς τὴν Ῥόδον , ἤδη ἔχων ναῦς ἑπτὰ καὶ εἴκοσι ·
Then Teleutias continued his voyage to Rhodes, having now twenty-seven ships;


4.8.24
1819
πλέων δὲ περιτυγχάνει Φιλοκράτει τῷ Ἐφιάλτου πλέοντι μετὰ δέκα τριήρων Ἀθήνηθεν εἰς Κύπρον ἐπὶ συμμαχίᾳ τῇ Εὐαγόρου , καὶ λαμβάνει πάσας , ὑπεναντιώτατα δὴ ταῦτα ἀμφότεροι ἑαυτοῖς πράττοντες ·
and while sailing thither he fell in with Philocrates, the son of Ephialtes, sailing with ten triremes from Athens to Cyprus for the purpose of aiding Euagoras, and captured all ten. Both parties were acting in this affair in a manner absolutely opposed to their own interests;


4.8.24
1820
οἵ τε γὰρ Ἀθηναῖοι φίλῳ χρώμενοι βασιλεῖ συμμαχίαν ἔπεμπον Εὐαγόρᾳ τῷ πολεμοῦντι πρὸς βασιλέα , ὅ τε Τελευτίας Λακεδαιμονίων πολεμούντων βασιλεῖ τοὺς πλέοντας ἐπὶ τῷ ἐκείνου πολέμῳ διέφθειρεν .
for the Athenians, although they had the King for a friend, were sending aid to Euagoras who was making war upon the King, and Teleutias, although the Lacedaemonians were at war with the King, was destroying people who were sailing to make war upon him.


4.8.24
1821
ἐπαναπλεύσας δ’ εἰς Κνίδον καὶ διαθέμενος ἃ ἔλαβεν , εἰς Ῥόδον αὖ ἀφικόμενος ἐβοήθει τοῖς τὰ αὐτῶν φρονοῦσιν .
Then Teleutias, after sailing back to Cnidos and selling there the booty which he had captured, arrived at Rhodes on his second voyage and proceeded to aid those who held to the side of the Lacedaemonians.


4.8.25
1822
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι νομίσαντες τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους πάλιν δύναμιν κατασκευάζεσθαι ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ , ἀντεκπέμπουσι Θρασύβουλον τὸν Στειριέα σὺν τετταράκοντα ναυσίν .
Meanwhile the Athenians, coming to the belief that the Lacedaemonians were again acquiring power on the sea, sent out against them Thrasybulus, of the deme Steiria, with forty ships.


4.8.25
1823
ὁ δ’ ἐκπλεύσας τῆς μὲν εἰς Ῥόδον βοηθείας ἐπέσχε , νομίζων οὔτ’ ἂν αὐτὸς ῥᾳδίως τιμωρήσασθαι τοὺς φίλους τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων τεῖχος ἔχοντας καὶ Τελευτίου σὺν ναυσὶ παρόντος συμμάχου αὐτοῖς , οὔτ’ ἂν τοὺς σφετέρους φίλους ὑπὸ τοῖς πολεμίοις γενέσθαι , τάς τε πόλεις ἔχοντας καὶ πολὺ πλείους ὄντας καὶ μάχῃ κεκρατηκότας ·
When he had sailed out, he gave up his plan of an expedition to Rhodes, thinking on the one hand that he could not easily punish the friends of the Lacedaemonians, since they held a fortress and Teleutias was there with a fleet to support them, and, on the other hand, that the friends of his own state would not fall under the power of the enemy, since they held the cities, were far more numerous, and had been victorious in battle.


4.8.26
1824
εἰς δὲ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον πλεύσας καὶ οὐδενὸς ἀντιπάλου παρόντος ἐνόμισε καταπρᾶξαι ἄν τι τῇ πόλει ἀγαθόν .
Accordingly he sailed to the Hellespont, and, since there was no adversary there, thought that he could accomplish some useful service for his state.


4.8.26
1825
καὶ οὕτω δὴ πρῶτον μὲν καταμαθὼν στασιάζοντας Ἀμήδοκόν τε τὸν Ὀδρυσῶν βασιλέα καὶ Σεύθην τὸν ἐπὶ θαλάττῃ ἄρχοντα ἀλλήλοις μὲν διήλλαξεν αὐτούς , Ἀθηναίοις δὲ φίλους καὶ συμμάχους ἐποίησε , νομίζων καὶ τὰς ὑπὸ τῇ Θρᾴκῃ οἰκούσας Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις φίλων ὄντων τούτων μᾶλλον προσέχειν ἂν τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις τὸν νοῦν .
In the first place, therefore, learning that Amedocus, the king of the Odrysians, and Seuthes, the ruler of the coast region, were at variance, he reconciled them to one another and made them friends and allies of the Athenians, thinking that if they were friendly, the Greek cities situated on the Thracian coast would also show a greater inclination towards the Athenians.


4.8.27
1826
ἐχόντων δὲ τούτων τε καλῶς καὶ τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ πόλεων διὰ τὸ βασιλέα φίλον τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις εἶναι , πλεύσας εἰς Βυζάντιον ἀπέδοτο τὴν δεκάτην τῶν ἐκ τοῦ Πόντου πλεόντων .
Then, with this matter successfully arranged, and the cities in Asia in a favourable attitude on account of the King’s being a friend of the Athenians, he sailed to Byzantium and farmed out the tithe-duty on vessels sailing out of the Pontus.


4.8.27
1827
μετέστησε δὲ ἐξ ὀλιγαρχίας εἰς τὸ δημοκρατεῖσθαι τοὺς Βυζαντίους ·
He also changed the government of the Byzantines from an oligarchy to a democracy,


4.8.27
1828
ὥστε οὐκ ἀχθεινῶς ἑώρα ὁ τῶν Βυζαντίων δῆμος Ἀθηναίους ὅτι πλείστους παρόντας ἐν τῇ πόλει .
so that the commons of Byzantium were not sorry to see the greatest possible number of Athenians present in their city.


4.8.28
1829
ταῦτα δὲ πράξας καὶ Καλχηδονίους φίλους προσποιησάμενος ἀπέπλει ἔξω τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου .
Now after he had accomplished these things and had won over the Calchedonians also as friends, he sailed back out of the Hellespont.


4.8.28
1830
ἐπιτυχὼν δ’ ἐν τῇ Λέσβῳ ταῖς πόλεσι πάσαις πλὴν Μυτιληναίων λακωνιζούσαις , ἐπ’ οὐδεμίαν αὐτῶν ᾔει , πρὶν ἐν Μυτιλήνῃ συντάξας τούς τε ἀπὸ τῶν ἑαυτοῦ νεῶν τετρακοσίους ὁπλίτας καὶ τοὺς ἐκ τῶν πόλεων φυγάδας , ὅσοι εἰς Μυτιλήνην κατεπεφεύγεσαν , καὶ αὐτῶν δὲ Μυτιληναίων τοὺς ἐρρωμενεστάτους προσλαβών , καὶ ἐλπίδας ὑποθεὶς τοῖς μὲν Μυτιληναίοις , ὡς ἐὰν λάβῃ τὰς πόλεις , προστάται πάσης Λέσβου ἔσονται , τοῖς δὲ φυγάσιν , ὡς ἐὰν ὁμοῦ ὄντες ἐπὶ μίαν ἑκάστην τῶν πόλεων ἴωσιν , ἱκανοὶ ἔσονται ἅπαντες εἰς τὰς πατρίδας ἀνασωθῆναι , τοῖς δ’ αὖ ἐπιβάταις ὡς φίλην Λέσβον προσποιήσαντες τῇ πόλει πολλὴν εὐπορίαν χρημάτων διαπεπραγμένοι ἔσονται , ταῦτα δὲ παραμυθησάμενος καὶ συντάξας ἦγεν αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ Μήθυμναν .
And finding that all the cities in Lesbos except Mytilene were on the side of the Lacedaemonians, he went against none of them until he had marshalled in Mytilene the four hundred hoplites from his own ships and all the exiles from the Lesbian cities who had fled for refuge to Mytilene, and had also added to this force the stoutest of the Mytilenaeans themselves; nor, furthermore, until he had suggested hopes, firstly to the Mytilenaeans, that if he captured the cities they would be the leaders of all Lesbos, secondly to the exiles, that if they proceeded all together against each single one of the cities, they would be able, acting in unison, to accomplish their restoration to their native states, and again to his marines, that by making Lesbos likewise friendly to their state they would at once obtain a great abundance of money.


4.8.29
1831
Θηρίμαχος μέντοι , ὃς ἁρμοστὴς ἐτύγχανεν ὢν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων , ὡς ἤκουσε τὸν Θρασύβουλον προσιέναι , τούς τ’ ἀπὸ τῶν αὑτοῦ νεῶν λαβὼν ἐπιβάτας καὶ αὐτοὺς τοὺς Μηθυμναίους καὶ ὅσοι Μυτιληναίων φυγάδες ἐτύγχανον αὐτόθι , ἀπήντων ἐπὶ τὰ ὅρια .
Therimachus, however, who chanced to be the Lacedaemonian governor, on hearing that Thrasybulus was coming against him, took the marines from his own ships, the Methymnaeans themselves, and all the Mytilenaean exiles who chanced to be there, and went to meet the enemy at the borders.


4.8.29
1832
μάχης δὲ γενομένης ὁ μὲν Θηρίμαχος αὐτοῦ ἀποθνῄσκει , τῶν δ’ ἄλλων φευγόντων πολλοὶ ἀπέθανον .
A battle was fought in which Therimachus was killed on the spot and many of the others were killed as they fled.


4.8.30
1833
ἐκ δὲ τούτου τὰς μὲν προσηγάγετο τῶν πόλεων , ἐκ δὲ τῶν οὐ προσχωρουσῶν λεηλατῶν χρήματα τοῖς στρατιώταις , ἔσπευσεν εἰς τὴν Ῥόδον ἀφικέσθαι .
After this Thrasybulus brought over some of the cities, and was busy collecting money for his soldiers by plundering from those which refused to come over; meanwhile he was eager to arrive at Rhodes.


4.8.30
1834
ὅπως δ’ ἂν καὶ ἐκεῖ ὡς ἐρρωμενέστατον τὸ στράτευμα ποιήσαιτο , ἐξ ἄλλων τε πόλεων ἠργυρολόγει καὶ εἰς Ἄσπενδον ἀφικόμενος ὡρμίσατο εἰς τὸν Εὐρυμέδοντα ποταμόν .
But to the end that there also he might make his army as strong as possible, he collected money from various cities, and came to Aspendus in particular and anchored in the Eurymedon river.


4.8.30
1835
ἤδη δ’ ἔχοντος αὐτοῦ χρήματα παρὰ τῶν Ἀσπενδίων , ἀδικησάντων τι ἐκ τῶν ἀγρῶν τῶν στρατιωτῶν , ὀργισθέντες οἱ Ἀσπένδιοι τῆς νυκτὸς ἐπιπεσόντες κατακόπτουσιν ἐν τῇ σκηνῇ αὐτόν .
And after he had already received money from the Aspendians, his soldiers wrongfully did some plundering from their lands; the Aspendians therefore in anger fell upon him during the night and cut him down in his tent.


4.8.31
1836
καὶ Θρασύβουλος μὲν δὴ μάλα δοκῶν ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς εἶναι οὕτως ἐτελεύτησεν .
This, then, was the end of Thrasybulus, who was esteemed a most excellent man.


4.8.31
1837
οἱ μέντοι Ἀθηναῖοι ἑλόμενοι ἀντ’ αὐτοῦ Ἀγύρριον ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς ἐξέπεμψαν .
And the Athenians chose Agyrrhius in his place, and sent him out to take command of the ships.


4.8.31
1838
αἰσθόμενοι δ’ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὅτι ἡ δεκάτη τε τῶν ἐκ τοῦ Πόντου πεπραμένη εἴη ἐν Βυζαντίῳ ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίων καὶ Καλχηδόνα ἔχουσι καὶ αἱ ἄλλαι Ἑλλησπόντιαι πόλεις φίλου ὄντος αὐτοῖς Φαρναβάζου εὖ ἔχοιεν , ἔγνωσαν ἐπιμελητέον εἶναι .
The Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, learning that the tithe-duty on the vessels sailing out of the Pontus had been sold at Byzantium by the Athenians, that they were in possession of Calchedon, and that the other Hellespontine cities were in a favourable attitude toward them because Pharnabazus was their friend, concluded that they must attend to this situation.


4.8.32
1839
τῷ μὲν οὖν Δερκυλίδᾳ οὐδὲν ἐμέμφοντο ·
They did not, indeed, find any fault with Dercylidas;


4.8.32
1840
Ἀναξίβιος μέντοι φίλων αὐτῷ γενομένων τῶν ἐφόρων διεπράξατο ὥστε αὐτὸς ἐκπλεῦσαι ἁρμοστὴς εἰς Ἄβυδον .
but Anaxibius, inasmuch as the ephors had become friends of his, succeeded in having himself sent out to Abydus as governor.


4.8.32
1841
εἰ δὲ λάβοι ἀφορμὴν καὶ ναῦς , καὶ πολεμήσειν ὑπισχνεῖτο τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις , ὥστε μὴ ἔχειν ἐκείνοις καλῶς τὰ ἐν Ἑλλησπόντῳ .
And he promised that if he received money and ships, he would also make war upon the Athenians, so that matters might not stand so well with them in the Hellespont.


4.8.33
1842
οἱ μὲν δὴ δόντες καὶ τρεῖς τριήρεις καὶ ἀφορμὴν εἰς ξένους χιλίους ἐξέπεμψαν τὸν Ἀναξίβιον .
Accordingly the ephors gave Anaxibius three triremes and money enough for a thousand mercenaries, and sent him out.


4.8.33
1843
ὁ δὲ ἐπειδὴ ἀφίκετο , κατὰ γῆν μὲν ἁθροίσας ξενικὸν τῶν τ’ Αἰολίδων πόλεων παρεσπᾶτό τινας τοῦ Φαρναβάζου καὶ ἐπιστρατευσάσαις ταῖς πόλεσιν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἄβυδον ἀντεπεστράτευε καὶ ἐπεπορεύετο καὶ ἐδῄου τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν ·
When he had reached Abydus, his operations by land were as follows: after collecting a mercenary force, he proceeded to detach some of the Aeolian cities from Pharnabazus, take the field in retaliatory expeditions against the cities which had made expeditions against Abydus, march upon them, and lay waste their territory.


4.8.33
1844
καὶ ναῦς δὲ πρὸς αἷς εἶχε συμπληρώσας ἐξ Ἀβύδου τρεῖς ἄλλας κατῆγεν , εἴ τί που λαμβάνοι Ἀθηναίων πλοῖον ἢ τῶν ἐκείνων συμμάχων .
On the naval side, in addition to the ships which he had he fully manned three others from Abydus, and brought into port whatever merchant vessel he found anywhere belonging to the Athenians or their allies.


4.8.34
1845
αἰσθόμενοι δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ δεδιότες μὴ φθαρείη σφίσιν ἃ κατεσκεύασεν ἐν τῷ Ἑλλησπόντῳ Θρασύβουλος , ἀντεκπέμπουσιν Ἰφικράτην ναῦς ὀκτὼ ἔχοντα καὶ πελταστὰς εἰς διακοσίους καὶ χιλίους .
The Athenians, however, learning of these things, and fearing that the results of all Thrasybulus’ work in the Hellespont might be ruined for them, sent out against Anaxibius Iphicrates, with eight ships and about one thousand two hundred peltasts.


4.8.34
1846
οἱ πλεῖστοι δὲ αὐτῶν ἦσαν ὧν ἐν Κορίνθῳ ἦρξεν .
The greater part of these were the men whom he had commanded at Corinth.


4.8.34
1847
ἐπεὶ γὰρ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι τὴν Κόρινθον Ἄργος ἐπεποίηντο , οὐδὲν ἔφασαν αὐτῶν δεῖσθαι ·
For when the Argives had incorporated Corinth in Argos, they said that they had no need of them;


4.8.34
1848
καὶ γὰρ ἀπεκτόνει τινὰς τῶν ἀργολιζόντων ·
for Iphicrates had put to death some of the partisans of Argos;


4.8.34
1849
καὶ οὕτως ἀπελθὼν Ἀθήναζε οἴκοι ἔτυχεν ὤν .
accordingly he had returned to Athens and chanced to be at home at this time.


4.8.35
1850
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφίκετο εἰς Χερρόνησον , τὸ μὲν πρῶτον Ἀναξίβιος καὶ Ἰφικράτης λῃστὰς διαπέμποντες ἐπολέμουν ἀλλήλοις ·
Now when he reached the Chersonese, at first Anaxibius and he made war upon one another by sending out raiding parties;


4.8.35
1851
προϊόντος δὲ τοῦ χρόνου ὁ Ἰφικράτης αἰσθόμενος καὶ Ἀναξίβιον οἰχόμενον εἰς Ἄντανδρον σύν τε τοῖς μισθοφόροις καὶ τοῖς περὶ αὐτὸν Λακωνικοῖς καὶ σὺν Ἀβυδηνοῖς διακοσίοις ὁπλίταις , καὶ ἀκούσας ὅτι τὴν Ἄντανδρον φιλίαν προσειληφὼς εἴη , ὑπονοῶν ὅτι καταστήσας αὖ τὴν ἐκεῖ φρουρὰν ἀποπορεύσοιτο πάλιν καὶ ἀπάξοι τοὺς Ἀβυδηνοὺς οἴκαδε , διαβὰς τῆς νυκτὸς ᾗ ἐρημότατον ἦν τῆς Ἀβυδηνῆς καὶ ἐπανελθὼν εἰς τὰ ὄρη ἐνέδραν ἐποιήσατο .
but as time went on Iphicrates found out that Anaxibius had gone to Antandrus with his mercenaries, the Lacedaemonians who were with him, and two hundred hoplites from Abydus, and heard that he had brought Antandrus into relations of friendship with him.


4.8.35
1852
τὰς δὲ τριήρεις αἳ διήγαγον αὐτὸν ἐκέλευε παραπλεῖν ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ παρὰ τὴν Χερρόνησον τῆς ἄνω , ὅπως δοκοίη , ὥσπερ εἰώθει , ἐπ’ ἀργυρολογίαν ἐπαναπεπλευκέναι .
Whereupon, suspecting that after he had also established his garrison there he would return again and bring the Abydenes back home, Iphicrates crossed over by night to the most deserted portion of the territory of Abydus, and going up into the mountains, set an ambush. Furthermore, he ordered the triremes which had brought him across the strait to sail at daybreak along the coast of the Chersonese, up the strait, in order that it might seem that he had sailed up the Hellespont to collect money, as he was wont to do.


4.8.36
1853
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας οὐκ ἐψεύσθη , ἀλλ’ ὁ Ἀναξίβιος ἀπεπορεύετο , ὡς μὲν ἐλέγετο , οὐδὲ τῶν ἱερῶν γεγενημένων αὐτῷ ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ , ἀλλὰ καταφρονήσας , ὅτι διὰ φιλίας τε ἐπορεύετο καὶ εἰς πόλιν φιλίαν καὶ ὅτι ἤκουε τῶν ἀπαντώντων τὸν Ἰφικράτην ἀναπεπλευκέναι τῆς ἐπὶ Προκοννήσου , ἀμελέστερον ἐπορεύετο .
Having done all these things he was not disappointed, for Anaxibius did come marching back, even though — at least, as the story ran — his sacrifices on that day had not proved favourable; but despite that fact, filled with disdainful confidence because he was proceeding through a friendly country and to a friendly city, and because he heard from those who met him that Iphicrates had sailed up in the direction of Proconnesus, he was making his march in a rather careless fashion.


4.8.37
1854
ὅμως δὲ ὁ Ἰφικράτης , ἕως μὲν ἐν τῷ ἰσοπέδῳ τὸ στράτευμα τοῦ Ἀναξιβίου ἦν , οὐκ ἐξανίστατο ·
Nevertheless, Iphicrates did not rise from ambush so long as the army of Anaxibius was on the level ground;


4.8.37
1855
ἐπειδὴ δὲ οἱ μὲν Ἀβυδηνοὶ ἀφηγούμενοι ἤδη ἐν τῷ παρὰ Κρεμαστὴν ἦσαν πεδίῳ , ἔνθα ἐστὶ τὰ χρύσεια αὐτοῖς , τὸ δ’ ἄλλο στράτευμα ἑπόμενον ἐν τῷ κατάντει ἦν , ὁ δὲ Ἀναξίβιος ἄρτι κατέβαινε σὺν τοῖς Λακωνικοῖς , ἐν τούτῳ ὁ Ἰφικράτης ἐξανίστησι τὴν ἐνέδραν καὶ δρόμῳ ἐφέρετο πρὸς αὐτόν .
but when the Abydenes, who were in the van, were now in the plain of Cremaste, where their gold mines are, and the rest of the army as it followed along was on the downward slope, and Anaxibius with his Lacedaemonians was just beginning the descent, at this moment Iphicrates started his men up from their ambush and rushed upon him on the run.


4.8.38
1856
καὶ ὁ Ἀναξίβιος γνοὺς μὴ εἶναι ἐλπίδα σωτηρίας , ὁρῶν ἐπὶ πολύ τε καὶ στενὸν ἐκτεταμένον τὸ ἑαυτοῦ στράτευμα , καὶ νομίζων πρὸς τὸ ἄναντες οὐκ ἂν δύνασθαι σαφῶς βοηθῆσαι ἑαυτῷ τοὺς προεληλυθότας , ὁρῶν δὲ καὶ ἐκπεπληγμένους ἅπαντας , ὡς εἶδον τὴν ἐνέδραν , εἶπε πρὸς τοὺς παρόντας ·
Then Anaxibius, judging that there was no hope of safety, inasmuch as he saw that his army extended over a long and narrow way, and thought that those who had gone on ahead would clearly be unable to come to his assistance up the hill, and since he also perceived that all were in a state of terror when they saw the ambush, said to those who were with him:


4.8.38
1857
ἄνδρες , ἐμοὶ μὲν ἐνθάδε καλὸν ἀποθανεῖν ·
Gentlemen, it is honourable for me to die here,


4.8.38
1858
ὑμεῖς δὲ πρὶν συμμεῖξαι τοῖς πολεμίοις σπεύδετε εἰς τὴν σωτηρίαν .
but do you hurry to safety before coming to close engagement with the enemy.


4.8.39
1859
καὶ ταῦτ’ ἔλεγε καὶ παρὰ τοῦ ὑπασπιστοῦ λαβὼν τὴν ἀσπίδα ἐν χώρᾳ αὐτοῦ μαχόμενος ἀποθνῄσκει .
Thus he spoke, and taking his shield from his shieldbearer, fell fighting on that spot.


4.8.39
1860
καὶ τὰ παιδικὰ μέντοι αὐτῷ παρέμεινε , καὶ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων δὲ τῶν συνεληλυθότων ἐκ τῶν πόλεων ἁρμοστήρων ὡς δώδεκα μαχόμενοι συναπέθανον ·
His favourite youth, however, remained by his side, and likewise from among the Lacedaemonians about twelve of the governors, who had come from their cities and joined him, fought and fell with him.


4.8.39
1861
οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι φεύγοντες ἔπιπτον .
But the rest of the Lacedaemonians fled and fell one after another,


4.8.39
1862
οἱ δ’ ἐδίωκον μέχρι τοῦ ἄστεως .
the enemy pursuing as far as the city.


4.8.39
1863
καὶ τῶν τε ἄλλων ὡς διακόσιοι ἀπέθανον καὶ τῶν Ἀβυδηνῶν ὁπλιτῶν περὶ πεντήκοντα .
Furthermore, about two hundred of the other troops of Anaxibius were killed, and about fifty of the Abydene hoplites.


4.8.39
1864
ταῦτα δὲ πράξας ὁ Ἰφικράτης ἀνεχώρησε πάλιν εἰς Χερρόνησον .
And after accomplishing these things Iphicrates went back again to the Chersonese.



5.1.1
1865
καὶ τὰ μὲν δὴ περὶ Ἑλλήσποντον Ἀθηναίοις τε καὶ Λακεδαιμονίοις τοιαῦτα ἦν .
Such, then, were the doings of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians in the region of the Hellespont.


5.1.1
1866
ὢν δὲ πάλιν ὁ Ἐτεόνικος ἐν τῇ Αἰγίνῃ , καὶ ἐπιμειξίᾳ χρωμένων τὸν πρόσθεν χρόνον τῶν Αἰγινητῶν πρὸς τοὺς Ἀθηναίους , ἐπεὶ φανερῶς κατὰ θάλατταν ὁ πόλεμος ἐπολεμεῖτο , συνδόξαν καὶ τοῖς ἐφόροις ἐφίησι λῄζεσθαι τὸν βουλόμενον ἐκ τῆς Ἀττικῆς .
Meanwhile Eteonicus was again in Aegina, and although previously the Aeginetans had been maintaining commercial intercourse with the Athenians, still, now that the war was being carried on by sea openly, he, with the approval of the ephors, urged on everybody who so wished, to plunder Attica.


5.1.2
1867
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι πολιορκούμενοι ὑπ’ αὐτῶν , πέμψαντες εἰς Αἴγιναν καὶ ὁπλίτας καὶ στρατηγὸν αὐτῶν Πάμφιλον ἐπετείχισαν Αἰγινήταις καὶ ἐπολιόρκουν αὐτοὺς καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν δέκα τριήρεσιν .
Thereupon the Athenians, being cut off from supplies by the plunderers, sent to Aegina a force of hoplites and Pamphilus as their general, built a fortress as a base of attack upon the Aeginetans, and besieged them both by land and by sea with ten triremes.


5.1.2
1868
ὁ μέντοι Τελευτίας τυχὼν ἐπὶ τῶν νήσων ποι ἀφιγμένος κατὰ χρημάτων πόρον , ἀκούσας ταῦτα περὶ τοῦ ἐπιτειχισμοῦ , ἐβοήθει τοῖς Αἰγινήταις ·
Teleutias, however, who chanced to have arrived on one of the islands in quest of a grant of money, upon hearing of this (that is, in regard to the building of the fortress) came to the aid of the Aeginetans;


5.1.2
1869
καὶ τὸ μὲν ναυτικὸν ἀπήλασε , τὸ δ’ ἐπιτείχισμα διεφύλαττεν ὁ Πάμφιλος .
and he drove off the Athenian fleet, but Pamphilus succeeded in holding the fortress.


5.1.3
1870
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἀπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων Ἱέραξ ναύαρχος ἀφικνεῖται .
After this Hierax arrived from Lacedaemon as admiral.


5.1.3
1871
κ- ἐκεῖνος μὲν παραλαμβάνει τὸ ναυτικόν , ὁ δὲ Τελευτίας μακαριώτατα δὴ ἀπέπλευσεν οἴκαδε .
And he took over the fleet, while Teleutias, under the very happiest circumstances, set sail for home.


5.1.3
1872
ἡνίκα γὰρ ἐπὶ θάλατταν κατέβαινεν ἐπ’ οἴκου ὁρμώμενος , οὐδεὶς ἐκεῖνον τῶν στρατιωτῶν ὃς οὐκ ἐδεξιώσατο , καὶ ὁ μὲν ἐστεφάνωσεν , ὁ δὲ ἐταινίωσεν , οἱ δ’ ὑστερήσαντες ὅμως καὶ ἀναγομένου ἔρριπτον εἰς τὴν θάλατταν στεφάνους καὶ ηὔχοντο αὐτῷ πολλὰ καὶ ἀγαθά .
For when he was going down to the sea as he set out for home, there was no one among the soldiers who did not grasp his hand, and one decked him with a garland, another with a fillet, and others who came too late, nevertheless, even though he was now under way, threw garlands into the sea and prayed for many blessings upon him.


5.1.4
1873
γιγνώσκω μὲν οὖν ὅτι ἐν τούτοις οὔτε δαπάνημα οὔτε κίνδυνον οὔτε μηχάνημα ἀξιόλογον οὐδὲν διηγοῦμαι ·
Now I am aware that I am not describing in these incidents any enterprise involving money expended or danger incurred or any memorable stratagem;


5.1.4
1874
ἀλλὰ ναὶ μὰ Δία τόδε ἄξιόν μοι δοκεῖ εἶναι ἀνδρὶ ἐννοεῖν , τί ποτε ποιῶν ὁ Τελευτίας οὕτω διέθηκε τοὺς ἀρχομένους .
and yet, by Zeus, it seems to me that it is well worth a man’s while to consider what sort of conduct it was that enabled Teleutias to inspire the men he commanded with such a feeling toward himself.


5.1.4
1875
τοῦτο γὰρ ἤδη πολλῶν καὶ χρημάτων καὶ κινδύνων ἀξιολογώτατον ἀνδρὸς ἔργον ἐστίν .
For to attain to this is indeed the achievement of a true man, more noteworthy than the expenditure of much money and the encountering of many dangers.


5.1.5
1876
ὁ δ’ αὖ Ἱέραξ τὰς μὲν ἄλλας ναῦς λαβὼν πάλιν ἔπλει εἰς Ῥόδον , ἐν Αἰγίνῃ δὲ τριήρεις δώδεκα κατέλιπε καὶ Γοργώπαν τὸν αὑτοῦ ἐπιστολέα ἁρμοστήν .
As for Hierax, on the other hand, he sailed back to Rhodes with the bulk of the ships, but left behind him in Aegina twelve triremes and Gorgopas, his vice-admiral, as governor.


5.1.5
1877
καὶ ἐκ τούτου ἐπολιορκοῦντο μᾶλλον οἱ ἐν τῷ ἐπιτειχίσματι Ἀθηναίων ἢ οἱ ἐν τῇ πόλει ·
And after this it was the Athenians in the fortress who were besieged rather than the Aeginetans in the city;


5.1.5
1878
ὥστε ὑπὸ ψηφίσματος Ἀθηναῖοι πληρώσαντες ναῦς πολλὰς ἀπεκομίσαντο ἐξ Αἰγίνης πέμπτῳ μηνὶ τοὺς ἐκ τοῦ φρουρίου .
insomuch that the Athenians, by a formal decree, manned a large number of ships and brought back from Aegina in the fifth month the troops in the fortress.


5.1.5
1879
τούτων δὲ γενομένων οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι πάλιν αὖ πράγματα εἶχον ὑπό τε τῶν λῃστῶν καὶ τοῦ Γοργώπα ·
But when this had been done, the Athenians were again molested by the bands of raiders and by Gorgopas,


5.1.5
1880
καὶ ἀντιπληροῦσι ναῦς τρισκαίδεκα , καὶ αἱροῦνται Εὔνομον ναύαρχον ἐπ’ αὐτάς .
and they manned against these enemies thirteen ships and chose Eunomus as admiral to command them.


5.1.6
1881
ὄντος δὲ τοῦ Ἱέρακος ἐν Ῥόδῳ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι Ἀνταλκίδαν ναύαρχον ἐκπέμπουσι , νομίζοντες καὶ Τιριβάζῳ τοῦτο ποιοῦντες μάλιστ’ ἂν χαρίζεσθαι .
Now while Hierax was at Rhodes the Lacedaemonians sent out Antalcidas as admiral, thinking that by doing this they would most please Tiribazus also.


5.1.6
1882
ὁ δὲ Ἀνταλκίδας ἐπεὶ ἀφίκετο εἰς Αἴγιναν , συμπαραλαβὼν τὰς τοῦ Γοργώπα ναῦς ἔπλευσεν εἰς Ἔφεσον , καὶ τὸν μὲν Γοργώπαν πάλιν ἀποπέμπει εἰς Αἴγιναν σὺν ταῖς δώδεκα ναυσίν , ἐπὶ δὲ ταῖς ἄλλαις Νικόλοχον ἐπέστησε τὸν ἐπιστολέα .
And when Antalcidas arrived at Aegina, he took with him the ships of Gorgopas and sailed to Ephesus, then sent Gorgopas back again to Aegina with his twelve ships, and put Nicolochus, his vice-admiral, in command of the rest.


5.1.6
1883
καὶ ὁ μὲν Νικόλοχος βοηθῶν Ἀβυδηνοῖς ἔπλει ἐκεῖσε ·
Thereupon Nicolochus, seeking to aid the people of Abydus, proceeded to sail thither;


5.1.6
1884
παρατρεπόμενος δὲ εἰς Τένεδον ἐδῄου τὴν χώραν , καὶ χρήματα λαβὼν ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Ἄβυδον .
he turned aside, however, to Tenedos and laid waste its territory, and having obtained money there, sailed on to Abydus.


5.1.7
1885
οἱ δὲ τῶν Ἀθηναίων στρατηγοὶ ἁθροισθέντες ἀπὸ Σαμοθρᾴκης τε καὶ Θάσου καὶ τῶν κατ’ ἐκεῖνα χωρίων ἐβοήθουν τοῖς Τενεδίοις .
Then the generals of the Athenians gathered together from Samothrace, Thasos, and the places in that region, and set out to aid the people of Tenedos.


5.1.7
1886
ὡς δ’ ᾔσθοντο εἰς Ἄβυδον καταπεπλευκότα τὸν Νικόλοχον , ὁρμώμενοι ἐκ Χερρονήσου ἐπολιόρκουν αὐτὸν ἔχοντα ναῦς πέντε καὶ εἴκοσι δύο καὶ τριάκοντα ταῖς μεθ’ ἑαυτῶν .
But upon learning that Nicolochus had put in at Abydus they then, setting out from the Chersonese as a base, blockaded him and his twenty-five ships with the thirty-two ships under their command.


5.1.7
1887
ὁ μέντοι Γοργώπας ἀποπλέων ἐξ Ἐφέσου περιτυγχάνει Εὐνόμῳ ·
As for Gorgopas, on his voyage back from Ephesus he fell in with Eunomus,


5.1.7
1888
καὶ τότε μὲν κατέφυγεν εἰς Αἴγιναν μικρὸν πρὸ ἡλίου δυσμῶν ·
and for the moment took refuge in Aegina, reaching there a little before sunset.


5.1.7
1889
ἐκβιβάσας δ’ εὐθὺς ἐδείπνιζε τοὺς στρατιώτας .
Then he at once disembarked his men and gave them dinner.


5.1.8
1890
ὁ δ’ Εὔνομος ὀλίγον χρόνον ὑπομείνας ἀπέπλει .
Meanwhile Eunomus, after waiting a short time, sailed off.


5.1.8
1891
νυκτὸς δ’ ἐπιγενομένης , φῶς ἔχων , ὥσπερ νομίζεται , ἀφηγεῖτο , ὅπως μὴ πλανῶνται αἱ ἑπόμεναι .
And when night came on he led the way, carrying a light, as the custom is, so that the ships which were following him might not go astray.


5.1.8
1892
ὁ δὲ Γοργώπας ἐμβιβάσας εὐθὺς ἐπηκολούθει κατὰ τὸν λαμπτῆρα , ὑπολειπόμενος , ὅπως μὴ φανερὸς εἴη μηδ’ αἴσθησιν παρέχοι , λίθων τε ψόφῳ τῶν κελευστῶν ἀντὶ φωνῆς χρωμένων καὶ παραγωγῇ τῶν κωπῶν .
Then Gorgopas immediately embarked his men and followed on in the direction of the light, keeping behind the enemy so that he should not be visible or give them a chance to notice him; while his boatswains gave the time by clicking stones together instead of with their voices, and made the men employ a sliding motion of the oars.


5.1.9
1893
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἦσαν αἱ τοῦ Εὐνόμου πρὸς τῇ γῇ περὶ Ζωστῆρα τῆς Ἀττικῆς , ἐκέλευε τῇ σάλπιγγι ἐπιπλεῖν .
But when the ships of Eunomus were close to the shore near Cape Zoster in Attica, Gorgopas gave the order by the trumpet to sail against them.


5.1.9
1894
τῷ δὲ Εὐνόμῳ ἐξ ἐνίων μὲν τῶν νεῶν ἄρτι ἐξέβαινον , οἱ δὲ καὶ ἔτι ὡρμίζοντο , οἱ δὲ καὶ ἔτι κατέπλεον .
And as for Eunomus, the men on some of his ships were just disembarking, others were still occupied in coming to anchor, and others were even yet on their way toward the shore.


5.1.9
1895
ναυμαχίας δὲ πρὸς τὴν σελήνην γενομένης , τέτταρας τριήρεις λαμβάνει ὁ Γοργώπας , καὶ ἀναδησάμενος ᾤχετο ἄγων εἰς Αἴγιναν ·
Then, a battle being fought by moonlight, Gorgopas captured four triremes, and taking them in tow, carried them off to Aegina;


5.1.9
1896
αἱ δ’ ἄλλαι νῆες αἱ τῶν Ἀθηναίων εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ κατέφυγον .
but the other ships of the Athenians made their escape to Piraeus.


5.1.10
1897
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Χαβρίας ἐξέπλει εἰς Κύπρον βοηθῶν Εὐαγόρᾳ , πελταστάς τ’ ἔχων ὀκτακοσίους καὶ δέκα τριήρεις , προσλαβὼν δὲ καὶ Ἀθήνηθεν ἄλλας τε ναῦς καὶ ὁπλίτας .
After this Chabrias set out on a voyage to Cyprus to aid Euagoras, with eight hundred peltasts and ten triremes, to which force he had also added more ships and a body of hoplites obtained from Athens;


5.1.10
1898
αὐτὸς δὲ τῆς νυκτὸς ἀποβὰς εἰς τὴν Αἴγιναν πορρωτέρω τοῦ Ἡρακλείου ἐν κοίλῳ χωρίῳ ἐνήδρευσεν , ἔχων τοὺς πελταστάς .
and during the night he himself, with his peltasts, landed in Aegina and set an ambush in a hollow place beyond the Heracleium.


5.1.10
1899
ἅμα δὲ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ , ὥσπερ συνέκειτο , ἧκον οἱ τῶν Ἀθηναίων ὁπλῖται , Δημαινέτου αὐτῶν ἡγουμένου , καὶ ἀνέβαινον τοῦ Ἡρακλείου ἐπέκεινα ὡς ἑκκαίδεκα σταδίους , ἔνθα ἡ Τριπυργία καλεῖται .
Then at daybreak, just as had been agreed, the hoplites of the Athenians came, under the command of Demaenetus, and ascended to a point about sixteen stadia beyond the Heracleium, where the so-called Tripyrgia is.


5.1.11
1900
ἀκούσας δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Γοργώπας , ἐβοήθει μετά τε τῶν Αἰγινητῶν καὶ σὺν τοῖς τῶν νεῶν ἐπιβάταις καὶ Σπαρτιατῶν οἳ ἔτυχον αὐτόθι παρόντες ὀκτώ .
On hearing of this Gorgopas sallied forth to the rescue with the Aeginetans, the marines from his ships, and eight Spartiatae who chanced to be there.


5.1.11
1901
καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν πληρωμάτων δὲ τῶν ἐκ τῶν νεῶν ἐκήρυξε βοηθεῖν ὅσοι ἐλεύθεροι εἶεν ·
He also made proclamation that all freemen among the crews of the ships should come with him,


5.1.11
1902
ὥστ’ ἐβοήθουν καὶ τούτων πολλοί , ὅ τι ἐδύνατο ἕκαστος ὅπλον ἔχων .
so that many of these also joined the relief force, each man with whatever weapon he could get.


5.1.12
1903
ἐπεὶ δὲ παρήλλαξαν οἱ πρῶτοι τὴν ἐνέδραν , ἐξανίστανται οἱ περὶ τὸν Χαβρίαν , καὶ εὐθὺς ἠκόντιζον καὶ ἔβαλλον .
Now when those in the van had passed by the ambush, Chabrias and his followers rose up and immediately threw javelins and stones upon the enemy.


5.1.12
1904
ἐπῇσαν δὲ καὶ οἱ ἐκ τῶν νεῶν ἀποβεβηκότες ὁπλῖται .
And the hoplites who had disembarked from the ships also advanced upon them.


5.1.12
1905
καὶ οἱ μὲν πρῶτοι , ἅτε οὐδενὸς ἁθρόου ὄντος , ταχὺ ἀπέθανον , ὧν ἦν Γοργώπας τε καὶ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ·
Then those in the van, inasmuch as they were not a compact mass, were quickly killed, among whom were Gorgopas and the Lacedaemonians;


5.1.12
1906
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὗτοι ἔπεσον , ἐτράπησαν δὴ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι .
and when these had fallen the rest also were put to flight.


5.1.12
1907
καὶ ἀπέθανον Αἰγινητῶν μὲν ὡς πεντήκοντα καὶ ἑκατόν , ξένοι δὲ καὶ μέτοικοι καὶ ναῦται καταδεδραμηκότες οὐκ ἐλάττους διακοσίων .
And there fell about one hundred and fifty Aeginetans and not less than two hundred foreigners, aliens resident in Aegina, and sailors who had hurriedly rushed ashore.


5.1.13
1908
ἐκ δὲ τούτου οἱ μὲν Ἀθηναῖοι , ὥσπερ ἐν εἰρήνῃ , ἔπλεον τὴν θάλατταν ·
After this the Athenians sailed the sea just as in time of peace,


5.1.13
1909
οὐδὲ γὰρ τῷ Ἐτεονίκῳ ἤθελον οἱ ναῦται καίπερ ἀναγκάζοντι ἐμβάλλειν , ἐπεὶ μισθὸν οὐκ ἐδίδου .
for the Lacedaemonian sailors refused to row for Eteonicus, even though he tried to compel them to do so, because he did not give them pay.


5.1.13
1910
ἐκ δὲ τούτου οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι Τελευτίαν αὖ ἐπὶ ταύτῃ ἐκπέμπουσιν ἐπὶ ταύτας τὰς ναῦς ναύαρχον .
After this the Lacedaemonians sent out Teleutias again to take command of these ships as admiral.


5.1.13
1911
ὡς δὲ εἶδον αὐτὸν ἥκοντα οἱ ναῦται , ὑπερήσθησαν .
And when the sailors saw that he had come, they were delighted beyond measure.


5.1.13
1912
ὁ δ’ αὐτοὺς συγκαλέσας εἶπε τοιάδε ·
And he called them together and spoke as follows:


5.1.14
1913
ὦ ἄνδρες στρατιῶται , ἐγὼ χρήματα μὲν οὐκ ἔχων ἥκω ·
Fellow soldiers, I have come without money;


5.1.14
1914
ἐὰν μέντοι θεὸς ἐθέλῃ καὶ ὑμεῖς συμπροθυμῆσθε , πειράσομαι τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ὑμῖν ὡς πλεῖστα πορίζειν .
yet if God be willing and you perform your part zealously, I shall endeavour to supply you with provisions in the greatest abundance.


5.1.14
1915
εὖ δ’ ἴστε , ἐγὼ ὅταν ὑμῶν ἄρχω , εὔχομαί τε οὐδὲν ἧττον ζῆν ὑμᾶς ἢ καὶ ἐμαυτόν , τά τ’ ἐπιτήδεια θαυμάσαιτε μὲν ἂν ἴσως , εἰ φαίην βούλεσθαι ὑμᾶς μᾶλλον ἢ ἐμὲ ἔχειν ·
And be well assured that, whenever I am in command of you, I pray just as earnestly for your lives as for my own. As to provisions, you would be surprised, perhaps, if I should say that I am more desirous of your being supplied than of being supplied myself;


5.1.14
1916
ἐγὼ δὲ νὴ τοὺς θεοὺς καὶ δεξαίμην ἂν αὐτὸς μᾶλλον δύο ἡμέρας ἄσιτος ἢ ὑμᾶς μίαν γενέσθαι ·
indeed, by the gods, I should prefer to go without food myself for two days than to have you go without for one.


5.1.14
1917
ἥ γε μὴν θύρα ἡ ἐμὴ ἀνέῳκτο μὲν δήπου καὶ πρόσθεν εἰσιέναι τῷ δεομένῳ τι ἐμοῦ , ἀνεῴξεται δὲ καὶ νῦν .
And just as my door was open in days past, as you know, for him to enter who had any request to make of me, so likewise it shall be open now.


5.1.15
1918
ὥστε ὅταν ὑμεῖς πλήρη ἔχητε τὰ ἐπιτήδεια , τότε καὶ ἐμὲ ὄψεσθε ἀφθονώτερον διαιτώμενον ·
Therefore, when you have provisions in abundance, then you will see me also living bounteously;


5.1.15
1919
ἂν δὲ ἀνεχόμενόν με ὁρᾶτε καὶ ψύχη καὶ θάλπη καὶ ἀγρυπνίαν , οἴεσθε καὶ ὑμεῖς ταῦτα πάντα καρτερεῖν .
but if you see me submitting to cold and heat and night-watching, expect to endure all these things yourselves.


5.1.15
1920
οὐδὲν γὰρ ἐγὼ τούτων κελεύω ὑμᾶς ποιεῖν ἵνα ἀνιᾶσθε , ἀλλ’ ἵνα ἐκ τούτων ἀγαθόν τι λαμβάνητε .
For I do not bid you do any of these things that you may suffer discomfort, but that from them you may gain something good.


5.1.16
1921
καὶ ἡ πόλις δέ τοι , ἔφη , ὦ ἄνδρες στρατιῶται , ἡ ἡμετέρα , ἣ δοκεῖ εὐδαίμων εἶναι , εὖ ἴστε ὅτι τ- ἀγαθὰ καὶ τὰ καλὰ ἐκτήσατο οὐ ῥᾳθυμοῦσα , ἀλλὰ ἐθέλουσα καὶ πονεῖν καὶ κινδυνεύειν , ὁπότε δέοι .
And Sparta too,  he added,  that Sparta of ours, fellow soldiers, which is accounted so prosperous  —  she be well assured, won her prosperity and her glory, not by careless idling, but by being willing to undergo both toils and dangers whenever there was need.


5.1.16
1922
καὶ ὑμεῖς οὖν ἦτε μὲν καὶ πρότερον , ὡς ἐγὼ οἶδα , ἄνδρες ἀγαθοί ·
Now you in like manner were in former days, as I know, good men;


5.1.16
1923
νῦν δὲ πειρᾶσθαι χρὴ ἔτι ἀμείνους γίγνεσθαι , ἵν’ ἡδέως μὲν συμπονῶμεν , ἡδέως δὲ συνευδαιμονῶμεν .
but now you must strive to prove yourselves even better men, in order that, just as we gladly undergo toils together, so we may gladly enjoy good fortune together.


5.1.17
1924
τί γὰρ ἥδιον ἢ μηδένα ἀνθρώπων κολακεύειν μήτε Ἕλληνα μήτε βάρβαρον ἕνεκα μισθοῦ , ἀλλ’ ἑαυτοῖς ἱκανοὺς εἶναι τὰ ἐπιτήδεια πορίζεσθαι , καὶ ταῦτα ὅθενπερ κάλλιστον ;
For what greater gladness can there be than to have to flatter no one in the world, Greek or barbarian, for the sake of pay, but to be able to provide supplies for oneself, and what is more, from the most honourable source?


5.1.17
1925
ἡ γάρ τοι ἐν πολέμῳ ἀπὸ τῶν πολεμίων ἀφθονία εὖ ἴστε ὅτι ἅμα τροφήν τε καὶ εὔκλειαν ἐν πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις παρέχεται .
For be well assured that abundance gained in war from the enemy yields not merely sustenance, but at the same time fair fame among all men.


5.1.18
1926
ὁ μὲν ταῦτ’ εἶπεν , οἱ δὲ πάντες ἀνεβόησαν παραγγέλλειν ὅ τι ἂν δέῃ , ὡς σφῶν ὑπηρετησόντων .
Thus he spoke, and they all set up a shout, bidding him give whatever order was needful, in the assurance that they would obey.


5.1.18
1927
ὁ δὲ τεθυμένος ἐτύγχανεν ·
Now he chanced to have finished sacrificing,


5.1.18
1928
εἶπε δέ ·
and he said:


5.1.18
1929
ἄγετε , ὦ ἄνδρες , δειπνήσατε μὲν ἅπερ καὶ ὣς ἐμέλλετε ·
Come, my men, get dinner, just as you were intending to do anyway;


5.1.18
1930
προπαράσχεσθε δέ μοι μιᾶς ἡμέρας σῖτον .
and provide yourselves, I beg you, with food for one day.


5.1.18
1931
ἔπειτα δὲ ἥκετε ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς αὐτίκα μάλα , ὅπως πλεύσωμεν ἔνθα θεὸς ἐθέλει , ἐν καιρῷ ἀφιξόμενοι .
Then come to the ships right speedily, that we may sail to the place where God wills that we go, and may arrive in good time.


5.1.19
1932
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἦλθον , ἐμβιβασάμενος αὐτοὺς εἰς τὰς ναῦς ἔπλει τῆς νυκτὸς εἰς τὸν λιμένα τῶν Ἀθηναίων , τοτὲ μὲν ἀναπαύων καὶ παραγγέλλων ἀποκοιμᾶσθαι , τοτὲ δὲ κώπαις προσκομιζόμενος .
And when they had come he embarked them upon the ships and sailed during the night to the harbour of the Athenians, now letting the men rest and bidding them get a little sleep, and now setting them at the oars.


5.1.19
1933
εἰ δέ τις ὑπολαμβάνει ὡς ἀφρόνως ἔπλει δώδεκα τριήρεις ἔχων ἐπὶ πολλὰς ναῦς κεκτημένους , ἐννοησάτω τὸν ἀναλογισμὸν αὐτοῦ .
But if anyone supposes that it was madness for him to sail with twelve triremes against men who possessed many ships, let such a one consider Teleutias’ calculations.


5.1.20
1934
ἐκεῖνος γὰρ ἐνόμισεν ἀμελέστερον μὲν ἔχειν τοὺς Ἀθηναίους περὶ τὸ ἐν τῷ λιμένι ναυτικὸν Γοργώπα ἀπολωλότος ·
He conceived that the Athenians were more careless about their fleet in the harbour now that Gorgopas was dead;


5.1.20
1935
εἰ δὲ καὶ εἶεν τριήρεις ὁρμοῦσαι , ἀσφαλέστερον ἡγήσατο ἐπ’ εἴκοσι ναῦς Ἀθήνησιν οὔσας πλεῦσαι ἢ ἄλλοθι δέκα .
and even if there were triremes at anchor there, he believed that it was safer to sail against twenty ships which were at Athens than against ten elsewhere.


5.1.20
1936
τῶν μὲν γὰρ ἔξω ᾔδει ὅτι κατὰ ναῦν ἔμελλον οἱ ναῦται σκηνήσειν , τῶν δὲ Ἀθήνησιν ἐγίγνωσκεν ὅτι οἱ μὲν τριήραρχοι οἴκοι καθευδήσοιεν , οἱ δὲ ναῦται ἄλλος ἄλλῃ σκηνήσοιεν .
For in the case of ships that were abroad he knew that the sailors would be quartered on board their several ships, while with ships at Athens he was aware that the captains would be sleeping at home and the sailors quartered here and there.


5.1.21
1937
ἔπλει μὲν δὴ ταῦτα διανοηθείς ·
These, then, were the considerations which he had weighed before he sailed;


5.1.21
1938
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἀπεῖχε πέντε ἢ ἓξ στάδια τοῦ λιμένος , ἡσυχίαν εἶχε καὶ ἀνέπαυεν .
and when he was distant from the harbour five or six stadia, he remained quiet and let his men rest.


5.1.21
1939
ὡς δὲ ἡμέρα ὑπέφαινεν , ἡγεῖτο ·
Then, as day was dawning, he led on


5.1.21
1940
οἱ δὲ ἐπηκολούθουν .
and they followed.


5.1.21
1941
καὶ καταδύειν μὲν οὐδὲν εἴα στρογγύλον πλοῖον οὐδὲ λυμαίνεσθαι ταῖς ἑαυτῶν ναυσίν ·
Now he forbade them to sink or harm any merchant vessel with their own ships;


5.1.21
1942
εἰ δέ που τριήρη ἴδοιεν ὁρμοῦσαν , ταύτην πειρᾶσθαι ἄπλουν ποιεῖν , τὰ δὲ φορτηγικὰ πλοῖα καὶ γέμοντα ἀναδουμένους ἄγειν ἔξω , ἐκ δὲ τῶν μειζόνων ἐμβαίνοντας ὅπου δύναιντο τοὺς ἀνθρώπους λαμβάνειν .
but if they saw a trireme at anchor anywhere, he ordered them to try to make her unseaworthy, and furthermore, to bring out in tow the merchant ships which were loaded, and to board the larger ones wherever they could and take off their people.


5.1.21
1943
ἦσαν δέ τινες οἳ καὶ ἐκπηδήσαντες εἰς τὸ Δεῖγμα ἐμπόρους τέ τινας καὶ ναυκλήρους συναρπάσαντες εἰς τὰς ναῦς εἰσήνεγκαν .
Indeed, there were some of his men who even leaped ashore on to the Deigma, seized merchants and owners of trading vessels, and carried them aboard the ships.


5.1.22
1944
ὁ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἐπεποιήκει .
He, then, succeeded in accomplishing these things.


5.1.22
1945
τῶν δὲ Ἀθηναίων οἱ μὲν αἰσθόμενοι ἔνδοθεν ἔθεον ἔξω , σκεψόμενοι τίς ἡ κραυγή , οἱ δὲ ἔξωθεν οἴκαδε ἐπὶ τὰ ὅπλα , οἱ δὲ καὶ εἰς ἄστυ ἀγγελοῦντες .
But as for the Athenians, some of them, upon hearing the uproar, ran from their houses into the streets to see what the shouting meant, others ran from the streets to their homes to get their weapons, and still others to the city to carry the news.


5.1.22
1946
πάντες δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι τότε ἐβοήθησαν καὶ ὁπλῖται καὶ ἱππεῖς , ὡς τοῦ Πειραιῶς ἑαλωκότος .
Then all the Athenians, hoplites and horsemen, rushed to the rescue, thinking that Piraeus had been captured.


5.1.23
1947
ὁ δὲ τὰ μὲν πλοῖα ἀπέστειλεν εἰς Αἴγιναν , καὶ τῶν τριήρων τρεῖς ἢ τέτταρας συναπαγαγεῖν ἐκέλευσε , ταῖς δὲ ἄλλαις παραπλέων παρὰ τὴν Ἀττικήν , ἅτε ἐκ τοῦ λιμένος πλέων , πολλὰ καὶ ἁλιευτικὰ ἔλαβε καὶ πορθμεῖα ἀνθρώπων μεστά , καταπλέοντα ἀπὸ νήσων .
But Teleutias sent off the captured merchant vessels to Aegina and gave orders that three or four of the triremes should convoy them thither, while with the rest of the triremes he coasted along the shore of Attica and, inasmuch as he was sailing out of the harbour, captured great numbers of fishing craft and ferryboats full of people as they were sailing in from the islands.


5.1.23
1948
ἐπὶ δὲ Σούνιον ἐλθὼν καὶ ὁλκάδας γεμούσας τὰς μέν τινας σίτου , τὰς δὲ καὶ ἐμπολῆς , ἔλαβε .
And on coming to Sunium he captured trading vessels also, some of them full of corn, others of merchandise.


5.1.24
1949
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Αἴγιναν .
Having done all these things he sailed back to Aegina.


5.1.24
1950
καὶ ἀποδόμενος τὰ λάφυρα μηνὸς μισθὸν προέδωκε τοῖς στρατιώταις .
and when he had sold his booty he gave the soldiers a month’s pay in advance.


5.1.24
1951
καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν δὲ περιπλέων ἐλάμβανεν ὅ τι ἐδύνατο .
He likewise from that time forth cruised round and captured whatever he could.


5.1.24
1952
καὶ ταῦτα ποιῶν πλήρεις τε τὰς ναῦς ἔτρεφε καὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας εἶχεν ἡδέως καὶ ταχέως ὑπηρετοῦντας .
And by doing these things he maintained his ships with full complements of sailors, and kept his soldiers in a state of glad and prompt obedience.


5.1.25
1953
ὁ δὲ Ἀνταλκίδας κατέβη μὲν μετὰ Τιριβάζου διαπεπραγμένος συμμαχεῖν βασιλέα , εἰ μὴ ἐθέλοιεν Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι χρῆσθαι τῇ εἰρήνῃ ᾗ αὐτὸς ἔλεγεν .
And now Antalcidas returned with Tiribazus from the Persian capital, having effected an agreement that the King should be an ally of the Lacedaemonians if the Athenians and their allies refused to accept the peace which he himself directed them to accept.


5.1.25
1954
ὡς δ’ ἤκουσε Νικόλοχον σὺν ταῖς ναυσὶ πολιορκεῖσθαι ἐν Ἀβύδῳ ὑπὸ Ἰφικράτους καὶ Διοτίμου , πεζῇ ᾤχετο εἰς Ἄβυδον .
But when Antalcidas heard that Nicolochus with his ships was being blockaded at Abydus by Iphicrates and Diotimus, he went overland to Abydus.


5.1.25
1955
ἐκεῖθεν δὲ λαβὼν τὸ ναυτικὸν νυκτὸς ἀνήγετο , διασπείρας λόγον ὡς μεταπεμπομένων τῶν Καλχηδονίων ·
And from there he set out during the night with the fleet, after spreading a report that the Calchedonians were sending for him;


5.1.25
1956
ὁρμισάμενος δὲ ἐν Περκώτῃ ἡσυχίαν εἶχεν .
then he came to anchor at Percote and remained quiet there.


5.1.26
1957
αἰσθόμενοι δὲ οἱ περὶ Δημαίνετον καὶ Διονύσιον καὶ Λεόντιχον καὶ Φανίαν ἐδίωκον αὐτὸν τὴν ἐπὶ Προκοννήσου ·
Now the Athenian forces under Demaenetus, Dionysius, Leontichus, and Phanias, upon learning of his departure, followed after him in the direction of Proconnesus;


5.1.26
1958
ὁ δ’ , ἐπεὶ ἐκεῖνοι παρέπλευσαν , ὑποστρέψας εἰς Ἄβυδον ἀφίκετο ·
and when they had sailed past him, Antalcidas turned about and came back to Abydus,


5.1.26
1959
ἠκηκόει γὰρ ὅτι προσπλέοι Πολύξενος ἄγων τὰς ἀπὸ Συρακουσῶν καὶ Ἰταλίας ναῦς εἴκοσιν , ὅπως ἀναλάβοι καὶ ταύτας .
for he had heard that Polyxenus was approaching with the ships from Syracuse and Italy, twenty in number, and he wished to join these also to his command.


5.1.26
1960
ἐκ δὲ τούτου Θρασύβουλος ὁ Κολλυτεὺς ἔχων ναῦς ὀκτὼ ἔπλει ἀπὸ Θρᾴκης , βουλόμενος ταῖς ἄλλαις Ἀττικαῖς ναυσὶ συμμεῖξαι .
But soon after this Thrasybulus, of the deme Collytus, came sailing from Thrace with eight ships, desiring to unite with the other Athenian ships.


5.1.27
1961
ὁ δὲ Ἀνταλκίδας , ἐπεὶ αὐτῷ οἱ σκοποὶ ἐσήμηναν ὅτι προσπλέοιεν τριήρεις ὀκτώ , ἐμβιβάσας τοὺς ναύτας εἰς δώδεκα ναῦς τὰς ἄριστα πλεούσας , καὶ προσπληρώσασθαι κελεύσας , εἴ τις ἐνεδεῖτο , ἐκ τῶν καταλειπομένων , ἐνήδρευεν ὡς ἐδύνατο ἀφανέστατα .
And Antalcidas, when his scouts signalled to him that eight triremes were approaching, embarked the sailors on twelve of his fastest ships, gave orders that if anyone was lacking men, he should fill up his crew from the ships left behind, and lay in wait with the utmost possible concealment.


5.1.27
1962
ἐπεὶ δὲ παρέπλεον , ἐδίωκεν ·
Then, as the enemy were sailing past him, he pursued;


5.1.27
1963
οἱ δὲ ἰδόντες ἔφευγον .
and they, upon seeing him, fled.


5.1.27
1964
τὰς μὲν οὖν βραδύτατα πλεούσας ταῖς ἄριστα πλεούσαις ταχὺ κατειλήφει ·
Now he speedily succeeded in overhauling the slowest of the enemy’s ships with his fastest;


5.1.27
1965
παραγγείλας δὲ τοῖς πρωτόπλοις τῶν μεθ’ αὑτοῦ μὴ ἐμβαλεῖν ταῖς ὑστάταις , ἐδίωκε τὰς προεχούσας .
but giving orders to the leaders of his own fleet not to attack the hindmost ships, he continued the pursuit of those which were ahead.


5.1.27
1966
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταύτας ἔλαβεν , ἰδόντες οἱ ὕστεροι ἁλισκομένους σφῶν αὐτῶν τοὺς πρόπλους ὑπ’ ἀθυμίας καὶ τῶν βραδυτέρων ἡλίσκοντο ·
And when he had captured them, those who were behind, upon seeing that the leaders of their fleet were being taken, out of discouragement were themselves taken even by the slower ships of Antalcidas;


5.1.27
1967
ὥσθ’ ἥλωσαν ἅπασαι .
and the result was that all the ships were captured.


5.1.28
1968
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἦλθον αὐτῷ αἵ τε ἐκ Συρακουσῶν νῆες εἴκοσιν , ἦλθον δὲ καὶ αἱ ἀπὸ Ἰωνίας , ὅσης ἐγκρατὴς ἦν Τιρίβαζος , συνεπληρώθησαν δὲ καὶ ἐκ τῆς Ἀριοβαρζάνους , καὶ γὰρ ἦν ξένος ἐκ παλαιοῦ τῷ Ἀριοβαρζάνει , ὁ δὲ Φαρνάβαζος ἤδη ἀνακεκλημένος ᾤχετο ἄνω , ὅτε δὴ καὶ ἔγημε τὴν βασιλέως θυγατέρα ·
And after the twenty ships from Syracuse had come and joined Antalcidas, and the ships from all that part of Ionia of which Tiribazus was master had also come, and more still had been manned from the territory of Ariobarzanes  —  for Antalcidas was an old friend of Ariobarzanes, and Pharnabazus had at this time gone up to the capital in response to a summons, this being the occasion when he married the King’s daughter  —


5.1.28
1969
ὁ δὲ Ἀνταλκίδας γενομέναις ταῖς πάσαις ναυσὶ πλείοσιν ἢ ὀγδοήκοντα ἐκράτει τῆς θαλάττης ·
then Antalcidas, the whole number of his ships amounting to more than eighty, was master of the sea,


5.1.28
1970
ὥστε καὶ τὰς ἐκ τοῦ Πόντου ναῦς Ἀθήναζε μὲν ἐκώλυε καταπλεῖν , εἰς δὲ τοὺς ἑαυτῶν συμμάχους κατῆγεν .
so that he also prevented the ships from the Pontus from sailing to Athens, and compelled them to sail to the ports of his people’s allies.


5.1.29
1971
οἱ μὲν οὖν Ἀθηναῖοι , ὁρῶντες μὲν πολλὰς τὰς πολεμίας ναῦς , φοβούμενοι δὲ μὴ ὡς πρότερον καταπολεμηθείησαν , συμμάχου Λακεδαιμονίοις βασιλέως γεγενημένου , πολιορκούμενοι δ’ ἐκ τῆς Αἰγίνης ὑπὸ τῶν λῃστῶν , διὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἰσχυρῶς ἐπεθύμουν τῆς εἰρήνης .
The Athenians, therefore, seeing that the enemy’s ships were many, fearing that they might be completely subdued, as they had been before, now that the King had become an ally of the Lacedaemonians, and being beset by the raiding parties from Aegina, for these reasons were exceedingly desirous of peace.


5.1.29
1972
οἱ δ’ αὖ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , φρουροῦντες μόρᾳ μὲν ἐν Λεχαίῳ , μόρᾳ δ’ ἐν Ὀρχομενῷ , φυλάττοντες δὲ τὰς πόλεις , αἷς μὲν ἐπίστευον , μὴ ἀπόλοιντο , αἷς δὲ ἠπίστουν , μὴ ἀποσταῖεν , πράγματα δ’ ἔχοντες καὶ παρέχοντες περὶ τὴν Κόρινθον , χαλεπῶς ἔφερον τῷ πολέμῳ .
On the other hand the Lacedaemonians, what with maintaining a garrison of one regiment at Lechaeum and another at Orchomenus, keeping watch upon their allied states  —  those which they trusted, to prevent their being destroyed, and those which they distrusted, to prevent their revolting  —  and suffering and causing trouble around Corinth, were out of patience with the war.


5.1.29
1973
οἵ γε μὴν Ἀργεῖοι , εἰδότες φρουράν τε πεφασμένην ἐφ’ ἑαυτοὺς καὶ γιγνώσκοντες ὅτι ἡ τῶν μηνῶν ὑποφορὰ οὐδὲν ἔτι σφᾶς ὠφελήσει , καὶ οὗτοι εἰς τὴν εἰρήνην πρόθυμοι ἦσαν .
As for the Argives, knowing that the Lacedaemonian ban had been called out against them, and being aware that their plea of the sacred months would no longer be of any help to them, they also were eager for peace.


5.1.30
1974
ὥστ’ ἐπεὶ παρήγγειλεν ὁ Τιρίβαζος παρεῖναι τοὺς βουλομένους ὑπακοῦσαι ἣν βασιλεὺς εἰρήνην καταπέμποι , ταχέως πάντες παρεγένοντο .
So that when Tiribazus ordered those to be present who desired to give ear to the peace which the King had sent down, all speedily presented themselves.


5.1.30
1975
ἐπεὶ δὲ συνῆλθον , ἐπιδείξας ὁ Τιρίβαζος τὰ βασιλέως σημεῖα ἀνεγίγνωσκε τὰ γεγραμμένα .
And when they had come together, Tiribazus showed them the King’s seal and then read the writing.


5.1.30
1976
εἶχε δὲ ὧδε .
It ran as follows:


5.1.31
1977
Ἀρταξέρξης βασιλεὺς νομίζει δίκαιον τὰς μὲν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ πόλεις ἑαυτοῦ εἶναι καὶ τῶν νήσων Κλαζομενὰς καὶ Κύπρον , τὰς δὲ ἄλλας Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις καὶ μικρὰς καὶ μεγάλας αὐτονόμους ἀφεῖναι πλὴν Λήμνου καὶ Ἴμβρου καὶ Σκύρου ·
King Artaxerxes thinks it just that the cities in Asia should belong to him, as well as Clazomenae and Cyprus among the islands, and that the other Greek cities, both small and great, should be left independent, except Lemnos, Imbros, and Scyros;


5.1.31
1978
ταύτας δὲ ὥσπερ τὸ ἀρχαῖον εἶναι Ἀθηναίων .
and these should belong, as of old, to the Athenians.


5.1.31
1979
ὁπότεροι δὲ ταύτην τὴν εἰρήνην μὴ δέχονται , τούτοις ἐγὼ πολεμήσω μετὰ τῶν ταῦτα βουλομένων καὶ πεζῇ καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν καὶ ναυσὶ καὶ χρήμασιν .
But whichever of the two parties does not accept this peace, upon them I will make war, in company with those who desire this arrangement, both by land and by sea, with ships and with money.


5.1.32
1980
ἀκούοντες οὖν ταῦτα οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν πόλεων πρέσβεις ἀπήγγελλον ἐπὶ τὰς ἑαυτῶν ἕκαστοι πόλεις .
Upon hearing these words the ambassadors from the various states reported them to their own several states.


5.1.32
1981
καὶ οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι ἅπαντες ὤμνυσαν ἐμπεδώσειν ταῦτα , οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ἠξίουν ὑπὲρ πάντων Βοιωτῶν ὀμνύναι .
And all the others swore that they would steadfastly observe these provisions, but the Thebans claimed the right to take the oath in the name of all the Boeotians.


5.1.32
1982
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος οὐκ ἔφη δέξασθαι τοὺς ὅρκους , ἐὰν μὴ ὀμνύωσιν , ὥσπερ τὰ βασιλέως γράμματα ἔλεγεν , αὐτονόμους εἶναι καὶ μικρὰν καὶ μεγάλην πόλιν .
Agesilaus, however, refused to accept their oaths unless they swore, just as the King’s writing directed, that every city, whether small or great, should be independent.


5.1.32
1983
οἱ δὲ τῶν Θηβαίων πρέσβεις ἔλεγον ὅτι οὐκ ἐπεσταλμένα σφίσι ταῦτ’ εἴη .
But the ambassadors of the Thebans said that these were not the instructions which had been given them.


5.1.32
1984
ἴτε νυν , ἔφη ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , καὶ ἐρωτᾶτε ·
Go then,  said Agesilaus,  and ask your people;


5.1.32
1985
ἀπαγγέλλετε δ’ αὐτοῖς καὶ ταῦτα , ὅτι εἰ μὴ ποιήσουσι ταῦτα , ἔκσπονδοι ἔσονται .
and report to them this also, that if they do not so act, they will be shut out from the treaty.


5.1.32
1986
οἱ μὲν δὴ ᾤχοντο .
The Thebans ambassadors accordingly departed.


5.1.33
1987
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος διὰ τὴν πρὸς Θηβαίους ἔχθραν οὐκ ἔμελλεν , ἀλλὰ πείσας τοὺς ἐφόρους εὐθὺς ἐθύετο .
Agesilaus, however, on account of his hatred for the Thebans, did not delay, but after winning over the ephors proceeded at once to perform his sacrifices.


5.1.33
1988
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἐγένετο τὰ διαβατήρια , ἀφικόμενος εἰς τὴν Τεγέαν διέπεμπε τῶν μὲν ἱππέων κατὰ τοὺς περιοίκους ἐπισπεύσοντας , διέπεμπε δὲ καὶ ξεναγοὺς εἰς τὰς πόλεις .
And when the offering at the frontier proved favourable, upon his arrival at Tegea he sent horsemen hither and thither among the Perioeci to hasten their coming, and likewise sent mustering officers to the various cities of the allies.


5.1.33
1989
πρὶν δὲ αὐτὸν ὁρμηθῆναι ἐκ Τεγέας , παρῆσαν οἱ Θηβαῖοι λέγοντες ὅτι ἀφιᾶσι τὰς πόλεις αὐτονόμους .
But before he had set out from Tegea, the Thebans arrived with word that they would leave the cities independent.


5.1.33
1990
καὶ οὕτω Λακεδαιμόντιοι μὲν οἴκαδε ἀπῆλθον , Θηβαῖοι δ’ εἰς τὰς σπονδὰς εἰσελθεῖν ἠναγκάσθησαν , αὐτονόμους ἀφέντες τὰς Βοιωτίας πόλεις .
And so the Lacedaemonians returned home and the Thebans were forced to accede to the treaty, allowing the Boeotian cities to be independent.


5.1.34
1991
οἱ δ’ αὖ Κορίνθιοι οὐκ ἐξέπεμπον τὴν τῶν Ἀργείων φρουράν .
But the Corinthians, on the other hand, would not dismiss the garrison maintained in their city by the Argives.


5.1.34
1992
ἀλλ’ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος καὶ τούτοις προεῖπε , τοῖς μέν , εἰ μὴ ἐκπέμψοιεν τοὺς Ἀργείους , τοῖς δέ , εἰ μὴ ἀπίοιεν ἐκ τῆς Κορίνθου , ὅτι πόλεμον ἐξοίσει πρὸς αὐτούς .
Agesilaus, however, made proclamation to these peoples also, saying to the Corinthians that if they did not dismiss the Argives, and to the Argives that if they did not depart from Corinth, he would make war upon them.


5.1.34
1993
ἐπεὶ δὲ φοβηθέντων ἀμφοτέρων ἐξῆλθον οἱ Ἀργεῖοι καὶ αὐτὴ ἐφ’ αὑτῆς ἡ τῶν Κορινθίων πόλις ἐγένετο , οἱ μὲν σφαγεῖς καὶ οἱ μεταίτιοι τοῦ ἔργου αὐτοὶ γνόντες ἀπῆλθον ἐκ τῆς Κορίνθου ·
And when, as a result of the fear which seized both peoples, the Argives departed and the state of the Corinthians regained its self-government, the authors of the massacre and those who shared the responsibility for the deed withdrew of their own accord from Corinth,


5.1.34
1994
οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι πολῖται ἑκόντες κατεδέχοντο τοὺς πρόσθεν φεύγοντας .
while the rest of the citizens willingly received back the former exiles.


5.1.35
1995
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταῦτ’ ἐπράχθη καὶ ὠμωμόκεσαν αἱ πόλεις ἐμμενεῖν ἐν τῇ εἰρήνῃ ἣν κατέπεμψε βασιλεύς , ἐκ τούτου διελύθη μὲν τὰ πεζικά , διελύθη δὲ καὶ τὰ ναυτικὰ στρατεύματα .
When these things had been accomplished and the states had sworn that they would abide by the treaty which the King had proposed, thereupon the armies were disbanded and the naval armaments were likewise disbanded.


5.1.35
1996
Λακεδαιμονίοις μὲν δὴ καὶ Ἀθηναίοις καὶ τοῖς συμμάχοις οὕτω μετὰ τὸν ὕστερον πόλεμον τῆς καθαιρέσεως τῶν Ἀθήνησι τειχῶν αὕτη πρώτη εἰρήνη ἐγένετο .
Thus it was that this peace was established between the Lacedaemonians and Athenians and their allies, the first since the outbreak of the war which followed the destruction of the walls of Athens.


5.1.36
1997
ἐν δὲ τῷ πολέμῳ μᾶλλον ἀντιρρόπως τοῖς ἐναντίοις πράττοντες οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι πολὺ ἐπικυδέστεροι ἐγένοντο ἐκ τῆς ἐπ’ Ἀνταλκίδου εἰρήνης καλουμένης .
Now while in the war the Lacedaemonians were no more than holding their own with their antagonists, yet as a result of the so-called Peace of Antalcidas they gained a far more distinguished position.


5.1.36
1998
προστάται γὰρ γενόμενοι τῆς ὑπὸ βασιλέως καταπεμφθείσης εἰρήνης καὶ τὴν αὐτονομίαν ταῖς πόλεσι πράττοντες , προσέλαβον μὲν σύμμαχον Κόρινθον , αὐτονόμους δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν Θηβαίων τὰς Βοιωτίδας πόλεις ἐποίησαν , οὗπερ πάλαι ἐπεθύμουν , ἔπαυσαν δὲ καὶ Ἀργείους Κόρινθον σφετεριζομένους , φρουρὰν φήναντες ἐπ’ αὐτούς , εἰ μὴ ἐξίοιεν ἐκ Κορίνθου .
For by having become champions of the treaty proposed by the King and by establishing the independence of the cities they gained an additional ally in Corinth, made the Boeotian cities independent of the Thebans, a thing which they had long desired, and also put a stop to the doings of the Argives in appropriating Corinth as their own, by threatening to call out the ban against them if they did not depart from Corinth.


5.2.1
1999
τούτων δὲ προκεχωρηκότων ὡς ἐβούλοντο , ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς , ὅσοι ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ τῶν συμμάχων ἐπέκειντο καὶ τοῖς πολεμίοις εὐμενέστεροι ἦσαν ἢ τῇ Λακεδαίμονι , τούτους κολάσαι καὶ κατασκευάσαι ὡς μὴ δύναιντο ἀπιστεῖν .
Since in all this matters had proceeded as they desired, the Lacedaemonians resolved, in the case of all among their allies who had been hostile during the war and more favourably inclined toward the enemy than toward Lacedaemon, to chastise them and put them in such a situation that they could not be disloyal.


5.2.1
2000
πρῶτον μὲν οὖν πέμψαντες πρὸς τοὺς Μαντινέας ἐκέλευσαν αὐτοὺς τὸ τεῖχος περιαιρεῖν , λέγοντες ὅτι οὐκ ἂν πιστεύσειαν ἄλλως αὐτοῖς μὴ σὺν τοῖς πολεμίοις γενέσθαι .
Firstly, therefore, they sent to the Mantineans and ordered them to tear down their wall, saying that they could not trust them in any other way not to take sides with their enemies.


5.2.2
2001
αἰσθάνεσθαι γὰρ ἔφασαν καὶ ὡς σῖτον ἐξέπεμπον τοῖς Ἀργείοις σφῶν αὐτοῖς πολεμούντων , καὶ ὡς ἔστι μὲν ὅτε οὐδὲ συστρατεύοιεν ἐκεχειρίαν προφασιζόμενοι , ὁπότε δὲ καὶ ἀκολουθοῖεν , ὡς κακῶς συστρατεύοιεν .
For they said they had noted not only that the Mantineans had been sending corn to the Argives when they themselves were making war upon that people, but also that sometimes, on the pretext of a holy truce, they had not served in the Lacedaemonian armies at all, and when they had fallen into line, had served badly.


5.2.2
2002
ἔτι δὲ γιγνώσκειν ἔφασαν φθονοῦντας μὲν αὐτούς , εἴ τι σφίσιν ἀγαθὸν γίγνοιτο , ἐφηδομένους δ’ , εἴ τις συμφορὰ προσπίπτοι .
Furthermore, the Lacedaemonians said they were aware that they were envious if any good fortune came to them, and delighted if any disaster befel them.


5.2.2
2003
ἐλέγοντο δὲ καὶ αἱ σπονδαὶ ἐξεληλυθέναι τοῖς Μαντινεῦσι τούτῳ τῷ ἔτει αἱ μετὰ τὴν ἐν Μαντινείᾳ μάχην τριακονταετεῖς γενόμεναι .
It was also common talk that the thirty years’ truce, concluded after the battle of Mantinea, had expired this year, so far as the Mantineans were concerned.


5.2.3
2004
ἐπεὶ δ’ οὐκ ἤθελον καθαιρεῖν τὰ τείχη , φρουρὰν φαίνουσιν ἐπ’ αὐτούς .
When, accordingly, they now refused to tear down their walls, the Lacedaemonians called out the ban against them.


5.2.3
2005
Ἀγησίλαος μὲν οὖν ἐδεήθη τῆς πόλεως ἀφεῖναι ἑαυτὸν ταύτης τῆς στρατηγίας , λέγων ὅτι τῷ πατρὶ αὐτοῦ ἡ τῶν Μαντινέων πόλις πολλὰ ὑπηρετήκοι ἐν τοῖς πρὸς Μεσσήνην πολέμοις ·
Now Agesilaus requested the state to relieve him of the command of this expedition, saying that the city of the Mantineans had rendered his father many services in the wars against Messene;


5.2.3
2006
Ἀγησίπολις δὲ ἐξήγαγε τὴν φρουρὰν καὶ μάλα Παυσανίου τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτοῦ φιλικῶς ἔχοντος πρὸς τοὺς ἐν Μαντινείᾳ τοῦ δήμου προστάτας .
Agesipolis, therefore, led forth the ban, even though his father, Pausanias, was on exceedingly friendly terms with the leaders of the popular party in Mantinea.


5.2.4
2007
ὡς δὲ ἐνέβαλε , πρῶτον μὲν τὴν γῆν ἐδῄου .
And when he had entered Mantinean territory, he first laid waste the land;


5.2.4
2008
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐδ’ οὕτω καθῄρουν τὰ τείχη , τάφρον ὤρυττε κύκλῳ περὶ τὴν πόλιν , τοῖς μὲν ἡμίσεσι τῶν στρατιωτῶν προκαθημένοις σὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις τῶν ταφρευόντων , τοῖς δ’ ἡμίσεσιν ἐργαζομένοις .
but since even then they would not tear down the walls, he proceeded to dig a trench round about the city, with one half of the soldiers sitting under arms in front of the diggers to protect them, and the other half working.


5.2.4
2009
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐξείργαστο ἡ τάφρος , ἀσφαλῶς ἤδη κύκλῳ τεῖχος περὶ τὴν πόλιν ᾠκοδόμησεν .
And after the trench had been completed, he then without risk built a wall round about the city.


5.2.4
2010
αἰσθόμενος δὲ ὅτι ὁ σῖτος ἐν τῇ πόλει πολὺς ἐνείη , εὐετηρίας γενομένης τῷ πρόσθεν ἔτει , καὶ νομίσας χαλεπὸν ἔσεσθαι , εἰ δεήσει πολὺν χρόνον τρύχειν στρατείαις τήν τε πόλιν καὶ τοὺς συμμάχους , ἀπέχωσε τὸν ῥέοντα ποταμὸν διὰ τῆς πόλεως μάλ’ ὄντα εὐμεγέθη .
Learning, however, that the corn supply in the city was abundant, since there had been a good harvest the previous year, and thinking that it would be a grievous thing if it should prove necessary to burden both his state and its allies for a long period with campaigns, he dammed up the river which flowed through the city; and it was a very large one.


5.2.5
2011
ἐμφραχθείσης δὲ τῆς ἀπορροίας ᾔρετο τὸ ὕδωρ ὑπέρ τε τῶν ὑπὸ ταῖς οἰκίαις καὶ ὑπὲρ τῶν ὑπὸ τῷ τείχει θεμελίων .
Its outflow being thus checked, the water rose not only above the foundations of the houses but above those of the city wall.


5.2.5
2012
βρεχομένων δὲ τῶν κάτω πλίνθων καὶ προδιδουσῶν τὰς ἄνω , τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐρρήγνυτο τὸ τεῖχος , ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ ἐκλίνετο .
Then as the lower bricks became soaked and failed to support those above them, the wall began first to crack and then to give way.


5.2.5
2013
οἱ δὲ χρόνον μέν τινα ξύλα ἀντήρειδον καὶ ἐμηχανῶντο ὡς μὴ πίπτοι ὁ πύργος ·
And the Mantineans for a time tried to prop it up with timbers, and sought contrivances to prevent the tower from falling;


5.2.5
2014
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἡττῶντο τοῦ ὕδατος , δείσαντες μὴ πεσόντος πῃ τοῦ κύκλῳ τείχους δοριάλωτοι γένοιντο , ὡμολόγουν περιαιρήσειν .
but when they were no longer able to resist the water, being seized with the fear that if any portion of the encircling wall fell they would become prisoners of war, they offered to agree to tear down their walls.


5.2.5
2015
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὐκ ἔφασαν σπείσεσθαι , εἰ μὴ καὶ διοικιοῖντο κατὰ κώμας .
The Lacedaemonians, however, said that they would not make peace with them except on condition that they should also dwell apart in villages.


5.2.5
2016
οἱ δ’ αὖ νομίσαντες ἀνάγκην εἶναι , συνέφασαν καὶ ταῦτα ποιήσειν .
And they for their part, coming to the conclusion that it was necessary, agreed that they would do this also.


5.2.6
2017
οἰομένων δὲ ἀποθανεῖσθαι τῶν ἀργολιζόντων καὶ τῶν τοῦ δήμου προστατῶν , διεπράξατο ὁ πατὴρ παρὰ τοῦ Ἀγησιπόλιδος ἀσφάλειαν αὐτοῖς γενέσθαι ἀπαλλαττομένοις ἐκ τῆς πόλεως , ἑξήκοντα οὖσι .
Now the partisans of Argos and the leaders of the popular party expected that they would be put to death, but the father of Agesipolis obtained from him the promise that safety should be granted them as they departed from the city, being sixty in number.


5.2.6
2018
καὶ ἀμφοτέρωθεν μὲν τῆς ὁδοῦ ἀρξάμενοι ἀπὸ τῶν πυλῶν ἔχοντες τὰ δόρατα οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἕστασαν , θεώμενοι τοὺς ἐξιόντας .
So on both sides of the road, beginning at the city gates, stood the Lacedaemonians with their spears, watching those who were coming out.


5.2.6
2019
καὶ μισοῦντες αὐτοὺς ὅμως ἀπείχοντο αὐτῶν ῥᾷον ἢ οἱ βέλτιστοι τῶν Μαντινέων .
And although they hated them, nevertheless they kept their hands off them more easily than did the Mantineans belonging to the aristocratic party.


5.2.6
2020
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν εἰρήσθω μέγα τεκμήριον πειθαρχίας .
Let this, then, stand recorded as a striking example of good discipline.


5.2.7
2021
ἐκ δὲ τούτου καθῃρέθη μὲν τὸ τεῖχος , διῳκίσθη δ’ ἡ Μαντίνεια τετραχῇ , καθάπερ τὸ ἀρχαῖον ᾤκουν .
After this the wall was torn down and Mantinea was divided into four separate villages, just as the people had dwelt in ancient times.


5.2.7
2022
καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἤχθοντο , ὅτι τὰς μὲν ὑπαρχούσας οἰκίας ἔδει καθαιρεῖν , ἄλλας δὲ οἰκοδομεῖν ·
And at first they were displeased, because they were compelled to tear down the houses which they had and to build others;


5.2.7
2023
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ ἔχοντες τὰς οὐσίας ἐγγύτερον μὲν ᾤκουν τῶν χωρίων ὄντων αὐτοῖς περὶ τὰς κώμας , ἀριστοκρατίᾳ δ’ ἐχρῶντο , ἀπηλλαγμένοι δ’ ἦσαν τῶν βαρέων δημαγωγῶν , ἥδοντο τοῖς πεπραγμένοις .
but the owners of the landed property, since they not only dwelt nearer to their estates, which were round about the villages, but also enjoyed an aristocratic government and were rid of the troublesome demagogues, were pleased with what had been done.


5.2.7
2024
καὶ ἔπεμπον μὲν αὐτοῖς οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὐ καθ’ ἕν , ἀλλὰ κατὰ κώμην ἑκάστην ξεναγόν .
And the Lacedaemonians sent mustering officers to them, not singly, but one for each village.


5.2.7
2025
συνεστρατεύοντο δ’ ἐκ τῶν κωμῶν πολὺ προθυμότερον ἢ ὅτε ἐδημοκρατοῦντο .
Moreover, they came from their villages for service in the Lacedaemonian army far more zealously than when they were under a democratic government.


5.2.7
2026
καὶ τὰ μὲν δὴ περὶ Μαντινείας οὕτω διεπέπρακτο , σοφωτέρων γενομένων ταύτῃ γε τῶν ἀνθρώπων τὸ μὴ διὰ τειχῶν ποταμὸν ποιεῖσθαι .
Thus ended the affair of the Mantineans, whereby men were made wiser in this point at least  —  not to let a river run through city walls.


5.2.8
2027
οἱ δ’ ἐκ Φλειοῦντος φεύγοντες αἰσθανόμενοι τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἐπισκοποῦντας τῶν συμμάχων ὁποῖοί τινες ἕκαστοι ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ αὐτοῖς ἐγεγένηντο , καιρὸν ἡγησάμενοι , ἐπορεύθησαν εἰς Λακεδαίμονα καὶ ἐδίδασκον ὡς ἕως μὲν σφεῖς οἴκοι ἦσαν , ἐδέχετό τε ἡ πόλις τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους εἰς τὸ τεῖχος καὶ συνεστρατεύοντο ὅποι ἡγοῖντο ·
And now the exiles from Phlius, as they observed that the Lacedaemonians were investigating to see what sort of friends their several allies had proved to be to them during the war, thinking that it was an opportune time, proceeded to Lacedaemon and set forth that so long as they were at home in Phlius, the city had received the Lacedaemonians within its walls, and its people had gone with them on their campaigns wherever they led the way;


5.2.8
2028
ἐπεὶ δὲ σφᾶς αὐτοὺς ἐξέβαλον , ὡς ἕπεσθαι μὲν οὐδαμοῦ ἐθέλοιεν , μόνους δὲ πάντων ἀνθρώπων Λακεδαιμονίους οὐ δέχοιντο εἴσω τῶν πυλῶν .
but that after the Phliasians had driven them into exile, they had declined to follow anywhere, and had refused to receive the Lacedaemonians  —  and them alone of all men  —  within their gates.


5.2.9
2029
ἀκούσασιν οὖν ταῦτα τοῖς ἐφόροις ἄξιον ἔδοξεν ἐπιστροφῆς εἶναι .
When the ephors heard these things, they decided that the matter deserved attention.


5.2.9
2030
καὶ πέμψαντες πρὸς τὴν τῶν Φλειασίων πόλιν ἔλεγον ὡς φίλοι μὲν οἱ φυγάδες τῇ Λακεδαιμονίων πόλει εἶεν , ἀδικοῦντες δ’ οὐδὲν φεύγοιεν .
Accordingly they sent to the city of the Phliasians and said that the exiles were friends of the Lacedaemonian state and had been exiled for no wrong-doing.


5.2.9
2031
ἀξιοῦν δ’ ἔφασαν μὴ ὑπ’ ἀνάγκης , ἀλλὰ παρ’ ἑκόντων διαπράξασθαι κατελθεῖν αὐτούς .
They said further that they deemed it proper to effect their return from banishment, not by compulsion, but by voluntary consent of the Phliasians.


5.2.9
2032
ἃ δὴ ἀκούσαντες οἱ Φλειάσιοι ἔδεισαν μὴ εἰ στρατεύσαιντο ἐπ’ αὐτούς , τῶν ἔνδοθεν παρείησάν τινες αὐτοὺς εἰς τὴν πόλιν .
Upon hearing this the Phliasians conceived the fear that if the Lacedaemonians made an expedition against them, some of the people within the walls would let them into the city.


5.2.9
2033
καὶ γὰρ συγγενεῖς πολλοὶ ἔνδον ἦσαν τῶν φευγόντων καὶ ἄλλως εὐμενεῖς , καὶ οἷα δὴ ἐν ταῖς πλείσταις πόλεσι νεωτέρων τινὲς ἐπιθυμοῦντες πραγμάτων κατάγειν ἐβούλοντο τὴν φυγήν .
For not only were there many kinsmen of the exiles in the city, and people who were friendly to them for other reasons, but also, as is indeed usual in most cities, some desired a change of government and therefore wanted to bring back the exiles.


5.2.10
2034
τοιαῦτα μὲν δὴ φοβηθέντες , ἐψηφίσαντο καταδέχεσθαι τοὺς φυγάδας , καὶ ἐκείνοις μὲν ἀποδοῦναι τὰ ἐμφανῆ κτήματα , τοὺς δὲ τὰ ἐκείνων πριαμένους ἐκ δημοσίου τὴν τιμὴν ἀπολαβεῖν ·
On account, then, of such fears, the Phliasians voted to take back the exiles and to restore to them their undisputed property, those who had purchased such property to recover the price of it from the public treasury;


5.2.10
2035
εἰ δέ τι ἀμφίλογον πρὸς ἀλλήλους γίγνοιτο , δίκῃ διακριθῆναι .
and if any dispute should arise in any case between these purchasers and the exiles, it was to be settled by legal process.


5.2.10
2036
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν αὖ περὶ τῶν Φλειασίων φυγάδων ἐν ἐκείνῳ τῷ χρόνῳ ἐπέπρακτο .
Thus ended, in its turn, this incident of the Phliasian exiles at that time.


5.2.11
2037
ἐξ Ἀκάνθου δὲ καὶ Ἀπολλωνίας , αἵπερ μέγισται τῶν περὶ Ὄλυνθον πόλεων , πρέσβεις ἀφίκοντο εἰς Λακεδαίμονα .
Then there came ambassadors to Lacedaemon from Acanthus and Apollonia, which are the largest of the cities in the neighbourhood of Olynthus.


5.2.11
2038
ἀκούσαντες δ’ οἱ ἔφοροι ὧν ἕνεκα ἧκον , προσήγαγον αὐτοὺς πρός τε τὴν ἐκκλησίαν καὶ τοὺς συμμάχους .
And when the ephors heard with what object they had come, they brought them before the Lacedaemonian assembly and the allies.


5.2.12
2039
ἔνθα δὴ Κλειγένης Ἀκάνθιος ἔλεξεν ·
Thereupon Cleigenes of Acanthus spoke as follows:


5.2.12
2040
ὦ ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοί τε καὶ σύμμαχοι , οἰόμεθα λανθάνειν ὑμᾶς πρᾶγμα μέγα φυόμενον ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι .
Men of Lacedaemon and of the allied states, we think you are unaware that a great danger is springing up in Greece.


5.2.12
2041
ὅτι μὲν γὰρ τῶν ἐπὶ Θρᾴκης μεγίστη πόλις Ὄλυνθος σχεδὸν πάντες ἐπίστασθε .
To be sure, almost all of you know that Olynthus is the largest of the cities on the coast of Thrace.


5.2.12
2042
οὗτοι τῶν πόλεων προσηγάγοντο ἐφ’ ᾧτε νόμοις τοῖς αὐτοῖς χρῆσθαι καὶ συμπολιτεύειν , ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ τῶν μειζόνων προσέλαβόν τινας .
These Olynthians, in the first place, attached to themselves some of the cities with the provision that all should live under the same laws and be fellow-citizens, and then they took over some of the larger cities also.


5.2.12
2043
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἐπεχείρησαν καὶ τὰς τῆς Μακεδονίας πόλεις ἐλευθεροῦν ἀπὸ Ἀμύντου τοῦ Μακεδόνων βασιλέως .
After this they undertook, further, to free the cities of Macedonia from Amyntas, king of the Macedonians.


5.2.13
2044
ἐπεὶ δὲ εἰσήκουσαν αἱ ἐγγύτατα αὐτῶν , ταχὺ καὶ ἐπὶ τὰς πόρρω καὶ μείζους ἐπορεύοντο ·
And when the nearest of them gave their allegiance, they speedily proceeded against those which were farther away and larger;


5.2.13
2045
καὶ κατελίπομεν ἡμεῖς ἔχοντας ἤδη ἄλλας τε πολλὰς καὶ Πέλλαν , ἥπερ μεγίστη τῶν ἐν Μακεδονίᾳ πόλεων ·
and we left them already in possession of a great number of Macedonian cities, including especially Pella, which is the largest of the cities in Macedonia.


5.2.13
2046
καὶ Ἀμύνταν δὲ ᾐσθανόμεθα ἀποχωροῦντά τε ἐκ τῶν πόλεων καὶ ὅσον οὐκ ἐκπεπτωκότα ἤδη ἐκ πάσης Μακεδονίας .
We also had information that Amyntas was withdrawing from his cities and had already been all but driven out of all Macedonia.


5.2.13
2047
πέμψαντες δὲ καὶ πρὸς ἡμᾶς καὶ πρὸς Ἀπολλωνιάτας οἱ Ὀλύνθιοι προεῖπον ἡμῖν ὅτι εἰ μὴ παρεσόμεθα συστρατευσόμενοι , ἐκεῖνοι ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς ἴοιεν .
The Olynthians, furthermore, sent to us and to the Apollonians and announced to us that if we did not present ourselves to join them in their campaigns, they would come against us.


5.2.14
2048
ἡμεῖς δέ , ὦ ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , βουλόμεθα μὲν τοῖς πατρίοις νόμοις χρῆσθαι καὶ αὐτοπολῖται εἶναι ·
As for ourselves, however, men of Lacedaemon, we desire to live under the laws of our fathers and to be citizens of our own city;


5.2.14
2049
εἰ μέντοι μὴ βοηθήσει τις , ἀνάγκη καὶ ἡμῖν μετ’ ἐκείνων γίγνεσθαι .
but unless some one shall come to our aid, it will be necessary for us also to be united with them.


5.2.14
2050
καίτοι νῦν γ’ ἤδη αὐτοῖς εἰσὶν ὁπλῖται μὲν οὐκ ἐλάττους ὀκτακοσίων , πελτασταὶ δὲ πολὺ πλείους ἢ τοσοῦτοι ·
And yet at this moment they already have not less than eight hundred hoplites and far more than that number of peltasts;


5.2.14
2051
ἱππεῖς γε μέντοι , ἐὰν καὶ ἡμεῖς μετ’ αὐτῶν γενώμεθα , ἔσονται πλείους ἢ χίλιοι .
while as for horsemen, if we also become united with them, they will have more than one thousand.


5.2.15
2052
κατελίπομεν δὲ καὶ Ἀθηναίων καὶ Βοιωτῶν πρέσβεις ἤδη αὐτόθι .
Again, we left ambassadors both of the Athenians and of the Boeotians already there.


5.2.15
2053
ἠκούομεν δὲ ὡς καὶ αὐτοῖς Ὀλυνθίοις ἐψηφισμένον εἴη συμπέμπειν πρέσβεις εἰς ταύτας τὰς πόλεις περὶ συμμαχίας .
And we heard reports that the Olynthians on their side had voted to send ambassadors with them to these states in regard to the matter of an alliance.


5.2.15
2054
καίτοι εἰ τοσαύτη δύναμις προσγενήσεται τῇ τε Ἀθηναίων καὶ Θηβαίων ἰσχύι , ὁρᾶτε , ἔφη , ὅπως μὴ οὐκέτι εὐμεταχείριστα ἔσται ἐκεῖνα ὑμῖν .
Now if so great a power is to be added to the present strength of the Athenians and Thebans, take care, he said, lest you find that situation no longer easy to handle.


5.2.15
2055
ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ Ποτείδαιαν ἔχουσιν ἐπὶ τῷ ἰσθμῷ τῆς Παλλήνης οὖσαν , νομίζετε καὶ τὰς ἐντὸς ταύτης πόλεις ὑπηκόους ἔσεσθαι αὐτῶν .
Furthermore, since the Olynthians are in possession of Potidaea, which is on the isthmus of Pallene, be sure that the cities included within Pallene will also be subject to them.


5.2.15
2056
τεκμήριον δ’ ἔτι ἔστω ὑμῖν καὶ τοῦτο ὅτι ἰσχυρῶς αὗται αἱ πόλεις πεφόβηνται ·
And let this fact also be a further evidence to you that these cities have come to fear the Olynthians mightily


5.2.15
2057
μάλιστα γὰρ μισοῦσαι τοὺς Ὀλυνθίους ὅμως οὐκ ἐτόλμησαν μεθ’ ἡμῶν πρεσβείας πέμπειν διδαξούσας ταῦτα .
that although they feel the utmost hatred toward the Olynthians, nevertheless they did not dare to send ambassadors with us to set forth these things.


5.2.16
2058
ἐννοήσατε δὲ καὶ τόδε , πῶς εἰκὸς ὑμᾶς τῆς μὲν Βοιωτίας ἐπιμεληθῆναι ὅπως μὴ καθ’ ἓν εἴη , πολὺ δὲ μείζονος ἁθροιζομένης δυνάμεως ἀμελῆσαι , καὶ ταύτης οὐ κατὰ γῆν μόνον , ἀλλὰ καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν ἰσχυρᾶς γιγνομένης .
You should consider this question also, how you can consistently, after having taken care in the case of Boeotia to prevent its being united, nevertheless disregard the gathering of a much greater power, and what is more, a power which is becoming strong not by land only, but also by sea.


5.2.16
2059
τί γὰρ δὴ καὶ ἐμποδών , ὅπου ξύλα μὲν ναυπηγήσιμα ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ χώρᾳ ἐστί , χρημάτων δὲ πρόσοδοι ἐκ πολλῶν μὲν λιμένων , ἐκ πολλῶν δ’ ἐμπορίων , πολυανθρωπία γε μὴν διὰ τὴν πολυσιτίαν ὑπάρχει ;
For what indeed is there to hinder such expansion, seeing that the country itself possesses ship-timber and has revenues from many ports and many trading-places, and likewise an abundant population on account of the abundance of food?


5.2.17
2060
ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ γείτονές γ’ εἰσὶν αὐτοῖς Θρᾷκες οἱ ἀβασίλευτοι , οἳ θεραπεύουσι μὲν καὶ νῦν ἤδη τοὺς Ὀλυνθίους ·
And further, mark you, they have for neighbours those Thracians who are under no king.


5.2.17
2061
εἰ δὲ ὑπ’ ἐκείνοις ἔσονται , πολλὴ καὶ αὕτη δύναμις προσγένοιτ’ ἂν αὐτοῖς .
They even now are paying court to the Olynthians; and if they should come under their sway, this also would be a great power added to the Olynthians.


5.2.17
2062
τούτων γε μὴν ἀκολουθούντων καὶ τὰ ἐν τῷ Παγγαίῳ χρύσεια χεῖρα ἂν αὐτοῖς ἤδη ὀρέγοι .
Then, if the Thracians were their followers, straightway the gold mines of Mount Pangaeum also would beckon to them.


5.2.17
2063
καὶ τούτων ἡμεῖς οὐδὲν λέγομεν ὅ τι οὐ καὶ ἐν τῷ τῶν Ὀλυνθίων δήμῳ μυριόλεκτόν ἐστι .
And there is not one of these things which we say which is not also said thousands of times among the people of Olynthus.


5.2.18
2064
τό γε μὴν φρόνημα αὐτῶν τί ἄν τις λέγοι ;
As for their pride, how could one describe it?


5.2.18
2065
καὶ γὰρ ὁ θεὸς ἴσως ἐποίησεν ἅμα τῷ δύνασθαι καὶ τὰ φρονήματα αὔξεσθαι τῶν ἀνθρώπων .
For the deity, perhaps, has so ordered it that men’s pride should increase with their power.


5.2.18
2066
ἡμεῖς μὲν οὖν , ὦ ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοί τε καὶ σύμμαχοι , ἐξαγγέλλομεν ὅτι οὕτω τ- ἐκεῖ ἔχει ·
We, then, men of Lacedaemon and of the allied states, report that such are the conditions there;


5.2.18
2067
ὑμεῖς δὲ βουλεύεσθε , εἰ δοκεῖ ἄξια ἐπιμελείας εἶναι .
it is for you to deliberate as to whether they seem to deserve attention.


5.2.18
2068
δεῖ γε μὴν ὑμᾶς καὶ τόδε εἰδέναι , ὡς ἣν εἰρήκαμεν δύναμιν μεγάλην οὖσαν , οὔπω δυσπάλαιστός ἐστιν .
But you must understand this also, that the power which we have described as great is not yet hard to wrestle with.


5.2.18
2069
αἱ γὰρ ἄκουσαι τῶν πόλεων τῆς πολιτείας κοινωνοῦσαι , αὗται , ἄν τι ἴδωσιν ἀντίπαλον , ταχὺ ἀποστήσονται ·
For such of the cities as share in the citizenship of Olynthus unwillingly, these, I say, will quickly fall away if they see any opposing force presenting itself;


5.2.19
2070
εἰ μέντοι συγκλεισθήσονται ταῖς τε ἐπιγαμίαις καὶ ἐγκτήσεσι παρ’ ἀλλήλοις , ἃς ἐψηφισμένοι εἰσί , καὶ γνώσονται ὅτι μετὰ τῶν κρατούντων ἕπεσθαι κερδαλέον ἐστίν , ὥσπερ Ἀρκάδες , ὅταν μεθ’ ὑμῶν ἴωσι , τά τε αὑτῶν σῴζουσι καὶ τὰ ἀλλότρια ἁρπάζουσιν , ἴσως οὐκέθ’ ὁμοίως εὔλυτα ἔσται .
if, however, they once become closely connected by reciprocal rights of intermarriage and of property, which have already been voted, and find that it is profitable to be on the side of the conqueror  —  even as the Arcadians when they go with you keep their own possessions safe and plunder those of others  —  then, it may be, this confederacy will no longer be so easy to break up.


5.2.20
2071
λεχθέντων δὲ τούτων ἐδίδοσαν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τοῖς συμμάχοις λόγον καὶ ἐκέλευον συμβουλεύειν ὅ τι γιγνώσκει τις ἄριστον τῇ Πελοποννήσῳ τε καὶ τοῖς συμμάχοις .
When these things had been said, the Lacedaemonians gave their allies permission to speak and bade them advise whatever course anyone of them deemed best both for Peloponnesus and for the allies.


5.2.20
2072
ἐκ τούτου μέντοι πολλοὶ μὲν συνηγόρευον στρατιὰν ποιεῖν , μάλιστα δὲ οἱ βουλόμενοι χαρίζεσθαι τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις , καὶ ἔδοξε πέμπειν τὸ εἰς τοὺς μυρίους σύνταγμα ἑκάστην πόλιν .
Thereupon many, especially those who desired to gratify the Lacedaemonians, advocated raising an army, and it was decided that each state should send its proportionate contingent for an army of ten thousand.


5.2.21
2073
λόγοι δὲ ἐγένοντο ἀργύριόν τε ἀντ’ ἀνδρῶν ἐξεῖναι διδόναι τῇ βουλομένῃ τῶν πόλεων , τριώβολον Αἰγιναῖον κατὰ ἄνδρα , ἱππέας τε εἴ τις παρέχοι , ἀντὶ τεττάρων ὁπλιτῶν τὸν μισθὸν τῷ ἱππεῖ δίδοσθαι ·
Proposals were also made that any state which so desired should be allowed to give money instead of men, three Aeginetan obols per day for each man, while if any state normally furnished horsemen, pay equal to that of four hoplites should be given for each horseman;


5.2.22
2074
εἰ δέ τις τῶν πόλεων ἐκλίποι τὴν στρατιάν , ἐξεῖναι Λακεδαιμονίοις ἐπιζημιοῦν στατῆρι κατὰ τὸν ἄνδρα τῆς ἡμέρας .
and if any one of the states should fail to send its contingent to the army, the Lacedaemonians were to be permitted to fine such state a stater per day for each man.


5.2.23
2075
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταῦτα ἔδοξεν , ἀναστάντες οἱ Ἀκάνθιοι πάλιν ἐδίδασκον ὡς ταῦτα καλὰ μὲν εἴη τὰ ψηφίσματα , οὐ μέντοι δυνατὰ ταχὺ περανθῆναι .
When these things had been decided upon, the Acanthians rose again and declared that while these measures were excellent, it nevertheless was not possible for them to be speedily carried out.


5.2.23
2076
βέλτιον οὖν ἔφασαν εἶναι , ἐν ᾧ αὕτη ἡ παρασκευὴ ἁθροίζοιτο , ὡς τάχιστα ἄνδρα ἐξελθεῖν ἄρχοντα καὶ δύναμιν ἐκ Λακεδαίμονός τε , ὅση ἂν ταχὺ ἐξέλθοι , καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἄλλων πόλεων ·
They said it was better, therefore, that while this expedition was gathering, a commander should set out with all possible speed with a force from Lacedaemon, of such size as could take the field quickly, and likewise from the other states;


5.2.23
2077
τούτου γὰρ γενομένου τάς τε οὔπω προσκεχωρηκυίας πόλεις στῆναι ἂν καὶ τὰς βεβιασμένας ἧττον ἂν συμμαχεῖν .
for if this were done, the cities which had not yet gone over to the Olynthians would take no step in that direction, and those which had been coerced would be less likely to continue in alliance with them.


5.2.24
2078
δοξάντων δὲ καὶ τούτων , ἐκπέμπουσιν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι Εὐδαμίδαν , καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ νεοδαμώδεις τε καὶ τῶν περιοίκων καὶ τῶν Σκιριτῶν ἄνδρας ὡς δισχιλίους .
This plan also was adopted, and the Lacedaemonians sent out Eudamidas, and with him emancipated Helots and men of the Perioeci and the Sciritans to the total number of about two thousand.


5.2.24
2079
ὁ μέντοι Εὐδαμίδας ἐξιὼν Φοιβίδαν τὸν ἀδελφὸν ἐδεήθη τῶν ἐφόρων τοὺς ὑπολειπομένους τῶν ἑαυτῷ προστεταγμένων ἁθροίσαντα μετιέναι ·
Now Eudamidas on setting out requested the ephors to allow Phoebidas, his brother, to gather together all the troops assigned to him which were left behind and to follow after him;


5.2.24
2080
αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπεὶ ἀφίκετο εἰς τὰ ἐπὶ Θρᾴκης χωρία , ταῖς μὲν δεομέναις τῶν πόλεων φρουροὺς ἔπεμπε , Ποτείδαιαν δὲ καὶ προσέλαβεν ἑκοῦσαν , σύμμαχον ἤδη ἐκείνων οὖσαν , καὶ ἐντεῦθεν ὁρμώμενος ἐπολέμει ὥσπερ εἰκὸς τὸν ἐλάττω ἔχοντα δύναμιν .
as for himself, when he reached the region of the Thracian coast, he sent garrisons to such of the cities as desired them, gained possession of Potidaea, which came over voluntarily, although it was already an ally of the Olynthians, and making that city his base of operations, carried on war in the way one naturally would who had an inferior force.


5.2.25
2081
ὁ δὲ Φοιβίδας , ἐπεὶ ἡθροίσθησαν αὐτῷ οἱ ὑπολειφθέντες τοῦ Εὐδαμίδου , λαβὼν αὐτοὺς ἐπορεύετο .
Then Phoebidas, after he had gathered together the remaining portion of Eudamidas’ troops, took them under his command and began his march.


5.2.25
2082
ὡς δ’ ἐγένοντο ἐν Θήβαις , ἐστρατοπεδεύσαντο μὲν ἔξω τῆς πόλεως περὶ τὸ γυμνάσιον ·
And when they arrived in the district of Thebes, they encamped outside the city, near the gymnasium.


5.2.25
2083
στασιαζόντων δὲ τῶν Θηβαίων , πολεμαρχοῦντες μὲν ἐτύγχανον Ἰσμηνίας τε καὶ Λεοντιάδης , διάφοροι δὲ ὄντες ἀλλήλοις καὶ ἀρχηγὸς ἑκάτερος τῶν ἑταιριῶν .
Now since the Thebans were divided by factions, it chanced that Ismenias and Leontiades, who were polemarchs, were at variance with one another, and both of them leaders of their respective political clubs.


5.2.25
2084
ὁ μὲν οὖν Ἰσμηνίας διὰ τὸ μῖσος τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων οὐδὲ ἐπλησίαζε τῷ Φοιβίδᾳ .
Hence Ismenias, on account of his hatred for the Lacedaemonians, did not even go near Phoebidas.


5.2.25
2085
ὁ μέντοι Λεοντιάδης ἄλλως τε ἐθεράπευεν αὐτόν , καὶ ἐπεὶ εἰσῳκειώθη , ἔλεγε τάδε ·
Leontiades, however, not only paid court to him in various ways, but when he had become intimate with him, spoke to him as follows:


5.2.26
2086
ἔξεστί σοι , ὦ Φοιβίδα , τῇδε τῇ ἡμέρᾳ μέγιστα ἀγαθὰ τῇ σεαυτοῦ πατρίδι ὑπουργῆσαι ·
Phoebidas, it is within your power this day to render the greatest service to your fatherland;


5.2.26
2087
ἐὰν γὰρ ἀκολουθήσῃς ἐμοὶ σὺν τοῖς ὁπλίταις , εἰσάξω σε ἐγὼ εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν .
for if you will follow me with your hoplites, I will lead you into the Acropolis.


5.2.26
2088
τούτου δὲ γενομένου νόμιζε τὰς Θήβας παντάπασιν ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίοις καὶ ἡμῖν τοῖς ὑμετέροις φίλοις ἔσεσθαι .
And this once accomplished, be sure that Thebes will be completely under the control of the Lacedaemonians and of us who are your friends;


5.2.27
2089
καίτοι νῦν μέν , ὡς ὁρᾷς , ἀποκεκήρυκται μηδένα μετὰ σοῦ στρατεύειν Θηβαίων ἐπ’ Ὀλυνθίους ·
whereas now, as you see, proclamation has been made forbidding any Theban from serving with you against the Olynthians.


5.2.27
2090
ἐὰν δέ γε σὺ ταῦτα μεθ’ ἡμῶν πράξῃς , εὐθύς σοι ἡμεῖς πολλοὺς μὲν ὁπλίτας , πολλοὺς δὲ ἱππέας συμπέμψομεν ·
But if you join with us and accomplish this deed, we will at once send with you many hoplites and many horsemen;


5.2.27
2091
ὥστε πολλῇ δυνάμει βοηθήσεις τῷ ἀδελφῷ , καὶ ἐν ᾧ μέλλει ἐκεῖνος Ὄλυνθον καταστρέφεσθαι , σὺ κατεστραμμένος ἔσει Θήβας , πολὺ μείζω πόλιν Ὀλύνθου .
so that you will go to the aid of your brother with a large force, and while he is getting ready to subdue Olynthus, you will already have subdued Thebes, a far greater state than Olynthus.


5.2.28
2092
ἀκούσας δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Φοιβίδας ἀνεκουφίσθη ·
When Phoebidas heard this, he was filled with buoyant hopes;


5.2.28
2093
καὶ γὰρ ἦν τοῦ λαμπρόν τι ποιῆσαι πολὺ μᾶλλον ἢ τοῦ ζῆν ἐραστής , οὐ μέντοι λογιστικός γε οὐδὲ πάνυ φρόνιμος ἐδόκει εἶναι .
for he was a man with a far greater passion for performing some brilliant achievement than for life itself, although, on the other hand, he was not regarded as one who weighed his acts or had much practical wisdom.


5.2.28
2094
ἐπεὶ δὲ ὡμολόγησε ταῦτα , προορμῆσαι μὲν αὐτὸν ἐκέλευσεν , ὥσπερ συνεσκευασμένος ἦν εἰς τὸ ἀπιέναι ·
And when he had agreed to the plan, Leontiades directed him to set out on his way, prepared as he was to depart from Thebes.


5.2.28
2095
ἡνίκα δ’ ἂν ᾖ καιρός , πρὸς σὲ ἥξω ἐγώ , ἔφη ὁ Λεοντιάδης , καὶ αὐτός σοι ἡγήσομαι .
And when the proper time arrives, said Leontiades, I will return to you and act as your guide myself.


5.2.29
2096
ἐν ᾧ δὲ ἡ μὲν βουλὴ ἐκάθητο ἐν τῇ ἐν ἀγορᾷ στοᾷ διὰ τὸ τὰς γυναῖκας ἐν τῇ Καδμείᾳ θεσμοφοριάζειν , θέρους δὲ ὄντος καὶ μεσημβρίας πλείστη ἦν ἐρημία ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς , ἐν τούτῳ προσελάσας ἐφ’ ἵππου ὁ Λεοντιάδης ἀποστρέφει τε τὸν Φοιβίδαν καὶ ἡγεῖται εὐθὺς εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν .
Accordingly, while the senate was in session in the portico in the market-place, for the reason that the women were celebrating the festival of the Thesmophoria in the Cadmea, and while, inasmuch as it was summer and midday, the streets were entirely deserted, at this time Leontiades rode out on horseback to overtake Phoebidas, turned him back, and led him straight to the Acropolis.


5.2.29
2097
καταστήσας δ’ ἐκεῖ τὸν Φοιβίδαν καὶ τοὺς μετ’ αὐτοῦ καὶ παραδοὺς τὴν βαλανάγραν αὐτῷ τῶν πυλῶν , καὶ εἰπὼν μηδένα παριέναι εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ὅντινα μὴ αὐτὸς κελεύοι , εὐθὺς ἐπορεύετο πρὸς τὴν βουλήν .
And after establishing Phoebidas there with the troops under his command, giving him the key to the gates, and telling him to let no one into the Acropolis unless he himself so ordered, he proceeded at once to the meeting of the senate.


5.2.30
2098
ἐλθὼν δὲ εἶπε τάδε ·
When he arrived there, he spoke as follows:


5.2.30
2099
ὅτι μέν , ὦ ἄνδρες , Λακεδαιμόνιοι κατέχουσι τὴν ἀκρόπολιν , μηδὲν ἀθυμεῖτε ·
Be not at all despondent, gentlemen, because the Lacedaemonians are in possession of the Acropolis;


5.2.30
2100
οὐδενὶ γάρ φασι πολέμιοι ἥκειν , ὅστις μὴ πολέμου ἐρᾷ ·
for they say that they have not come as enemies to anyone who is not eager for war;


5.2.30
2101
ἐγὼ δὲ τοῦ νόμου κελεύοντος ἐξεῖναι πολεμάρχῳ λαβεῖν , εἴ τις δοκεῖ ἄξια θανάτου ποιεῖν , λαμβάνω τουτονὶ Ἰσμηνίαν , ὡς πολεμοποιοῦντα .
as for me, since the law directs that a polemarch shall have power to arrest any man who seems to be doing deeds which deserve death, I arrest Ismenias here, as an instigator of war.


5.2.30
2102
καὶ ὑμεῖς δὲ οἱ λοχαγοί τε καὶ οἱ μετὰ τούτων τεταγμένοι , ἀνίστασθε , καὶ λαβόντες ἀπαγάγετε τοῦτον ἔνθα εἴρηται .
Therefore do you captains, and you who have been detailed with them, arise, seize this man, and lead him away to the place where you have been directed to take him.


5.2.31
2103
οἱ μὲν δὴ εἰδότες τὸ πρᾶγμα παρῆσάν τε καὶ ἐπείθοντο καὶ συνελάμβανον ·
Now those who knew of the plan were of course present, obeyed the order, and seized Ismenias;


5.2.31
2104
τῶν δὲ μὴ εἰδότων , ἐναντίων δὲ ὄντων τοῖς περὶ Λεοντιάδην , οἱ μὲν ἔφευγον εὐθὺς ἔξω τῆς πόλεως , δείσαντες μὴ ἀποθάνοιεν ·
but of those who did not know about it and were opponents of Leontiades and his party, some fled at once out of the city, fearing that they would be put to death;


5.2.31
2105
οἱ δὲ καὶ οἴκαδε πρῶτον ἀπεχώρησαν ·
others withdrew at first to their homes;


5.2.31
2106
ἐπεὶ δὲ εἰργμένον τὸν Ἰσμηνίαν ᾔσθοντο οἱ ἐν τῇ Καδμείᾳ , τότε δὴ ἀπεχώρησαν εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας οἱ τ- αὐτὰ γιγνώσκοντες Ἀνδροκλείδᾳ τε καὶ Ἰσμηνίᾳ μάλιστα τριακόσιοι .
when they learned, however, that Ismenias was imprisoned in the Cadmea, then all those who held the same views as Androcleidas and Ismenias retired to Athens, to the number of about three hundred.


5.2.32
2107
ὡς δὲ ταῦτ’ ἐπέπρακτο , πολέμαρχον μὲν ἀντὶ Ἰσμηνίου ἄλλον εἵλοντο , ὁ δὲ Λεοντιάδης εὐθὺς εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἐπορεύετο .
When these things had been accomplished, they chose another polemarch in place of Ismenias, but Leontiades proceeded at once to Lacedaemon.


5.2.32
2108
ηὗρε δ’ ἐκεῖ τοὺς μὲν ἐφόρους καὶ τῆς πόλεως τὸ πλῆθος χαλεπῶς ἔχοντας τῷ Φοιβίδᾳ , ὅτι οὐ προσταχθέντα ὑπὸ τῆς πόλεως ταῦτα ἐπεπράχει ·
There he found the ephors and the majority of the citizens angry with Phoebidas because he had acted in this matter without authorization by the state.


5.2.32
2109
ὁ μέντοι Ἀγησίλαος ἔλεγεν ὅτι εἰ μὲν βλαβερὰ τῇ Λακεδαίμονι πεπραχὼς εἴη , δίκαιος εἴη ζημιοῦσθαι , εἰ δὲ ἀγαθά , ἀρχαῖον εἶναι νόμιμον ἐξεῖναι τὰ τοιαῦτα αὐτοσχεδιάζειν .
Agesilaus, however, said that if what he had done was harmful to Lacedaemon, he deserved to be punished, but if advantageous, it was a time-honoured custom that a commander, in such cases, had the right to act on his own initiative.


5.2.32
2110
αὐτὸ οὖν τοῦτ’ , ἔφη , προσήκει σκοπεῖν , πότερον ἀγαθὰ ἢ κακά ἐστι τὰ πεπραγμένα .
It is precisely this point, therefore, which should be considered, whether what has been done is good or bad for the state.


5.2.33
2111
ἔπειτα μέντοι ὁ Λεοντιάδης ἐλθὼν εἰς τοὺς ἐκκλήτους ἔλεγε τοιάδε ·
Then Leontiades came before the assembly and spoke as follows:


5.2.33
2112
ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ὡς μὲν πολεμικῶς εἶχον ὑμῖν οἱ Θηβαῖοι , πρὶν τὰ νῦν πεπραγμένα γενέσθαι , καὶ ὑμεῖς ἐλέγετε ·
Men of Lacedaemon, that the Thebans were hostile to you before what has now been done came to pass, you were wont to say yourselves;


5.2.33
2113
ἑωρᾶτε γὰρ ἀεὶ τούτους τοῖς μὲν ὑμετέροις δυσμενέσι φιλικῶς ἔχοντας , τοῖς δ’ ὑμετέροις φίλοις ἐχθροὺς ὄντας .
for you saw that they were always friendly to your enemies, and enemies to your friends.


5.2.33
2114
οὐκ ἐπὶ μὲν τὸν ἐν Πειραιεῖ δῆμον , πολεμιώτατον ὄντα ὑμῖν , οὐκ ἠθέλησαν συστρατεύειν , Φωκεῦσι δέ , ὅτι ὑμᾶς εὐμενεῖς ὄντας ἑώρων , ἐπεστράτευον ;
Did they not refuse to join you in the campaign against the Athenian commons in Piraeus, who were bitter enemies of yours, and did they not, on the other hand, march against the Phocians because they saw that you were well disposed towards them?


5.2.34
2115
ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ πρὸς Ὀλυνθίους εἰδότες ὑμᾶς πόλεμον ἐκφέροντας συμμαχίαν ἐποιοῦντο , καὶ ὑμεῖς γε τότε μὲν ἀεὶ προσείχετε τὸν νοῦν πότε ἀκούσεσθε βιαζομένους αὐτοὺς τὴν Βοιωτίαν ὑφ’ αὑτοῖς εἶναι ·
Again, knowing that you were making war upon the Olynthians, they undertook to conclude an alliance with them, and you in those past days were always uneasily watching for the time when you should hear that they were forcing Boeotia to be under their sway;


5.2.34
2116
νῦν δ’ ἐπεὶ τάδε πέπρακται , οὐδὲν ὑμᾶς δεῖ Θηβαίους φοβεῖσθαι ·
but now that this stroke has been accomplished, there is no need of your fearing the Thebans;


5.2.34
2117
ἀλλ’ ἀρκέσει ὑμῖν μικρὰ σκυτάλη ὥστ’ ἐκεῖθεν πάντα ὑπηρετεῖσθαι ὅσων ἂν δέησθε , ἐὰν ὥσπερ ἡμεῖς ὑμῶν , οὕτω καὶ ὑμεῖς ἡμῶν ἐπιμελῆσθε .
on the contrary, a brief message from you will suffice to secure from that quarter all the support that you may desire, provided only you show as much concern for us as we have shown for you.


5.2.35
2118
ἀκούουσι ταῦτα τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ἔδοξε τήν τε ἀκρόπολιν ὥσπερ κατείληπτο φυλάττειν καὶ Ἰσμηνίᾳ κρίσιν ποιῆσαι .
Upon hearing these words the Lacedaemonians resolved, so long as the Acropolis had been seized, to keep it garrisoned, and to bring Ismenias to trial.


5.2.35
2119
ἐκ δὲ τούτου πέμπουσι δικαστὰς Λακεδαιμονίων μὲν τρεῖς , ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν συμμαχίδων ἕνα ἀφ’ ἑκάστης καὶ μικρᾶς καὶ μεγάλης πόλεως .
Accordingly they sent out as judges three Lacedaemonians and one from each of the allied states, whether small or great.


5.2.35
2120
ἐπεὶ δὲ συνεκαθίζετο τὸ δικαστήριον , τότε δὴ κατηγορεῖτο τοῦ Ἰσμηνίου καὶ ὡς βαρβαρίζοι καὶ ὡς ξένος τῷ Πέρσῃ ἐπ’ οὐδενὶ ἀγαθῷ τῆς Ἑλλάδος γεγενημένος εἴη καὶ ὡς τῶν παρὰ βασιλέως χρημάτων μετειληφὼς εἴη καὶ ὅτι τῆς ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι ταραχῆς πάσης ἐκεῖνός τε καὶ Ἀνδροκλείδας αἰτιώτατοι εἶεν .
And it was not until the court held its sitting that charges were brought against Ismenias,  —  that he was a supporter of the barbarians, that he had become a guest-friend of the Persian satrap to the hurt of Greece, that he had received a share of the money which came from the King, and that he and Androcleidas were chiefly responsible for all the trouble and disorder in Greece.


5.2.36
2121
ὁ δὲ ἀπελογεῖτο μὲν πρὸς πάντα ταῦτα , οὐ μέντοι ἔπειθέ γε τὸ μὴ οὐ μεγαλοπράγμων τε καὶ κακοπράγμων εἶναι .
To all these charges he did indeed make a defence, but he failed to persuade the court that he was not a man of great and evil undertakings.


5.2.36
2122
καὶ ἐκεῖνος μὲν κατεψηφίσθη καὶ ἀποθνῄσκει ·
So he was pronounced guilty and put to death;


5.2.36
2123
οἱ δὲ περὶ Λεοντιάδην εἶχόν τε τὴν πόλιν καὶ τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ἔτι πλείω ὑπηρέτουν ἢ προσετάττετο αὐτοῖς .
as for Leontiades and his party, they held possession of Thebes and gave the Lacedaemonians their support in even more than was demanded of them.


5.2.37
2124
τούτων δὴ πεπραγμένων οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι πολὺ προθυμότερον τὴν εἰς τὴν Ὄλυνθον στρατιὰν συναπέστελλον .
After these things had been accomplished, the Lacedaemonians with much more spirit set about dispatching the joint army to Olynthus.


5.2.37
2125
καὶ ἐκπέμπουσι Τελευτίαν μὲν ἁρμοστήν , τὴν δ’ εἰς τοὺς μυρίους σύνταξιν αὐτοί τε ἅπαντας συνεξέπεμπον , καὶ εἰς τὰς συμμαχίδας πόλεις σκυτάλας διέπεμπον , κελεύοντες ἀκολουθεῖν Τελευτίᾳ κατὰ τὸ δόγμα τῶν συμμάχων .
They sent out Teleutias as governor, and not only sent with him their own full contingent of the total ten thousand men, but also transmitted official dispatches to the various allied states, directing them to follow Teleutias in accordance with the resolution of the allies.


5.2.37
2126
καὶ οἵ τε ἄλλοι προθύμως τῷ Τελευτίᾳ ὑπηρέτουν , καὶ γὰρ οὐκ ἀχάριστος ἐδόκει εἶναι τοῖς ὑπουργοῦσί τι , καὶ ἡ τῶν Θηβαίων δὲ πόλις , ἅτε καὶ Ἀγησιλάου ὄντος αὐτῷ ἀδελφοῦ , προθύμως συνέπεμψε καὶ ὁπλίτας καὶ ἱππέας .
And all the states gave their hearty support to Teleutias,  —  for he was regarded as a man not ungrateful to those who performed any service,  —  while the Theban state in particular, inasmuch as he was a brother of Agesilaus, eagerly sent with him both hoplites and horsemen.


5.2.38
2127
ὁ δὲ σπεύδων μὲν οὐ μάλα ἐπορεύετο , ἐπιμελόμενος δὲ τοῦ τε μὴ ἀδικῶν τοὺς φίλους πορεύεσθαι καὶ τοῦ ὡς πλείστην δύναμιν ἁθροίζειν .
Now he prosecuted his march with no great speed, his concern being rather to make the journey without doing any harm to the friends of his state and to collect as large a force as possible.


5.2.38
2128
προέπεμπε δὲ καὶ πρὸς Ἀμύνταν , καὶ ἠξίου αὐτὸν καὶ ξένους μισθοῦσθαι καὶ τοῖς πλησίον βασιλεῦσι χρήματα διδόναι , ὡς συμμάχους εἶναι , εἴπερ βούλοιτο τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀναλαβεῖν .
He also sent word on ahead to Amyntas and asked him not only to hire mercenaries, but likewise to give money to the kings in his neighbourhood, that they might become allies, if he really wanted to recover his dominions.


5.2.38
2129
ἔπεμπε δὲ καὶ πρὸς Δέρδαν τὸν Ἐλιμίας ἄρχοντα , διδάσκων ὅτι οἱ Ὀλύνθιοι κατεστραμμένοι τὴν μείζω δύναμιν Μακεδονίας εἶεν , καὶ οὐκ ἀνήσουσι τὴν ἐλάττω , εἰ μή τις αὐτοὺς παύσει τῆς ὕβρεως .
Furthermore, he sent to Derdas, the ruler of Elimia, pointing out to him that the Olynthians had already subdued the greater power, Macedonia, and would not let the lesser escape unless someone put a stop to their presumption.


5.2.39
2130
ταῦτα δὲ ποιῶν , μάλα πολλὴν ἔχων στρατιὰν ἀφίκετο εἰς τὴν ἑαυτῶν συμμαχίδα .
As a result of his doing these things he had a very large army when he arrived in the territory of his state’s allies.


5.2.39
2131
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἦλθεν εἰς τὴν Ποτείδαιαν , ἐκεῖθεν συνταξάμενος ἐπορεύετο εἰς τὴν πολεμίαν .
And when he had come to Potidaea, he proceeded from there with his army in order of battle into the enemy’s country.


5.2.39
2132
καὶ πρὸς μὲν τὴν πόλιν ἰὼν οὔτ’ ἔκαεν οὔτ’ ἔκοπτε , νομίζων , εἴ τι ποιήσειε τούτων , ἐμποδὼν ἂν αὐτῷ πάντα γίγνεσθαι καὶ προσιόντι καὶ ἀπιόντι ·
Now on his way toward the city of Olynthus he neither burned nor cut down, believing that anything of this sort he should do would prove so many obstacles in his way both as he approached and as he withdrew;


5.2.39
2133
ὁπότε δὲ ἀναχωροίη ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως , τότε ὀρθῶς ἔχειν κόπτοντα τὰ δένδρα ἐμποδὼν καταβάλλειν , εἴ τις ὄπισθεν ἐπίοι .
but he believed that when he should retire from the city it would be right to cut down the trees and put them in the way of anyone who might come against him from behind.


5.2.40
2134
ὡς δὲ ἀπεῖχεν ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως οὐδὲ δέκα στάδια , ἔθετο τὰ ὅπλα , εὐώνυμον μὲν αὐτὸς ἔχων , οὕτω γὰρ συνέβαινεν αὐτῷ κατὰ τὰς πύλας ἰέναι ᾗ ἐξῇσαν οἱ πολέμιοι , ἡ δ’ ἄλλη φάλαγξ τῶν συμμάχων ἀπετέτατο πρὸς τὸ δεξιόν .
And when he was distant from the city not so much as ten stadia, he halted the army, himself occupying the left wing,  —  for in this way it fell to him to advance in the direction of the gate where the enemy issued forth,  —  while the rest of the phalanx, made up of the allies, stretched away to the right.


5.2.40
2135
καὶ τῶν ἱππέων δὲ τοὺς μὲν Λάκωνας καὶ τοὺς Θηβαίους καὶ ὅσοι τῶν Μακεδόνων παρῆσαν ἐπὶ τῷ δεξιῷ ἐτάξατο , παρὰ δὲ αὑτῷ εἶχε Δέρδαν τε καὶ τοὺς ἐκείνου ἱππέας ὡς εἰς τετρακοσίους διά τε τὸ ἄγασθαι τοῦτο τὸ ἱππικὸν καὶ διὰ τὸ θεραπεύειν τὸν Δέρδαν , ὡς ἡδόμενος παρείη .
As for the horsemen, he likewise posted upon the right wing the Laconians, the Thebans, and all the Macedonians who were present, while he kept by his own side Derdas and his horsemen, numbering about four hundred, not only because he admired this troop, but also to do honour to Derdas, so that he should be glad he had joined the expedition.


5.2.41
2136
ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ οἱ πολέμιοι ἐλθόντες ἀντιπαρετάξαντο ὑπὸ τῷ τείχει , συσπειραθέντες αὐτῶν οἱ ἱππεῖς ἐμβάλλουσι κατὰ τοὺς Λάκωνας καὶ Βοιωτούς .
But when the enemy came and formed in opposing line beneath the city wall, their horsemen, massing themselves together, charged upon the Laconians and Boeotians.


5.2.41
2137
καὶ Πολύχαρμόν τε τὸν Λακεδαιμόνιον ἵππαρχον καταβάλλουσιν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἵππου καὶ κείμενον πάμπολλα κατέτρωσαν , καὶ ἄλλους ἀπέκτειναν , καὶ τέλος τρέπονται τὸ ἐπὶ τῷ δεξιῷ κέρατι ἱππικόν .
And they not only struck down from his horse Polycharmus, the Lacedaemonian commander of cavalry, and inflicted very many wounds upon him as he lay, but they also killed others, and finally put to flight the cavalry upon the right wing.


5.2.41
2138
φευγόντων δὲ τῶν ἱππέων ἐνέκλινε καὶ τὸ ἐχόμενον πεζὸν αὐτῶν , καὶ ὅλον δ’ ἂν ἐκινδύνευσεν ἡττηθῆναι τὸ στράτευμα , εἰ μὴ Δέρδας ἔχων τὸ ἑαυτοῦ ἱππικὸν εὐθὺς πρὸς τὰς πύλας τῶν Ὀλυνθίων ἤλασεν .
Now as the cavalry fled, the infantry next them also gave way, and the whole army, indeed, would have been in danger of being defeated had not Derdas with his troop dashed straight for the gates of the Olynthians.


5.2.41
2139
ἐπῄει δὲ καὶ ὁ Τελευτίας σὺν τοῖς περὶ ἑαυτὸν ἐν τάξει .
And Teleutias also advanced to the attack with his troops in battle order.


5.2.42
2140
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ᾔσθοντο οἱ Ὀλύνθιοι ἱππεῖς , δείσαντες μὴ ἀποκλεισθεῖεν τῶν πυλῶν , ἀναστρέψαντες ἀπεχώρουν πολλῇ σπουδῇ .
When the Olynthian horsemen perceived these movements, being seized with fear lest they should be shut out from the gates, they turned about and retired in great haste.


5.2.42
2141
ἔνθα δὴ ὁ Δέρδας παρελαύνοντας παμπόλλους ἱππέας αὐτῶν ἀπέκτεινεν .
Then Derdas killed very many of them as they rode past him.


5.2.42
2142
ἀπεχώρησαν δὲ καὶ οἱ πεζοὶ τῶν Ὀλυνθίων εἰς τὴν πόλιν ·
And the foot-soldiers of the Olynthians also retired into the city;


5.2.42
2143
οὐ μέντοι πολλοὶ αὐτῶν ἀπέθανον , ἅτε ἐγγὺς τοῦ τείχους ὄντος .
but not many of them were killed, because the wall was near.


5.2.43
2144
ἐπεὶ δὲ τροπαῖόν τε ἐστάθη καὶ ἡ νίκη αὕτη τῷ Τελευτίᾳ ἐγεγένητο , ἀπιὼν δὴ ἔκοπτε τὰ δένδρα .
And when a trophy had been set up and this victory had fallen to Teleutias, then as he withdrew he proceeded to cut down the trees.


5.2.43
2145
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν στρατευσάμενος τὸ θέρος διῆκε καὶ τὸ Μακεδονικὸν στράτευμα καὶ τὸ τοῦ Δέρδα ·
Now after continuing the campaign through this summer he dismissed both the Macedonian army and the horsemen of Derdas;


5.2.43
2146
πολλάκις μέντοι καὶ οἱ Ὀλύνθιοι καταθέοντες εἰς τὰς τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων συμμαχίδας πόλεις ἐλεηλάτουν καὶ ἄνδρας ἀπεκτίννυον .
the Olynthians, however, on their side made frequent raids into the territory of the cities allied with the Lacedaemonians, and carried off booty and killed men.


5.3.1
2147
ἅμα δὲ τῷ ἦρι ὑποφαινομένῳ οἱ μὲν Ὀλύνθιοι ἱππεῖς ὄντες ὡς ἑξακόσιοι κατεδεδραμήκεσαν εἰς τὴν Ἀπολλωνίαν ἅμα μεσημβρίᾳ καὶ διεσπαρμένοι ἐλεηλάτουν ·
At the very beginning of the following spring the Olynthian horsemen, about six hundred in number, had made a raid into the district of Apollonia at midday and were scattered about pillaging;


5.3.1
2148
ὁ δὲ Δέρδας ἐτύγχανε ταύτῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἀφιγμένος μετὰ τῶν ἱππέων τῶν ἑαυτοῦ καὶ ἀριστοποιούμενος ἐν τῇ Ἀπολλωνίᾳ .
and it chanced that on that day Derdas had arrived with his horsemen and was breakfasting at Apollonia.


5.3.1
2149
ὡς δ’ εἶδε τὴν καταδρομήν , ἡσυχίαν τε εἶχε , τούς θ’ ἵππους ἐπεσκευασμένους καὶ τοὺς ἀμβάτας ἐξωπλισμένους ἔχων .
When he saw the raid, he kept quiet, keeping his horses saddled and bridled and their riders fully armed.


5.3.1
2150
ἐπειδὴ δὲ καταφρονητικῶς οἱ Ὀλύνθιοι καὶ εἰς τὸ προάστιον καὶ εἰς αὐτὰς τὰς πύλας ἤλαυνον , τότε δὴ συντεταγμένους ἔχων ἐξελαύνει .
But when the Olynthians came riding disdainfully not only into the suburbs, but to the very gates of the city, then he dashed forth with his men in good order.


5.3.2
2151
οἱ δὲ ὡς εἶδον , εἰς φυγὴν ὥρμησαν .
And upon seeing him the enemy took to flight.


5.3.2
2152
ὁ δ’ ὡς ἅπαξ ἐτρέψατο , οὐκ ἀνῆκεν ἐνενήκοντα στάδια διώκων καὶ ἀποκτιννύς , ἕως πρὸς αὐτὸ κατεδίωξε τῶν Ὀλυνθίων τὸ τεῖχος .
But he, when once he had turned them to flight, did not stop pursuing and killing for ninety stadia, until he had chased them to the very wall of the Olynthians.


5.3.2
2153
καὶ ἐλέγετο ὁ Δέρδας ἀποκτεῖναι ἐν τούτῳ τῷ ἔργῳ περὶ ὀγδοήκοντα ἱππέας .
It was said, indeed, that Derdas killed in this action about eighty horsemen.


5.3.2
2154
καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου τειχήρεις τε μᾶλλον ἦσαν οἱ πολέμιοι καὶ τῆς χώρας ὀλίγην παντελῶς εἰργάζοντο .
And from this day forth the enemy stayed more closely within their wall and cultivated only an exceedingly small portion of their land.


5.3.3
2155
προϊόντος δὲ τοῦ χρόνου , καὶ τοῦ Τελευτίου ἐστρατευμένου πρὸς τὴν τῶν Ὀλυνθίων πόλιν , ὡς εἴ τι δένδρον ὑπόλοιπον εἴη ἤ τι εἰργασμένον τοῖς πολεμίοις , φθείροι , ἐξελθόντες οἱ Ὀλύνθιοι ἱππεῖς ἥσυχοι πορευόμενοι διέβησαν τὸν παρὰ τὴν πόλιν ῥέοντα ποταμόν , καὶ ἐπορεύοντο ἡσυχῇ πρὸς τὸ ἐναντίον στράτευμα .
As time went on, however, and Teleutias had led his army up to the city of the Olynthians in order to destroy whatever tree was left or whatever field had been cultivated by the enemy, the Olynthian horsemen issued forth and, proceeding quietly, crossed the river which flows by the city and held on their way towards the opposing army.


5.3.3
2156
ὡς δ’ εἶδεν ὁ Τελευτίας , ἀγανακτήσας τῇ τόλμῃ αὐτῶν εὐθὺς Τλημονίδαν τὸν τῶν πελταστῶν ἄρχοντα δρόμῳ φέρεσθαι εἰς αὐτοὺς ἐκέλευσεν .
And when Teleutias saw them, being irritated at their audacity, he immediately ordered Tlemonidas, the leader of the peltasts, to charge against them on the run.


5.3.4
2157
οἱ δὲ Ὀλύνθιοι ὡς εἶδον προθέοντας τοὺς πελταστάς , ἀναστρέψαντες ἀπεχώρουν ἥσυχοι , καὶ διέβησαν πάλιν τὸν ποταμόν .
Now when the Olynthians saw the peltasts sallying forth, they turned about, retired quietly, and crossed the river again.


5.3.4
2158
οἱ δ’ ἠκολούθουν μάλα θρασέως , καὶ ὡς φεύγουσι διώξοντες ἐπιδιέβαινον .
The peltasts, on the other hand, followed very rashly and, with the thought that the enemy were in flight, pushed into the river after them to pursue them.


5.3.4
2159
ἔνθα δὴ οἱ Ὀλύνθιοι ἱππεῖς , ἡνίκα ἔτι εὐχείρωτοι αὐτοῖς ἐδόκουν εἶναι οἱ διαβεβηκότες , ἀναστρέψαντες ἐμβάλλουσιν αὐτοῖς , καὶ αὐτόν τε ἀπέκτειναν τὸν Τλημονίδαν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων πλείους ἢ ἑκατόν .
Thereupon the Olynthian horsemen, at the moment when they thought that those who had crossed the river were still easy to handle, turned about and dashed upon them, and they not only killed Tlemonidas himself, but more than one hundred of the others.


5.3.5
2160
ὁ δὲ Τελευτίας ὡς εἶδε τὸ γιγνόμενον , ὀργισθεὶς ἀναλαβὼν τὰ ὅπλα ἦγε μὲν ταχὺ τοὺς ὁπλίτας , διώκειν δὲ καὶ τοὺς πελταστὰς ἐκέλευε καὶ τοὺς ἱππέας καὶ μὴ ἀνιέναι .
But Teleutias, filled with anger when he saw what was going on, snatched up his arms and led the hoplites swiftly forward, while he ordered the peltasts and the horsemen to pursue and not stop pursuing.


5.3.5
2161
πολλοὶ μὲν οὖν δὴ καὶ ἄλλοι τοῦ καιροῦ ἐγγυτέρω τείχους διώξαντες κακῶς ἀπεχώρησαν , καὶ ἐκεῖνοι δ’ ἐπεὶ ἀπὸ τῶν πύργων ἐβάλλοντο , ἀποχωρεῖν τε ἠναγκάζοντο τεθορυβημένως καὶ προφυλάττεσθαι τὰ βέλη .
Now in many other instances those who have pressed a pursuit too close to a city’s wall have come off badly in their retreat, and in this case also, when the men were showered with missiles from the towers, they were forced to retire in disorder and to guard themselves against the missiles.


5.3.6
2162
ἐν τούτῳ δὴ οἱ Ὀλύνθιοι ἐπεξελαύνουσι μὲν τοὺς ἱππέας , ἐβοήθουν δὲ καὶ οἱ πελτασταί ·
At this moment the Olynthians sent out their horsemen to the attack, and the peltasts also came to their support;


5.3.6
2163
τέλος δὲ καὶ οἱ ὁπλῖται ἐπεξέθεον , καὶ τεταραγμένῃ τῇ φάλαγγι προσπίπτουσι .
finally, their hoplites likewise rushed out, and fell upon the Lacedaemonian phalanx when it was already in confusion.


5.3.6
2164
καὶ ὁ μὲν Τελευτίας ἐνταῦθα μαχόμενος ἀποθνῄσκει .
There Teleutias fell fighting.


5.3.6
2165
τούτου δὲ γενομένου εὐθὺς καὶ οἱ ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν ἐνέκλιναν , καὶ οὐδεὶς ἔτι ἵστατο , ἀλλὰ πάντες ἔφευγον , οἱ μὲν ἐπὶ Σπαρτώλου , οἱ δὲ ἐπὶ Ἀκάνθου , οἱ δὲ εἰς Ἀπολλωνίαν , οἱ πλεῖστοι δὲ εἰς Ποτείδαιαν .
And when this happened, the troops about him at once gave way, and in fact no one stood his ground any longer, but all fled, some for Spartolus, others for Acanthus, others to Apollonia, and the majority to Potidaea.


5.3.6
2166
ὡς δ’ ἄλλος ἄλλῃ ἔφευγον , οὕτω καὶ οἱ πολέμιοι ἄλλος ἄλλοσε διώκοντες παμπλήθεις ἀπέκτειναν ἀνθρώπους καὶ ὅτιπερ ὄφελος ἦν τοῦ στρατεύματος .
As they fled in all directions, so likewise the enemy pursued in all directions, and killed a vast number of men, including the most serviceable part of the army.


5.3.7
2167
ἐκ μέντοι γε τῶν τοιούτων παθῶν ὡς ἐγώ φημι ἀνθρώπους παιδεύεσθαι μάλιστα μὲν οὖν ὡς οὐδ’ οἰκέτας χρὴ ὀργῇ κολάζειν ·
From such disasters, however, I hold that men are taught the lesson, chiefly, indeed, that they ought not to chastise anyone, even slaves, in anger  —


5.3.7
2168
πολλάκις γὰρ καὶ δεσπόται ὀργιζόμενοι μείζω κακὰ ἔπαθον ἢ ἐποίησαν ·
for masters in anger have often suffered greater harm than they have inflicted;


5.3.7
2169
ἀτὰρ ἀντιπάλοις τὸ μετ’ ὀργῆς ἀλλὰ μὴ γνώμῃ προσφέρεσθαι ὅλον ἁμάρτημα .
but especially that, in dealing with enemies, to attack under the influence of anger and not with judgment is an absolute mistake.


5.3.7
2170
ἡ μὲν γὰρ ὀργὴ ἀπρονόητον , ἡ δὲ γνώμη σκοπεῖ οὐδὲν ἧττον μή τι πάθῃ ἢ ὅπως βλάψῃ τι τοὺς πολεμίους .
For anger is a thing which does not look ahead, while judgment aims no less to escape harm than to inflict it upon the enemy.


5.3.8
2171
τοῖς δ’ οὖν Λακεδαιμονίοις , ἐπεὶ ἤκουσαν τὸ πρᾶγμα , βουλευομένοις ἐδόκει οὐ φαύλην πεμπτέον δύναμιν εἶναι , ὅπως τό τε φρόνημα τῶν νενικηκότων κατασβεσθείη καὶ μὴ μάτην τὰ πεποιημένα γένοιτο .
When the Lacedaemonians heard of this affair, it seemed to them as they deliberated that they must send out no small force, in order that the pride of the victors might be quenched and that the efforts already made might not go for nothing.


5.3.8
2172
οὕτω δὲ γνόντες ἡγεμόνα μὲν Ἀγησίπολιν τὸν βασιλέα ἐκπέμπουσι , μετ’ αὐτοῦ δὲ ὥσπερ Ἀγησιλάου εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν τριάκοντα Σπαρτιατῶν .
Having come to this conclusion, they sent out Agesipolis, the king, as commander, and with him, as they had sent with Agesilaus to Asia, thirty Spartiatae.


5.3.9
2173
πολλοὶ δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ τῶν περιοίκων ἐθελονταὶ καλοὶ κ- ἀγαθοὶ ἠκολούθουν , καὶ ξένοι τῶν τροφίμων καλουμένων , καὶ νόθοι τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν , μάλα εὐειδεῖς τε καὶ τῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει καλῶν οὐκ ἄπειροι .
There followed with him also many of the Perioeci as volunteers, men of the better class, and aliens who belonged to the so-called foster-children of Sparta, and sons of the Spartiatae by Helot women, exceedingly fine-looking men, not without experience of the good gifts of the state.


5.3.9
2174
συνεστρατεύοντο δὲ καὶ ἐκ τῶν συμμαχίδων πόλεων ἐθελονταί , καὶ Θετταλῶν γε ἱππεῖς , γνωσθῆναι τῷ Ἀγησιπόλιδι βουλόμενοι , καὶ Ἀμύντας δὲ καὶ Δέρδας ἔτι προθυμότερον ἢ πρόσθεν .
Furthermore, volunteers from the allied states joined the expedition and horsemen of the Thessalians, who wished to become known to Agesipolis, while Amyntas and Derdas took part with even greater eagerness than before.


5.3.9
2175
Ἀγησίπολις μὲν δὴ ταῦτα πράττων ἐπορεύετο ἐπὶ τὴν Ὄλυνθον .
Under these circumstances it was that Agesipolis marched against Olynthus.


5.3.10
2176
ἡ δὲ τῶν Φλειασίων πόλις , ἐπαινεθεῖσα μὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἀγησιπόλιδος ὅτι πολλὰ καὶ ταχέως αὐτῷ χρήματα εἰς τὴν στρατιὰν ἔδοσαν , νομίζουσα δ’ ἔξω ὄντος Ἀγησιπόλιδος οὐκ ἂν ἐξελθεῖν ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς Ἀγησίλαον , οὐδ’ ἂν γενέσθαι ὥστε ἅμα ἀμφοτέρους τοὺς βασιλέας ἔξω Σπάρτης εἶναι , θρασέως οὐδὲν τῶν δικαίων ἐποίουν τοῖς κατεληλυθόσιν .
Meanwhile the people of Phlius, partly because they had been commended by Agesipolis for giving him a large sum of money for his campaign and giving it speedily, partly because they thought that with Agesipolis abroad Agesilaus would not take the field against them, and that it never would happen that both the kings would be outside of Sparta at the same time, boldly refused to grant any of their rights to the restored exiles.


5.3.10
2177
οἱ μὲν γὰρ δὴ φυγάδες ἠξίουν τὰ ἀμφίλογα ἐν ἴσῳ δικαστηρίῳ κρίνεσθαι ·
On the one hand, the exiles demanded that the questions in dispute should be brought to trial before an impartial court.


5.3.10
2178
οἱ δὲ ἠνάγκαζον ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ πόλει διαδικάζεσθαι .
They, however, compelled them to plead their cases in the city itself.


5.3.10
2179
λεγόντων δὲ τῶν κατεληλυθότων καὶ τίς αὕτη δίκη εἴη ὅπου αὐτοὶ οἱ ἀδικοῦντες δικάζοιεν , οὐδὲν εἰσήκουον .
And when the exiles asked what manner of trial that was, where the wrong-doers were themselves the judges, they refused to listen to them at all.


5.3.11
2180
ἐκ τούτου μέντοι ἔρχονται εἰς Λακεδαίμονα οἱ κατελθόντες κατηγορήσοντες τῆς πόλεως , καὶ ἄλλοι δὲ τῶν οἴκοθεν συνηκολούθουν , λέγοντες ὅτι πολλοῖς καὶ τῶν πολιτῶν οὐ δοκοῖεν δίκαια πάσχειν .
Consequently these restored exiles came to Lacedaemon to present their charge against the state, and other people from home came with them, saying that many even among the citizens thought that the exiles were not receiving just treatment.


5.3.11
2181
ἀγανακτήσασα δὲ τούτοις τῶν Φλειασίων ἡ πόλις ἐζημίωσε πάντας ὅσοι μὴ πεμπούσης τῆς πόλεως ἦλθον εἰς Λακεδαίμονα .
But the state of Phlius, angered at this, fined all who had gone to Lacedaemon without being sent by the state.


5.3.12
2182
οἱ δὲ ζημιωθέντες οἴκαδε μὲν ὤκνουν ἀπιέναι , μένοντες δ’ ἐδίδασκον ὡς οὗτοι μὲν εἴησαν οἱ βιαζόμενοι ταῦτα , οἵπερ σφᾶς τε ἐξέβαλον καὶ Λακεδαιμονίους ἀπέκλεισαν , οὗτοι δὲ οἱ πριάμενοί τε τὰ σφέτερα καὶ βιαζόμενοι μὴ ἀποδιδόναι , οὗτοι δὲ καὶ νῦν διαπεπραγμένοι εἰσὶ ζημιωθῆναι σφᾶς αὐτοὺς εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἐλθόντας , ὅπως τοῦ λοιποῦ μηδεὶς τολμῴη ἰέναι δηλώσων τὰ ἐν τῇ πόλει γιγνόμενα .
And those who were thus fined were afraid to return home, but remained and protested to the Lacedaemonians, saying:  These men, who are engaged in these high-handed proceedings, are the men who have banished us and have also excluded you from their city, these are the men who are buying our property and resorting to high-handed measures so as not to give it back, and now these same men have contrived to have a fine inflicted upon us for coming here, so that in the future no one shall dare to come for the purpose of revealing what is going on in the state.


5.3.13
2183
τῷ δ’ ὄντι ὑβρίζειν δοκούντων τῶν Φλειασίων φρουρὰν φαίνουσιν ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς οἱ ἔφοροι .
And since it seemed that the Phliasians were really acting insolently, the ephors called out the ban against them.


5.3.13
2184
ἦν δὲ οὐ τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ ἀχθομένῳ ταῦτα ·
Now this was not displeasing to Agesilaus;


5.3.13
2185
καὶ γὰρ τῷ μὲν πατρὶ αὐτοῦ Ἀρχιδάμῳ ξένοι ἦσαν οἱ περὶ Ποδάνεμον , καὶ τότε τῶν κατεληλυθότων ἦσαν ·
for the followers of Podanemus had been friends of his father Archidamus and were at this time among the restored exiles;


5.3.13
2186
αὐτῷ δὲ οἱ ἀμφὶ Προκλέα τὸν Ἱππονίκου .
while the partisans of Procles, the son of Hipponicus, were friends of his own.


5.3.14
2187
ὡς δὲ τῶν διαβατηρίων γενομένων οὐκ ἔμελλεν , ἀλλ’ ἐπορεύετο , πολλαὶ πρεσβεῖαι ἀπήντων καὶ χρήματα ἐδίδοσαν , ὥστε μὴ ἐμβάλλειν .
And when, after the sacrifices at the frontier had proved favourable, he made no delay but proceeded on the march, many embassies met him and offered him money not to invade the country of Phlius.


5.3.14
2188
ὁ δὲ ἀπεκρίνατο ὅτι οὐχ ἵνα ἀδικοίη στρατεύοιτο , ἀλλ’ ὅπως τοῖς ἀδικουμένοις βοηθήσειεν .
He replied, however, that he was not taking the field to do wrong, but to aid those who were suffering wrong.


5.3.15
2189
οἱ δὲ τελευτῶντες πάντα ἔφασκον ποιήσειν , ἐδέοντό τε μὴ ἐμβάλλειν .
Finally they said that they would do anything whatsoever, and begged him not to invade.


5.3.15
2190
ὁ δὲ πάλιν ἔλεγεν ὡς οὐκ ἂν πιστεύσειε λόγοις , καὶ γὰρ τὸ πρότερον ψεύσασθαι αὐτούς , ἀλλ’ ἔργου τινὸς πιστοῦ δεῖν ἔφη .
He answered again that he could not trust to words, for they had proved false to their word in the previous case, but he said there was need of some deed that one could trust.


5.3.15
2191
ἐρωτώμενος δὲ καὶ τί τοῦτ’ ἂν εἴη ;
And when he was asked what manner of deed this would be,


5.3.15
2192
πάλιν ἀπεκρίνατο ·
he replied again:


5.3.15
2193
ὅπερ καὶ πρόσθεν , ἔφη , ποιήσαντες οὐδὲν ὑφ’ ἡμῶν ἠδικήθητε .
The same thing,  said he,  that you did before, and in doing which you suffered no wrong whatever at our hands.


5.3.15
2194
τοῦτο δὲ ἦν τὴν ἀκρόπολιν παραδοῦναι .
By this he meant giving over their Acropolis.


5.3.16
2195
οὐκ ἐθελόντων δὲ αὐτῶν τοῦτο ποιεῖν , ἐνέβαλέ τε καὶ εἰς τὴν χώραν καὶ ταχὺ περιτειχίσας ἐπολιόρκει αὐτούς .
As they refused to do this, he invaded their land and quickly built a wall of circumvallation around the city and besieged them.


5.3.16
2196
πολλῶν δὲ λεγόντων Λακεδαιμονίων ὡς ὀλίγων ἕνεκεν ἀνθρώπων πόλει ἀπεχθάνοιντο πλέον πεντακισχιλίων ἀνδρῶν ·
And when many Lacedaemonians said that merely for the sake of a few individuals they were making themselves hated by a state of more than five thousand men


5.3.16
2197
καὶ γὰρ δὴ ὅπως τοῦτ’ ἔνδηλον εἴη , οἱ Φλειάσιοι ἐν τῷ φανερῷ τοῖς ἔξω ἐκκλησίαζον ·
— for the Phliasians held their assemblies in plain sight of the people outside the city just for the purpose of making the fact of their numbers evident —


5.3.16
2198
ὁ μέντοι Ἀγησίλαος πρὸς τοῦτο ἀντεμηχανήσατο .
Agesilaus devised a scheme to meet this situation.


5.3.17
2199
ὁπότε γὰρ ἐξίοιεν ἢ διὰ φιλίαν ἢ διὰ συγγένειαν τῶν φυγάδων , ἐδίδασκε συσσίτιά τε αὑτῶν κατασκευάζειν καὶ εἰς τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἱκανὸν διδόναι , ὁπόσοι γυμνάζεσθαι ἐθέλοιεν ·
Whenever any Phliasians came out of the city either from friendship or kinship with the exiles, he instructed the latter to form common messes of their own with such of the new-comers as were ready to undertake the army training, and to supply money enough for provisions;


5.3.17
2200
καὶ ὅπλα δὲ ἐκπορίζειν ἅπασι τούτοις διεκελεύετο , καὶ μὴ ὀκνεῖν εἰς ταῦτα χρήματα δανείζεσθαι .
he also urged them to provide arms for all these people and not to hesitate to borrow money for this purpose.


5.3.17
2201
οἱ δὲ ταῦτα ὑπηρετοῦντες ἀπέδειξαν πλείους χιλίων ἀνδρῶν ἄριστα μὲν τὰ σώματα ἔχοντας , εὐτάκτους δὲ καὶ εὐοπλοτάτους ·
The exiles accordingly carried out his injunctions, and showed as a result more than a thousand men in splendid condition of body, well disciplined, and extremely well armed;


5.3.17
2202
ὥστε τελευτῶντες οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἔλεγον ὡς τοιούτων δέοιντο συστρατιωτῶν .
so that the Lacedaemonians finally said that they had need of such fellow-soldiers.


5.3.18
2203
καὶ Ἀγησίλαος μὲν δὴ περὶ ταῦτα ἦν .
Agesilaus, then, was occupied with these things.


5.3.18
2204
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίπολις εὐθύς τε ἐκ τῆς Μακεδονίας προσιὼν ἔθετο πρὸς τῇ πόλει τῶν Ὀλυνθίων τὰ ὅπλα .
As for Agesipolis, he advanced straight from Macedonia and halted near the city of the Olynthians.


5.3.18
2205
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐδεὶς ἀντεξῄει αὐτῷ , τότε τῆς Ὀλυνθίας εἴ τι ὑπόλοιπον ἦν ἐδῄου καὶ εἰς τὰς συμμαχίδας ἰὼν αὐτῶν ἔφθειρε τὸν σῖτον ·
And when no one ventured to come out against him, he then laid waste whatever part of the Olynthian country was left unravaged, and proceeding into the territory of their allied cities, destroyed the corn;


5.3.18
2206
Τορώνην δὲ καὶ προσβαλὼν εἷλε κατὰ κράτος .
but Torone he attacked and captured by storm.


5.3.19
2207
ἐν δὲ τούτοις ὄντα κατὰ θέρους ἀκμὴν καῦμα περιφλεγὲς λαμβάνει αὐτόν .
While he was engaged in these operations, at midsummer a burning fever seized him.


5.3.19
2208
ὡς δὲ πρόσθεν ἑορακότα τὸ ἐν Ἀφύτει τοῦ Διονύσου ἱερὸν ἔρως αὐτὸν τότ’ ἔσχε τῶν τε σκιερῶν σκηνημάτων καὶ τῶν λαμπρῶν καὶ ψυχρῶν ὑδάτων .
And since he had previously seen the sanctuary of Dionysus at Aphytis, a longing took possession of him at this time for its shady resting-places and its clear, cool waters.


5.3.19
2209
ἐκομίσθη μὲν οὖν ἐκεῖσε ἔτι ζῶν , ὅμως μέντοι ἑβδομαῖος ἀφ’ οὗ ἔκαμεν ἔξω τοῦ ἱεροῦ ἐτελεύτησε .
He was therefore carried thither, still living, but, nevertheless, on the seventh day from the time when he fell sick, he came to his end outside the sanctuary.


5.3.19
2210
καὶ ἐκεῖνος μὲν ἐν μέλιτι τεθεὶς καὶ κομισθεὶς οἴκαδε ἔτυχε τῆς βασιλικῆς ταφῆς .
And he was placed in honey and carried home, and received the royal burial.


5.3.20
2211
Ἀγησίλαος δὲ τοῦτο ἀκούσας οὐχ ᾗ τις ἂν ᾤετο ἐφήσθη ὡς ἀντιπάλῳ , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐδάκρυσε καὶ ἐπόθησε τὴν συνουσίαν .
When Agesilaus heard of this, he did not, as one might have expected, rejoice over it, as over the death of an adversary, but he wept, and mourned the loss of his companionship;


5.3.20
2212
συσκηνοῦσι μὲν γὰρ δὴ βασιλεῖς ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ , ὅταν οἴκοι ὦσιν .
for the kings of course lodge together when they are at home.


5.3.20
2213
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίπολις τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ ἱκανὸς μὲν ἦν καὶ ἡβητικῶν καὶ θηρευτικῶν καὶ ἱππικῶν καὶ παιδικῶν λόγων μετέχειν ·
And Agesipolis was a man well fitted to converse with Agesilaus about youthful days, hunting exploits, horses, and love affairs;


5.3.20
2214
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις καὶ ὑπῃδεῖτο αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ συσκηνίᾳ , ὥσπερ εἰκὸς πρεσβύτερον .
besides this he also treated Agesilaus with deference in their association together in their common quarters, as one would naturally treat an elder.


5.3.20
2215
καὶ οἱ μὲν Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀντ’ ἐκείνου Πολυβιάδην ἁρμοστὴν ἐπὶ τὴν Ὄλυνθον ἐκπέμπουσιν .
In the place, then, of Agesipolis the Lacedaemonians sent out Polybiades to Olynthus as governor.


5.3.21
2216
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος ἤδη μὲν ὑπερέβαλε τὸν χρόνον , ὅσου ἐλέγετο ἐν τῇ Φλειοῦντι σῖτος εἶναι ·
Now Agesilaus had already gone beyond the time for which the food-supply in Phlius was said to suffice;


5.3.21
2217
τοσοῦτον γὰρ ἐγκράτεια γαστρὸς διαφέρει ὥστε οἱ Φλειάσιοι τὸν ἥμισυν ψηφισάμενοι σῖτον τελεῖν ἢ πρόσθεν , καὶ ποιοῦντες τοῦτο τὸν διπλάσιον τοῦ εἰκότος χρόνον πολιορκούμενοι διήρκεσαν .
for self-restraint in appetite differs so much from unrestrained indulgence that the Phliasians, by voting to consume half as much food as before and carrying out this decision, held out under siege for twice as long a time as was to have been expected.


5.3.22
2218
καὶ τόλμα δὲ ἀτολμίας ἔσθ’ ὅτε τοσοῦτον διαφέρει ὥστε Δελφίων τις , λαμπρὸς δοκῶν εἶναι , λαβὼν πρὸς αὑτὸν τριακοσίους ἄνδρας Φλειασίων ἱκανὸς μὲν ἦν κωλύειν τοὺς βουλομένους εἰρήνην ποιεῖσθαι , ἱκανὸς δὲ οἷς ἠπίστει εἴρξας φυλάττειν , ἐδύνατο δὲ εἴς τε τὰς φυλακὰς ἀναγκάζειν τὸ πλῆθος ἰέναι καὶ τούτους ἐφοδεύων πιστοὺς παρέχεσθαι .
Furthermore, courage sometimes differs so much from cowardice that a certain Delphion, who was regarded as a brilliant man, taking to himself three hundred of the Phliasians, was able to hold in check those who desired to make peace, was able to shut up and keep under guard those whom he distrusted, and had the power to compel the masses of the people to go to their posts and by putting sentinels over them to keep these people faithful.


5.3.22
2219
πολλάκις δὲ μεθ’ ὧν εἶχε περὶ αὑτὸν καὶ ἐκθέων ἀπέκρουε φύλακας ἄλλοτ’ ἄλλῃ τοῦ περιτετειχισμένου κύκλου .
Frequently also he would sally forth with the three hundred picked men and beat off the troops on guard at one point and another of the wall of circumvallation.


5.3.23
2220
ἐπεὶ μέντοι οἱ ἐπίλεκτοι οὗτοι πάντα τρόπον ζητοῦντες οὐχ ηὕρισκον σῖτον ἐν τῇ πόλει , ἐκ τούτου δὴ πέμψαντες πρὸς τὸν Ἀγησίλαον ἐδέοντο σπείσασθαι πρεσβείαν εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἰοῦσι ·
When, however, these picked men with searching in every way could not find food in the city, thereupon they sent to Agesilaus and asked him to give them safe conduct for going on an embassy to Lacedaemon;


5.3.23
2221
δεδόχθαι γὰρ σφίσιν ἔφασαν ἐπιτρέπειν τοῖς τέλεσι τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων χρήσασθαι τῇ πόλει ὅ τι βούλοιντο .
for they said that they had resolved to leave it to the authorities of the Lacedaemonians to do whatever they would with the city.


5.3.24
2222
ὁ δὲ ὀργισθεὶς ὅτι ἄκυρον αὐτὸν ἐποίουν , πέμψας μὲν πρὸς τοὺς οἴκοι φίλους διεπράξατο ἑαυτῷ ἐπιτραπῆναι τὰ περὶ Φλειοῦντος , ἐσπείσατο δὲ τῇ πρεσβείᾳ .
Agesilaus, however, angered because they treated him as one without authority, sent to his friends at home and arranged that the decision about Phlius should be left to him, but nevertheless he gave safe conduct to the embassy.


5.3.24
2223
φυλακῇ δὲ ἔτι ἰσχυροτέρᾳ ἢ πρότερον ἐφύλαττεν , ἵνα μηδεὶς τῶν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐξίοι .
Then he kept guard with a force even stronger than before, in order that no one of the people in the city might escape.


5.3.24
2224
ὅμως μέντοι ὅ γε Δελφίων καὶ στιγματίας τις μετ’ αὐτοῦ , ὃς πολλὰ ὑφείλετο ὅπλα τῶν πολιορκούντων , ἀπέδρασαν νύκτωρ .
In spite of this, however, Delphion, and with him a branded desperado who had many times stolen away weapons from the besiegers, escaped by night.


5.3.25
2225
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἧκον ἐκ τῆς Λακεδαίμονος ἀπαγγέλλοντες ὅτι ἡ πόλις ἐπιτρέποι Ἀγησιλάῳ διαγνῶναι τὰ ἐν Φλειοῦντι ὅπως αὐτῷ δοκοίη , Ἀγησίλαος δὴ οὕτως ἔγνω , πεντήκοντα μὲν ἄνδρας τῶν κατεληλυθότων , πεντήκοντα δὲ τῶν οἴκοθεν πρῶτον μὲν ἀνακρῖναι ὅντινά τε ζῆν ἐν τῇ πόλει καὶ ὅντινα ἀποθανεῖν δίκαιον εἴη ·
But when messengers arrived from Lacedaemon with word that the state left it to Agesilaus to decide as he thought best upon matters in Phlius, Agesilaus decided in this way — that fifty men from the restored exiles and fifty from the people at home should, in the first place, make inquiry to determine who ought justly to be left alive in the city and who ought to be put to death,


5.3.25
2226
ἔπειτα δὲ νόμους θεῖναι , καθ’ οὓς πολιτεύσοιντο ·
and, secondly, should draw up a constitution under which to conduct the government;


5.3.25
2227
ἕως δ’ ἂν ταῦτα διαπράξωνται , φυλακὴν καὶ μισθὸν τοῖς φρουροῖς ἓξ μηνῶν κατέλιπε .
and until such time as these matters should be settled, he left behind him a garrison and six months’ pay for those who composed it.


5.3.25
2228
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας τοὺς μὲν συμμάχους ἀφῆκε , τὸ δὲ πολιτικὸν οἴκαδε ἀπήγαγε .
After doing all this he dismissed the allies and led his citizen troops back home.


5.3.25
2229
καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Φλειοῦντα οὕτως αὖ ἐπετετέλεστο ἐν ὀκτὼ μησὶ καὶ ἐνιαυτῷ .
And thus the affair of Phlius in its turn came to a conclusion, after a year and eight months.


5.3.26
2230
καὶ ὁ Πολυβιάδης δὲ δὴ παντάπασι κακῶς ἔχοντας λιμῷ τοὺς Ὀλυνθίους , διὰ τὸ μήτ’ ἐκ τῆς γῆς λαμβάνειν μήτε κατὰ θάλατταν εἰσάγεσθαι σῖτον αὐτοῖς , ἠνάγκασε πέμψαι εἰς Λακεδαίμονα περὶ εἰρήνης .
At this time also Polybiades compelled the Olynthians, who were in an exceedingly wretched state from famine, inasmuch as they got no food from their own land and none was brought in to them by sea, to send to Lacedaemon to treat for peace;


5.3.26
2231
οἱ δ’ ἐλθόντες πρέσβεις αὐτοκράτορες συνθήκας ἐποιήσαντο τὸν αὐτὸν μὲν ἐχθρὸν καὶ φίλον Λακεδαιμονίοις νομίζειν , ἀκολουθεῖν δὲ ὅποι ἂν ἡγῶνται καὶ σύμμαχοι εἶναι .
and those who went thither, being ambassadors with full powers, concluded a compact to count the same people enemies and friends as the Lacedaemonians did, to follow wherever they led the way, and to be their allies.


5.3.26
2232
καὶ ὀμόσαντες ταῦτα ἐμμενεῖν οὕτως ἀπῆλθον οἴκαδε .
Then after taking an oath that they would abide by this compact, they went back home.


5.3.27
2233
προκεχωρηκότων δὲ τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ὥστε Θηβαίους μὲν καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους Βοιωτοὺς παντάπασιν ἐπ’ ἐκείνοις εἶναι , Κορινθίους δὲ πιστοτάτους γεγενῆσθαι , Ἀργείους δὲ τεταπεινῶσθαι διὰ τὸ μηδὲν ἔτι ὠφελεῖν αὐτοὺς τῶν μηνῶν τὴν ὑποφοράν , Ἀθηναίους δὲ ἠρημῶσθαι , τῶν δ’ αὖ συμμάχων κεκολασμένων οἳ δυσμενῶς εἶχον αὐτοῖς , παντάπασιν ἤδη καλῶς καὶ ἀσφαλῶς ἡ ἀρχὴ ἐδόκει αὐτοῖς κατεσκευάσθαι .
And now that success had to such an extent attended the efforts of the Lacedaemonians that the Thebans and the rest of the Boeotians were completely in their power, the Corinthians had become absolutely faithful, the Argives had been humbled for the reason that their plea of the sacred months was no longer of any help to them, and the Athenians were left destitute of allies, while on the other hand those among the allies of the Lacedaemonians who had been unfriendly to them had been chastised, it seemed that they had at length established their empire most excellently and securely.


5.4.1
2234
πολλὰ μὲν οὖν ἄν τις ἔχοι καὶ ἄλλα λέγειν καὶ Ἑλληνικὰ καὶ βαρβαρικά , ὡς θεοὶ οὔτε τῶν ἀσεβούντων οὔτε τῶν ἀνόσια ποιούντων ἀμελοῦσι ·
Now one could mention many other incidents, both among Greeks and barbarians, to prove that the gods do not fail to take heed of the wicked or of those who do unrighteous things;


5.4.1
2235
νῦν γε μὴν λέξω τὰ προκείμενα .
but at present I will speak of the case which is before me.


5.4.1
2236
Λακεδαιμόνιοί τε γὰρ οἱ ὀμόσαντες αὐτονόμους ἐάσειν τὰς πόλεις τὴν ἐν Θήβαις ἀκρόπολιν κατασχόντες ὑπ’ αὐτῶν μόνων τῶν ἀδικηθέντων ἐκολάσθησαν πρῶτον οὐδ’ ὑφ’ ἑνὸς τῶν πώποτε ἀνθρώπων κρατηθέντες , τούς τε τῶν πολιτῶν εἰσαγαγόντας εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν αὐτοὺς καὶ βουληθέντας Λακεδαιμονίοις δουλεύειν τὴν πόλιν , ὥστε αὐτοὶ τυραννεῖν , τὴν τούτων ἀρχὴν ἑπτὰ μόνον τῶν φυγόντων ἤρκεσαν καταλῦσαι .
The Lacedaemonians, namely, who had sworn that they would leave the states independent, after seizing possession of the Acropolis of Thebes were punished by the very men, unaided, who had been thus wronged, although before that time they had not been conquered by any single one of all the peoples that ever existed; while as for those among the Theban citizens who had led them into the Acropolis and had wanted the state to be in subjection to the Lacedaemonians in order that they might rule despotically themselves, just seven of the exiles were enough to destroy the government of these men.


5.4.1
2237
ὡς δὲ τοῦτ’ ἐγένετο διηγήσομαι .
How all this came to pass I will proceed to relate.


5.4.2
2238
ἦν τις Φιλλίδας , ὃς ἐγραμμάτευε τοῖς περὶ Ἀρχίαν πολεμάρχοις , καὶ τ- ἄλλα ὑπηρέτει , ὡς ἐδόκει , ἄριστα .
There was a certain Phillidas, who acted as secretary to Archias and his fellow polemarchs and in other ways served them, as it seemed, most excellently.


5.4.2
2239
τούτῳ δ’ ἀφιγμένῳ Ἀθήναζε κατὰ πρᾶξίν τινα καὶ πρόσθεν γνώριμος ὢν Μέλων τῶν Ἀθήναζε πεφευγότων Θηβαίων συγγίγνεται , καὶ διαπυθόμενος μὲν τὰ περὶ Ἀρχίαν τε τὸν πολεμαρχοῦντα καὶ τὴν περὶ Φίλιππον τυραννίδα , γνοὺς δὲ μισοῦντα αὐτὸν ἔτι μᾶλλον αὑτοῦ τὰ οἴκοι , πιστὰ δοὺς καὶ λαβὼν συνέθετο ὡς δεῖ ἕκαστα γίγνεσθαι .
Now this man went to Athens on a matter of business, and there met Melon, one of the Thebans in exile at Athens and a man who had been an acquaintance of his even before this time. Melon, after learning of the doings of the polemarch Archias and the tyrannous rule of Philippus, and finding out that Phillidas hated the conditions that existed at home even more than he himself did, exchanged pledges with him and came to an agreement as to how everything should be managed.


5.4.3
2240
ἐκ δὲ τούτου προσλαβὼν ὁ Μέλων ἓξ τοὺς ἐπιτηδειοτάτους τῶν φευγόντων ξιφίδια ἔχοντας καὶ ἄλλο ὅπλον οὐδέν , ἔρχεται πρῶτον μὲν εἰς τὴν χώραν νυκτός ·
After this Melon took with him six of the fittest men among the exiles, armed with daggers and no other weapon, and in the first place proceeded by night into the territory of Thebes;


5.4.3
2241
ἔπειτα δὲ ἡμερεύσαντες ἔν τινι τόπῳ ἐρήμῳ πρὸς τὰς πύλας ἦλθον , ὡς δὴ ἐξ ἀγροῦ ἀπιόντες , ἡνίκαπερ οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν ἔργων ὀψιαίτατοι .
then after spending the day in a deserted spot they came to the city gates, as if on their way back from the country, at just the time when the last returning labourers came in.


5.4.3
2242
ἐπεὶ δ’ εἰσῆλθον εἰς τὴν πόλιν , διενυκτέρευσαν μὲν ἐκείνην τὴν νύκτα παρὰ Χάρωνί τινι , καὶ τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν δὲ ἡμέραν διημέρευσαν .
When they had entered the city, they spent that night at the house of a certain Charon, and likewise spent the following day there.


5.4.4
2243
ὁ μὲν οὖν Φιλλίδας τά τε ἄλλα ἐπεμελεῖτο τοῖς πολεμάρχοις , ὡς Ἀφροδίσια ἄγουσιν ἐπ’ ἐξόδῳ τῆς ἀρχῆς , καὶ δὴ καὶ γυναῖκας πάλαι ὑπισχνούμενος ἄξειν αὐτοῖς τὰς σεμνοτάτας καὶ καλλίστας τῶν ἐν Θήβαις , τότε ἔφη ἄξειν .
As for Phillidas, since the polemarchs always celebrate a festival of Aphrodite upon the expiration of their term of office, he was making all the arrangements for them, and in particular, having long ago promised to bring them women, and the most stately and beautiful women there were in Thebes, he said he would do so at that time.


5.4.4
2244
οἱ δέ , ἦσαν γὰρ τοιοῦτοι , μάλα ἡδέως προσεδέχοντο νυκτερεύειν .
And they — for they were that sort of men — expected to spend the night very pleasantly.


5.4.5
2245
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐδείπνησάν τε καὶ συμπροθυμουμένου ἐκείνου ταχὺ ἐμεθύσθησαν , πάλαι κελευόντων ἄγειν τὰς ἑταίρας , ἐξελθὼν ἤγαγε τοὺς περὶ Μέλωνα , τρεῖς μὲν στείλας ὡς δεσποίνας , τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους ὡς θεραπαίνας .
Now when they had dined and with his zealous help had quickly become drunk, after they had long urged him to bring in their mistresses he went out and brought Melon and his followers, having dressed up three of them as matrons and the others as their attendants.


5.4.6
2246
κ- ἐκείνους μὲν εἰσήγαγεν εἰς τὸ προταμιεῖον τοῦ πολεμαρχείου , αὐτὸς δ’ εἰσελθὼν εἶπε τοῖς περὶ Ἀρχίαν ὅτι οὐκ ἄν φασιν εἰσελθεῖν αἱ γυναῖκες , εἴ τις τῶν διακόνων ἔνδον ἔσοιτο .
He conducted them all to the anteroom adjoining the treasury of the polemarchs’ building, and then came in himself and told Archias and his colleagues that the women said they would not enter if any of the servants were in the room.


5.4.6
2247
ἔνθεν οἱ μὲν ταχὺ ἐκέλευον πάντας ἐξιέναι , ὁ δὲ Φιλλίδας δοὺς οἶνον εἰς ἑνὸς τῶν διακόνων ἐξέπεμψεν αὐτούς .
At that the polemarchs speedily ordered them all to withdraw, while Phillidas gave them wine and sent them off to the house of one of their number.


5.4.6
2248
ἐκ δὲ τούτου εἰσήγαγε τὰς ἑταίρας δή , καὶ ἐκάθιζε παρ’ ἑκάστῳ .
Then he led in the supposed courtesans and seated them one beside each man.


5.4.6
2249
ἦν δὲ σύνθημα , ἐπεὶ καθίζοιντο , παίειν εὐθὺς ἀνακαλυψαμένους .
And the agreement was, that when they were seated, they should unveil themselves and strike at once.


5.4.7
2250
οἱ μὲν δὴ οὕτω λέγουσιν αὐτοὺς ἀποθανεῖν , οἱ δὲ καὶ ὡς κωμαστὰς εἰσελθόντας τοὺς ἀμφὶ Μέλωνα ἀποκτεῖναι τοὺς πολεμάρχους .
It was in this way, then, as some tell the story, that the polemarchs were killed, while others say that Melon and his followers came in as though they were revellers and killed them.


5.4.7
2251
λαβὼν δὲ ὁ Φιλλίδας τρεῖς αὐτῶν ἐπορεύετο ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ Λεοντιάδου οἰκίαν ·
After this Phillidas took three of his men and proceeded to the house of Leontiades.


5.4.7
2252
κόψας δὲ τὴν θύραν εἶπεν ὅτι παρὰ τῶν πολεμάρχων ἀπαγγεῖλαί τι βούλοιτο .
Knocking at the door he said that he wished to give him a message from the polemarchs.


5.4.7
2253
ὁ δὲ ἐτύγχανε μὲν χωρὶς κατακείμενος ἔτι μετὰ δεῖπνον , καὶ ἡ γυνὴ ἐριουργοῦσα παρεκάθητο .
Now it chanced that Leontiades had dined by himself and was still reclining on his couch after dinner, while his wife sat beside him, working with wool.


5.4.7
2254
ἐκέλευσε δὲ τὸν Φιλλίδαν πιστὸν νομίζων εἰσιέναι .
And believing Phillidas trustworthy he bade him come in.


5.4.7
2255
οἱ δ’ ἐπεὶ εἰσῆλθον , τὸν μὲν ἀποκτείναντες , τὴν δὲ γυναῖκα φοβήσαντες κατεσιώπησαν .
When the party had entered, they killed Leontiades and frightened his wife into silence.


5.4.7
2256
ἐξιόντες δὲ εἶπον τὴν θύραν κεκλεῖσθαι ·
And as they went out, they ordered that the door should remain shut;


5.4.7
2257
εἰ δὲ λήψονται ἀνεῳγμένην , ἠπείλησαν ἀποκτεῖναι ἅπαντας τοὺς ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ .
and they threatened that if they found it open, they would kill all who were in the house.


5.4.8
2258
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταῦτα ἐπέπρακτο , λαβὼν δύο ὁ Φιλλίδας τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἦλθε πρὸς τὸ ἀνάκειον , καὶ εἶπε τῷ εἰργμοφύλακι ὅτι ἄνδρα ἄγοι παρὰ πολεμάρχων ὃν εἶρξαι δέοι .
When these things had been done, Phillidas took two of the men and went to the prison, and told the keeper of the prison that he was bringing a man from the polemarchs who was to be shut up.


5.4.8
2259
ὡς δὲ ἀνέῳξε , τοῦτον μὲν εὐθὺς ἀπέκτειναν , τοὺς δὲ δεσμώτας ἔλυσαν .
And as soon as the keeper opened the door, they immediately killed him and released the prisoners.


5.4.8
2260
καὶ τούτους μὲν ταχὺ τῶν ἐκ τῆς στοᾶς ὅπλων καθελόντες ὥπλισαν , καὶ ἀγαγόντες ἐπὶ τὸ Ἀμφεῖον θέσθαι ἐκέλευον τὰ ὅπλα .
Then they speedily armed these men with weapons which they took down from the portico, and, leading them to the Ampheum, ordered them to stand under arms.


5.4.9
2261
ἐκ δὲ τούτου εὐθὺς ἐκήρυττον ἐξιέναι πάντας Θηβαίους , ἱππέας τε καὶ ὁπλίτας , ὡς τῶν τυράννων τεθνεώτων .
After this they immediately made proclamation to all the Thebans, both horsemen and hoplites, to come forth from their houses, saying that the tyrants were dead.


5.4.9
2262
οἱ δὲ πολῖται , ἕως μὲν νὺξ ἦν , ἀπιστοῦντες ἡσυχίαν εἶχον ·
The citizens, however, so long as night lasted, remained quiet out of distrust;


5.4.9
2263
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἡμέρα τ’ ἦν καὶ φανερὸν ἦν τὸ γεγενημένον , ταχὺ δὴ καὶ οἱ ὁπλῖται καὶ οἱ ἱππεῖς σὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις ἐξεβοήθουν .
but when day came, and what had taken place was evident, then both the hoplites and the horsemen speedily rushed forth with their arms to lend aid.


5.4.9
2264
ἔπεμψαν δ’ ἱππέας οἱ κατεληλυθότες καὶ ἐπὶ τοὺς πρὸς τοῖς ὁρίοις Ἀθηναίων τοὺς δύο τῶν στρατηγῶν .
The returned exiles also sent horsemen to fetch the troops of the Athenians who were on the borders under two of the generals.


5.4.9
2265
οἱ δ’ εἰδότες τὸ πρᾶγμα ἐφ’ ὃ ἀπεστάλκεσαν G? ὁ μέντοι ἐν τῇ ἀκροπόλει ἁρμοστὴς ἐπεὶ ᾔσθετο τὸ νυκτερινὸν κήρυγμα , εὐθὺς ἔπεμψεν εἰς Πλαταιὰς καὶ Θεσπιὰς ἐπὶ βοήθειαν .
And the latter, knowing the purpose for which they had sent out the horsemen, came to their aid.


5.4.10
2266
καὶ τοὺς μὲν Πλαταιᾶς αἰσθόμενοι προσιόντας οἱ τῶν Θηβαίων ἱππεῖς , ἀπαντήσαντες ἀπέκτειναν αὐτῶν πλέον ἢ εἴκοσιν ·
Now when the Lacedaemonian governor in the Acropolis heard the proclamation of the night, he at once sent to Plataea and Thespiae for help.


5.4.10
2267
ἐπεὶ δὲ εἰσῆλθον ταῦτα πράξαντες καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἀπὸ τῶν ὁρίων ἤδη παρῆσαν , προσέβαλον πρὸς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν .
And the Theban horsemen, upon perceiving that the Plataeans were approaching, went out to meet them and killed more than twenty of them; then as soon as they had re-entered the city after this achievement, and the Athenians from the borders had arrived, they made an attack upon the Acropolis.


5.4.11
2268
ὡς δὲ ἔγνωσαν οἱ ἐν τῇ ἀκροπόλει ὀλίγοι ὄντες , τήν τε προθυμίαν τῶν προσιόντων ἁπάντων ἑώρων , καὶ τῶν κηρυγμάτων μεγάλων γιγνομένων τοῖς πρώτοις ἀναβᾶσιν , ἐκ τούτων φοβηθέντες εἶπον ὅτι ἀπίοιεν ἄν , εἰ σφίσιν ἀσφάλειαν μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων ἀπιοῦσι διδοῖεν .
Now when those in the Acropolis realized that they were few in number, and saw the spirit of all who were coming against them, — for there were also offers of large prizes to those who should first ascend the Acropolis — being frightened in consequence of these things, they said that they would withdraw if the Thebans would allow them to do so in safety, keeping their arms.


5.4.11
2269
οἱ δὲ ἄσμενοί τε ἔδοσαν ἃ ᾔτουν , καὶ σπεισάμενοι καὶ ὅρκους ὀμόσαντες ἐπὶ τούτοις ἐξέπεμπον .
And the Thebans gladly granted what they asked, and after making a truce and giving their oaths let them go forth on these terms.


5.4.12
2270
ἐξιόντων μέντοι , ὅσους ἐπέγνωσαν τῶν ἐχθρῶν ὄντας , συλλαμβάνοντες ἀπέκτειναν .
As they were on their way out, however, the citizens seized and killed all whom they recognized as belonging to the number of their political foes.


5.4.12
2271
ἦσαν δέ τινες οἳ καὶ ὑπὸ Ἀθηναίων τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ὁρίων ἐπιβοηθησάντων ἐξεκλάπησαν καὶ διεσώθησαν .
There were some, indeed, who were spirited away and saved by the Athenians who had come from the borders with their supporting force.


5.4.12
2272
οἱ μέντοι Θηβαῖοι καὶ τοὺς παῖδας τῶν ἀποθανόντων , ὅσοις ἦσαν , λαβόντες ἀπέσφαξαν .
But the Thebans even seized the children of those who had been killed, whenever they had children, and slaughtered them.


5.4.13
2273
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταῦτα ἐπύθοντο οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , τὸν μὲν ἁρμοστὴν τὸν ἐγκαταλιπόντα τὴν ἀκρόπολιν καὶ οὐκ ἀναμείναντα τὴν βοήθειαν ἀπέκτειναν , φρουρὰν δὲ φαίνουσιν ἐπὶ τοὺς Θηβαίους .
When the Lacedaemonians learned of these events, they put to death the governor who had abandoned the Acropolis instead of waiting for the relief force, and called out the ban against the Thebans.


5.4.13
2274
καὶ Ἀγησίλαος μὲν λέγων ὅτι ὑπὲρ τετταράκοντα ἀφ’ ἥβης εἴη , καὶ ὥσπερ τοῖς ἄλλοις τοῖς τηλικούτοις οὐκέτι ἀνάγκη εἴη τῆς ἑαυτῶν ἔξω στρατεύεσθαι , οὕτω δὴ καὶ βασιλεῦσι τὸν αὐτὸν νόμον ὄντα ἀπεδείκνυε .
Now Agesilaus said that it was more than forty years since he had come of military age, and pointed out that just as other men of his age were no longer bound to serve outside their own country, so the same law applied to kings also.


5.4.13
2275
κ- ἐκεῖνος μὲν δὴ λέγων ταῦτα οὐκ ἐστρατεύετο .
He, then, on this plea would not undertake the campaign.


5.4.13
2276
οὐ μέντοι τούτου γ’ ἕνεκεν κατέμεινεν , ἀλλ’ εὖ εἰδὼς ὅτι εἰ στρατηγοίη , λέξοιεν οἱ πολῖται ὡς Ἀγησίλαος , ὅπως βοηθήσειε τοῖς τυράννοις , πράγματα τῇ πόλει παρέχοι .
It was not, however, for this reason that he stayed at home, but because he well knew that if he was in command the citizens would say that Agesilaus was making trouble for the state in order that he might give assistance to tyrants.


5.4.13
2277
εἴα οὖν αὐτοὺς βουλεύεσθαι ὁποῖόν τι βούλοιντο περὶ τούτων .
Therefore he let them decide as they would about this matter.


5.4.14
2278
οἱ δ’ ἔφοροι διδασκόμενοι ὑπὸ τῶν μετὰ τὰς ἐν Θήβαις σφαγὰς ἐκπεπτωκότων , Κλεόμβροτον ἐκπέμπουσι , πρῶτον τότε ἡγούμενον , μάλα χειμῶνος ὄντος .
But the ephors, hearing the stories of those who had been banished after the slaughter in Thebes, sent out Cleombrotus, — this being the first time that he had a command, — in the dead of winter.


5.4.14
2279
τὴν μὲν οὖν δι’ Ἐλευθερῶν ὁδὸν Χαβρίας ἔχων Ἀθηναίων πελταστὰς ἐφύλαττεν ·
Now the road which leads through Eleutherae was guarded by Chabrias with peltasts of the Athenians;


5.4.14
2280
ὁ δὲ Κλεόμβροτος ἀνέβαινε κατὰ τὴν εἰς Πλαταιὰς φέρουσαν .
but Cleombrotus climbed the mountain by the road leading to Plataea.


5.4.14
2281
προϊόντες δὲ οἱ πελτασταὶ περιτυγχάνουσιν ἐπὶ τῷ ἄκρῳ φυλάττουσι τοῖς ἐκ τοῦ ἀνακείου λελυμένοις , ὡς περὶ ἑκατὸν καὶ πεντήκοντα οὖσι .
And at the summit of the pass his peltasts, who were leading the advance, found the men who had been released from the prison, about one hundred and fifty in number, on guard.


5.4.14
2282
καὶ τούτους μὲν ἅπαντας , εἰ μή τις ἐξέφυγεν , οἱ πελτασταὶ ἀπέκτειναν ·
And the peltasts killed them all, except for one or another who may have escaped;


5.4.14
2283
αὐτὸς δὲ κατέβαινε πρὸς τὰς Πλαταιάς , ἔτι φιλίας οὔσας .
whereupon Cleombrotus descended to Plataea, which was still friendly.


5.4.15
2284
ἐπεὶ δὲ εἰς Θεσπιὰς ἀφίκετο , ἐκεῖθεν ὁρμηθεὶς εἰς Κυνὸς κεφαλὰς οὔσας Θηβαίων ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο .
Then after he had arrived at Thespiae, he went on from there to Cynoscephalae, which belonged to the Thebans, and encamped.


5.4.15
2285
μείνας δὲ ἐκεῖ περὶ ἑκκαίδεκα ἡμέρας ἀπεχώρησε πάλιν εἰς Θεσπιάς .
But after remaining there about sixteen days he retired again to Thespiae.


5.4.15
2286
κ- ἐκεῖ μὲν ἁρμοστὴν κατέλιπε Σφοδρίαν καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν συμμάχων τὸ τρίτον μέρος ἑκάστων ·
There he left Sphodrias as governor and a third part of each contingent of the allies;


5.4.15
2287
παρέδωκε δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ χρήματα ὅσα ἐτύγχανεν οἴκοθεν ἔχων , καὶ ἐκέλευσε ξενικὸν προσμισθοῦσθαι .
he also gave over to Sphodrias all the money which he chanced to have brought from home and directed him to hire a force of mercenaries besides.


5.4.16
2288
καὶ ὁ μὲν Σφοδρίας ταῦτ’ ἔπραττεν .
Sphodrias, then, set about doing this.


5.4.16
2289
ὁ δὲ Κλεόμβροτος ἀπῆγεν ἐπ’ οἴκου τὴν διὰ Κρεύσιος τοὺς μεθ’ αὑτοῦ στρατιώτας καὶ μάλα ἀποροῦντας πότερά ποτε πόλεμος πρὸς Θηβαίους ἢ εἰρήνη εἴη ·
Meanwhile Cleombrotus proceeded to conduct the soldiers under his command back homeward by the road which leads through Creusis, the troops being vastly puzzled to know whether there was really war between them and the Thebans, or peace;


5.4.16
2290
ἤγαγε μὲν γὰρ εἰς τὴν τῶν Θηβαίων τὸ στράτευμα , ἀπῆλθε δὲ ὡς ἐδύνατο ἐλάχιστα κακουργήσας .
for he had led his army into the country of the Thebans and then departed after doing just as little damage as he could.


5.4.17
2291
ἀπιόντι γε μὴν ἄνεμος αὐτῷ ἐξαίσιος ἐπεγένετο , ὃν καὶ οἰωνίζοντό τινες σημαίνειν πρὸ τῶν μελλόντων .
While he was on the homeward way, however, an extraordinary wind beset him, which some indeed augured was a sign foreshadowing what was going to happen.


5.4.17
2292
πολλὰ μὲν γὰρ καὶ ἄλλα βίαια ἐποίησεν , ἀτὰρ καὶ ὑπερβάλλοντος αὐτοῦ μετὰ τῆς στρατιᾶς ἐκ τῆς Κρεύσιος τὸ καθῆκον ἐπὶ θάλατταν ὄρος πολλοὺς μὲν ὄνους κατεκρήμνισεν αὐτοῖς σκεύεσι , πάμπολλα δὲ ὅπλα ἀφαρπασθέντα ἐξέπεσεν εἰς τὴν θάλατταν .
For it not only did many other violent things, but when he had left Creusis with his army and was crossing the mountain ridge which runs down to the sea, it hurled down the precipice great numbers of packasses, baggage and all, while very many shields were snatched away from the soldiers and fell into the sea.


5.4.18
2293
τέλος δὲ πολλοὶ οὐ δυνάμενοι σὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις πορεύεσθαι , ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν τοῦ ἄκρου κατέλιπον λίθων ἐμπλήσαντες ὑπτίας τὰς ἀσπίδας .
Finally many of the men, unable to proceed with all their arms, left their shields behind here and there on the summit of the ridge, putting them down on their backs and filling them with stones.


5.4.18
2294
καὶ τότε μὲν τῆς Μεγαρικῆς ἐν Αἰγοσθένοις ἐδείπνησαν ὡς ἐδύναντο ·
On that day, then, they took dinner as best they could at Aegosthena in the territory of Megara;


5.4.18
2295
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐλθόντες ἐκομίσαντο τὰ ὅπλα .
and on the following day they went back and recovered their shields.


5.4.18
2296
καὶ ἐκ τούτου οἴκαδε ἤδη ἕκαστοι ἀπῇσαν ·
After this all returned at once to their several homes;


5.4.18
2297
ἀφῆκε γὰρ αὐτοὺς ὁ Κλεόμβροτος .
for Cleombrotus dismissed them.


5.4.19
2298
οἱ μὲν οὖν Ἀθηναῖοι ὁρῶντες τὴν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ῥώμην καὶ ὅτι πόλεμος ἐν Κορίνθῳ οὐκέτι ἦν , ἀλλ’ ἤδη παριόντες τὴν Ἀττικὴν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι εἰς τὰς Θήβας ἐνέβαλλον , οὕτως ἐφοβοῦντο ὥστε καὶ τὼ δύο στρατηγώ , οἳ συνηπιστάσθην τὴν τοῦ Μέλωνος ἐπὶ τοὺς περὶ Λεοντιάδην ἐπανάστασιν , κρίναντες τὸν μὲν ἀπέκτειναν , τὸν δ’ , ἐπεὶ οὐχ ὑπέμεινεν , ἐφυγάδευσαν .
Now the Athenians, seeing the power of the Lacedaemonians and that the war was no longer in Corinthian territory, but that the Lacedaemonians were now going past Attica and invading the country of Thebes, were so fearful that they brought to trial the two generals who had been privy to the uprising of Melon against Leontiades and his party, put one of them to death, and, since the other did not remain to stand trial, exiled him.


5.4.20
2299
οἱ δ’ αὖ Θηβαῖοι καὶ αὐτοὶ φοβούμενοι , εἰ μηδένες ἄλλοι ἢ αὐτοὶ πολεμήσοιεν τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις , τοιόνδε εὑρίσκουσι μηχάνημα .
The Thebans, for their part, being also fearful in case no others except themselves should make war upon the Lacedaemonians, devised the following expedient.


5.4.20
2300
πείθουσι τὸν ἐν ταῖς Θεσπιαῖς ἁρμοστὴν Σφοδρίαν , χρήματα δόντες , ὡς ὑπωπτεύετο , ἐμβαλεῖν εἰς τὴν Ἀττικήν , ἵν’ ἐκπολεμώσειε τοὺς Ἀθηναίους πρὸς τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους .
They persuaded Sphodrias, the Lacedaemonian governor at Thespiae, — by giving him money, it was suspected, — to invade Attica, that so he might involve the Athenians in war with the Lacedaemonians.


5.4.20
2301
κ- ἐκεῖνος πειθόμενος αὐτοῖς , προσποιησάμενος τὸν Πειραιᾶ καταλήψεσθαι , ὅτι δὴ ἀπύλωτος ἦν , ἦγεν ἐκ τῶν Θεσπιῶν πρῲ δειπνήσαντας τοὺς στρατιώτας , φάσκων πρὸ ἡμέρας καθανύσειν εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ .
And he in obedience to their persuasions, professing that he would capture Piraeus, inasmuch as it still had no gates, led forth his troops from Thespiae after they had taken an early dinner, saying that he would finish the journey to Piraeus before daybreak.


5.4.21
2302
θριᾶσι δ’ αὐτῷ ἡμέρα ἐπεγένετο , καὶ οὐδὲν ἐντεῦθεν ἐποίησεν ὥστε λαθεῖν , ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ ἀπετράπετο , βοσκήματα διήρπασε καὶ οἰκίας ἐπόρθησε .
But he was still at Thria when daylight came upon him, and then he made no effort to escape observation, but on the contrary, when he had turned about, seized cattle and plundered houses.


5.4.21
2303
τῶν δ’ ἐντυχόντων τινὲς τῆς νυκτὸς φεύγοντες εἰς τὸ ἄστυ ἀπήγγελλον τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις ὅτι στράτευμα πάμπολυ προσίοι .
Meanwhile some of those who fell in with him during the night fled to the city and reported to the Athenians that a very large army was coming against them.


5.4.21
2304
οἱ μὲν δὴ ταχὺ ὁπλισάμενοι καὶ ἱππεῖς καὶ ὁπλῖται ἐν φυλακῇ τῆς πόλεως ἦσαν .
So they speedily armed themselves, both horsemen and hoplites, and kept guard over the city.


5.4.22
2305
τῶν δὲ Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ πρέσβεις ἐτύγχανον Ἀθήνησιν ὄντες παρὰ Καλλίᾳ τῷ προξένῳ Ἐτυμοκλῆς τε καὶ Ἀριστόλοχος καὶ Ὤκυλλος ·
Now it chanced also that there were ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians in Athens at the house of Callias, their diplomatic agent, — Etymocles, Aristolochus, and Ocyllus;


5.4.22
2306
οὓς οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , ἐπεὶ τὸ πρᾶγμα ἠγγέλθη , συλλαβόντες ἐφύλαττον , ὡς καὶ τούτους συνεπιβουλεύοντας .
and when the matter of the invasion was reported, the Athenians seized these men and kept them under guard, in the belief that they too were concerned in the plot.


5.4.22
2307
οἱ δὲ ἐκπεπληγμένοι τε ἦσαν τῷ πράγματι καὶ ἀπελογοῦντο ὡς οὐκ ἄν ποτε οὕτω μῶροι ἦσαν ὡς εἰ ᾔδεσαν καταλαμβανόμενον τὸν Πειραιᾶ , ἐν τῷ ἄστει ἂν ὑποχειρίους αὑτοὺς παρεῖχον , καὶ ταῦτα παρὰ τῷ προξένῳ , οὗ τάχιστ’ ἂν ηὑρέθησαν .
But they were utterly dismayed over the affair and said in their defence that if they had known that an attempt was being made to seize Piraeus, they would never have been so foolish as to put themselves in the power of the Athenians in the city, and, still less, at the house of their diplomatic agent, where they would most speedily be found.


5.4.23
2308
ἔτι δ’ ἔλεγον ὡς εὔδηλον καὶ τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις ἔσοιτο ὅτι οὐδ’ ἡ πόλις τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ταῦτα συνῄδει .
They said, further, that it would become clear to the Athenians also that the Lacedaemonian state was not cognizant of this attempt, either.


5.4.23
2309
Σφοδρίαν γὰρ εὖ εἰδέναι ἔφασαν ὅτι ἀπολωλότα πεύσοιντο ὑπὸ τῆς πόλεως .
For as to Sphodrias, they said they well knew that they would hear that he had been put to death by the state.


5.4.23
2310
κ- ἐκεῖνοι μὲν κριθέντες μηδὲν συνειδέναι ἀφείθησαν .
They accordingly were adjudged to be without any knowledge of the affair and were released.


5.4.24
2311
οἱ δ’ ἔφοροι ἀνεκάλεσάν τε τὸν Σφοδρίαν καὶ ὑπῆγον θανάτου .
But the ephors recalled Sphodrias and brought capital charges against him.


5.4.24
2312
ἐκεῖνος μέντοι φοβούμενος οὐχ ὑπήκουσεν ·
He, however, out of fear did not obey the summons;


5.4.24
2313
ὅμως δὲ καίπερ οὐχ ὑπακούων εἰς τὴν κρίσιν ἀπέφυγε .
but nevertheless, although he did not obey and present himself for the trial, he was acquitted.


5.4.24
2314
καὶ πολλοῖς ἔδοξεν αὕτη δὴ ἀδικώτατα ἐν Λακεδαίμονι ἡ δίκη κριθῆναι .
And it seemed to many that the decision in this case was the most unjust ever known in Lacedaemon.


5.4.24
2315
ἐγένετο δὲ τοῦτο τὸ αἴτιον .
The reason for it was as follows.


5.4.25
2316
ἦν υἱὸς τῷ Σφοδρία Κλεώνυμος , ἡλικίαν τε ἔχων τὴν ἄρτι ἐκ παίδων , καὶ ἅμα κάλλιστός τε καὶ εὐδοκιμώτατος τῶν ἡλίκων .
Sphodrias had a son Cleonymus, who was at the age just following boyhood and was, besides, the handsomest and most highly regarded of all the youths of his years.


5.4.25
2317
τούτου δὲ ἐρῶν ἐτύγχανεν Ἀρχίδαμος ὁ Ἀγησιλάου .
And Archidamus, the son of Agesilaus, chanced to be extremely fond of him.


5.4.25
2318
οἱ μὲν οὖν τοῦ Κλεομβότου φίλοι , ἅτε ἑταῖροι ὄντες τῷ Σφοδρίᾳ , ἀπολυτικῶς αὐτοῦ εἶχον , τὸν δέ γε Ἀγησίλαον καὶ τοὺς ἐκείνου φίλους ἐφοβοῦντο , καὶ τοὺς διὰ μέσου δέ ·
Now the friends of Cleombrotus were political associates of Sphodrias, and were therefore inclined to acquit him, but they feared Agesilaus and his friends, and likewise those who stood between the two parties;


5.4.25
2319
δεινὰ γὰρ ἐδόκει πεποιηκέναι .
for it seemed that he had done a dreadful deed.


5.4.26
2320
ἐκ τούτου δὲ ὁ μὲν Σφοδρίας εἶπε πρὸς τὸν Κλεώνυμον ·
Therefore Sphodrias said to Cleonymus:


5.4.26
2321
ἔξεστί σοι , ὦ υἱέ , σῶσαι τὸν πατέρα , δεηθέντι Ἀρχιδάμου εὐμενῆ Ἀγησίλαον ἐμοὶ εἰς τὴν κρίσιν παρασχεῖν .
It is within your power, my son, to save your father by begging Archidamus to make Agesilaus favourable to me at my trial.


5.4.26
2322
ὁ δὲ ἀκούσας ἐτόλμησεν ἐλθεῖν πρὸς τὸν Ἀρχίδαμον , καὶ ἐδεῖτο σωτῆρα αὐτῷ τοῦ πατρὸς γενέσθαι .
Upon hearing this Cleonymus gathered courage to go to Archidamus and begged him for his sake to become the saviour of his father.


5.4.27
2323
ὁ μέντοι Ἀρχίδαμος ἰδὼν μὲν τὸν Κλεώνυμον κλαίοντα συνεδάκρυε παρεστηκώς ·
Now when Archidamus saw Cleonymus weeping, he wept with him as he stood by his side;


5.4.27
2324
ἀκούσας δὲ δεομένου , ἀπεκρίνατο ·
and when he heard his request, he replied:


5.4.27
2325
ἀλλ’ , ὦ Κλεώνυμε , ἴσθι μὲν ὅτι ἐγὼ τῷ ἐμῷ πατρὶ οὐδ’ ἀντιβλέπειν δύναμαι , ἀλλὰ κἄν τι βούλωμαι διαπράξασθαι ἐν τῇ πόλει , πάντων μᾶλλον ἢ τοῦ πατρὸς δέομαι ·
Cleonymus, be assured that I cannot even look my father in the face, but if I wish to accomplish some object in the state, I petition everyone else rather than my father;


5.4.27
2326
ὅμως δ’ , ἐπεὶ σὺ κελεύεις , νόμιζε πᾶσάν με προθυμίαν ἕξειν ταῦτά σοι πραχθῆναι .
yet nevertheless, since you so bid me, believe that I will use every effort to accomplish this for you.


5.4.28
2327
καὶ τότε μὲν δὴ ἐκ τοῦ φιλιτίου εἰς τὸν οἶκον ἐλθὼν ἀνεπαύετο ·
At that time, accordingly, he went from the public mess-room to his home and retired to rest;


5.4.28
2328
τοῦ δ’ ὄρθρου ἀναστὰς ἐφύλαττε μὴ λάθοι αὐτὸν ὁ πατὴρ ἐξελθών .
then he arose at dawn and kept watch, so that his father should not leave the house without his notice.


5.4.28
2329
ἐπεὶ δὲ εἶδεν αὐτὸν ἐξιόντα , πρῶτον μέν , εἴ τις τῶν πολιτῶν παρῆν , παρίει τούτους διαλέγεσθαι αὐτῷ , ἔπειτα δ’ , εἴ τις ξένος , ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ τῶν θεραπόντων τῷ δεομένῳ παρεχώρει .
But when he saw him going out, in the first place, if anyone among the citizens was present, he gave way to allow them to converse with Agesilaus, and again, if it was a stranger, he did the same, and again he even made way for any one of his attendants who wished to address him.


5.4.28
2330
τέλος δ’ , ἐπεὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Εὐρώτα ἀπιὼν ὁ Ἀγησίλαος εἰσῆλθεν οἴκαδε , ἀπιὼν ᾤχετο οὐδὲ προσελθών .
Finally, when Agesilaus came back from the Eurotas and entered his house, Archidamus went away without even having approached him.


5.4.28
2331
καὶ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ δὲ τ- αὐτὰ ταῦτα ἐποίησεν .
On the next day also he acted in the very same way.


5.4.29
2332
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος ὑπώπτευε μὲν ὧν ἕνεκεν ἐφοίτα , οὐδὲν μέντοι ἠρώτα , ἀλλ’ εἴα αὐτόν .
And Agesilaus, while he suspected for what reason he kept going to and fro with him, nevertheless asked no question, but let him alone.


5.4.29
2333
ὁ δ’ αὖ Ἀρχίδαμος ἐπεθύμει μέν , ὥσπερ εἰκός , ὁρᾶν τὸν Κλεώνυμον ·
But Archidamus, on the other hand, was eager, naturally enough, to see Cleonymus;


5.4.29
2334
ὅπως μέντοι ἔλθοι πρὸς αὐτὸν μὴ διειλεγμένος τῷ πατρὶ περὶ ὧν ἐκεῖνος ἐδεήθη οὐκ εἶχεν .
still, he did not know how he could go to him without first having talked with his father about the request that Cleonymus had made.


5.4.29
2335
οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ τὸν Σφοδρίαν οὐχ ὁρῶντες τὸν Ἀρχίδαμον ἰόντα , πρόσθεν δὲ θαμίζοντα , ἐν παντὶ ἦσαν μὴ λελοιδορημένος ὑπὸ Ἀγησιλάου εἴη .
And the partisans of Sphodrias, since they did not see Archidamus coming to visit Cleonymus, whereas formerly he had come often, were in the utmost anxiety, fearing that he had been rebuked by Agesilaus.


5.4.30
2336
τέλος μέντοι ὁ Ἀρχίδαμος ἐτόλμησε προσελθεῖν καὶ εἰπεῖν ·
Finally, however, Archidamus gathered courage to approach Agesilaus and say:


5.4.30
2337
ὦ πάτερ , Κλεώνυμός με κελεύει σου δεηθῆναι σῶσαί οἱ τὸν πατέρα ·
Father, Cleonymus bids me request you to save his father;


5.4.30
2338
καὶ ἐγὼ τ- αὐτά σου δέομαι , εἰ δυνατόν .
and I make the same request of you, if it is possible.


5.4.30
2339
ὁ δ’ ἀπεκρίνατο ·
And Agesilaus answered:


5.4.30
2340
ἀλλὰ σοὶ μὲν ἔγωγε συγγνώμην ἔχω ·
For yourself, I grant you pardon;


5.4.30
2341
αὐτὸς μέντοι ὅπως ἂν συγγνώμης τύχοιμι παρὰ τῆς πόλεως ἄνδρα μὴ καταγιγνώσκων ἀδικεῖν οἷς ἐχρηματίσατο ἐπὶ κακῷ τῆς πόλεως οὐχ ὁρῶ .
but how could I obtain my own pardon from the state if I failed to pronounce guilty of wrong-doing a man who made traffic for himself to the hurt of the state, I do not see.


5.4.31
2342
ὁ δὲ τότε μὲν πρὸς ταῦτα οὐδὲν εἶπεν , ἀλλ’ ἡττηθεὶς τοῦ δικαίου ἀπῆλθεν .
Now at the time Archidamus said nothing in reply to these words, but yielding to the justice of them, went away.


5.4.31
2343
ὕστερον δὲ ἢ αὐτὸς νοήσας ἢ διδαχθεὶς ὑπό του εἶπεν ἐλθών ·
Afterwards, however, whether because he had conceived the idea himself or because it had been suggested to him by some one else, he went to Agesilaus and said:


5.4.31
2344
ἀλλ’ ὅτι μέν , ὦ πάτερ , εἰ μηδὲν ἠδίκει Σφοδρίας , ἀπέλυσας ἂν αὐτὸν οἶδα ·
Father, I know that if Sphodrias had done no wrong, you would have acquitted him;


5.4.31
2345
νῦν δέ , εἰ ἠδίκηκέ τι , ἡμῶν ἕνεκεν συγγνώμης ὑπὸ σοῦ τυχέτω .
but as it is, if he has done something wrong, let him for our sakes obtain pardon at your hands.


5.4.31
2346
ὁ δὲ εἶπεν ·
And Agesilaus said:


5.4.31
2347
οὐκοῦν ἂν μέλλῃ καλὰ ταῦθ’ ἡμῖν εἶναι , οὕτως ἔσται .
Well, if this should be honourable for us, it shall be so.


5.4.31
2348
ὁ μὲν δὴ ταῦτ’ ἀκούσας μάλα δύσελπις ὢν ἀπῄει .
Upon hearing these words Archidamus went away in great despondency.


5.4.32
2349
τῶν δὲ τοῦ Σφοδρία φίλων τις διαλεγόμενος Ἐτυμοκλεῖ εἶπεν ·
Now one of the friends of Sphodrias in conversation with Etymocles, said to him:


5.4.32
2350
ὑμεῖς μέν , οἶμαι , ἔφη , πάντες οἱ Ἀγησιλάου φίλοι ἀποκτενεῖτε τὸν Σφοδρίαν .
I suppose, said he, that you, the friends of Agesilaus, are all for putting Sphodrias to death.


5.4.32
2351
καὶ ὁ Ἐτυμοκλῆς ·
And Etymocles replied:


5.4.32
2352
μὰ Δία οὐκ ἄρα ταὔτ’ , ἔφη , ποιήσομεν Ἀγησιλάῳ , ἐπεὶ ἐκεῖνός γε πρὸς πάντας ὅσοις διείλεκται τ- αὐτὰ λέγει , μὴ ἀδικεῖν μὲν Σφοδρίαν ἀδύνατον εἶναι ·
By Zeus, then we shall not be following the same course as Agesilaus, for he says to all with whom he has conversed the same thing, — that it is impossible that Sphodrias is not guilty of wrong-doing;


5.4.32
2353
ὅστις μέντοι παῖς τε ὢν καὶ παιδίσκος καὶ ἡβῶν πάντα τὰ καλὰ ποιῶν διετέλεσε , χαλεπὸν εἶναι τοιοῦτον ἄνδρα ἀποκτιννύναι ·
but that when, as child, boy, and young man, one has continually performed all the duties of a Spartan, it is a hard thing to put such a man to death;


5.4.32
2354
τὴν γὰρ Σπάρτην τοιούτων δεῖσθαι στρατιωτῶν .
for Sparta has need of such soldiers.


5.4.33
2355
ὁ οὖν ἀκούσας ταῦτα ἀπήγγειλε τῷ Κλεωνύμῳ .
The man, then, upon hearing this, reported it to Cleonymus.


5.4.33
2356
ὁ δ’ ἡσθείς , εὐθὺς ἐλθὼν πρὸς τὸν Ἀρχίδαμον εἶπεν ·
And he, filled with joy, went at once to Archidamus and said:


5.4.33
2357
ὅτι μὲν ἡμῶν ἐπιμελῇ ἤδη ἴσμεν ·
We know now that you have a care for us;


5.4.33
2358
εὖ δ’ ἐπίστω , Ἀρχίδαμε , ὅτι καὶ ἡμεῖς πειρασόμεθα ἐπιμελεῖσθαι ὡς μήποτε σὺ ἐπὶ τῇ ἡμετέρᾳ φιλίᾳ αἰσχυνθῇς .
and be well assured, Archidamus, that we in our turn shall strive to take care that you may never have cause to be ashamed on account of our friendship.


5.4.33
2359
καὶ οὐκ ἐψεύσατο , ἀλλὰ καὶ ζῶν ἅπαντ’ ἐποίει ὅσα καλὰ ἐν τῇ Σπάρτῃ , καὶ ἐν Λεύκτροις πρὸ τοῦ βασιλέως μαχόμενος σὺν Δείνωνι τῷ πολεμάρχῳ τρὶς πεσὼν πρῶτος τῶν πολιτῶν ἐν μέσοις τοῖς πολεμίοις ἀπέθανε .
And he did not prove false to his words, for not only did he act in all ways as it is deemed honourable for a citizen of Sparta to act while he lived, but at Leuctra, fighting in defence of his king with Deinon the polemarch, he fell three times and was the first of the citizens to lose his life in the midst of the enemy.


5.4.33
2360
καὶ ἠνίασε μὲν εἰς τὰ ἔσχατα τὸν Ἀρχίδαμον , ὡς δ’ ὑπέσχετο , οὐ κατῄσχυνεν , ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ἐκόσμησε .
And while his death caused extreme grief to Archidamus, still, as he promised, he did not bring shame upon him, but rather honour.


5.4.33
2361
τοιούτῳ μὲν δὴ τρόπῳ Σφοδρίας ἀπέφυγε .
It was in this way, then, that Sphodrias was acquitted.


5.4.34
2362
τῶν μέντοι Ἀθηναίων οἱ βοιωτιάζοντες ἐδίδασκον τὸν δῆμον ὡς οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὐχ ὅπως τιμωρήσαιντο , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπαινέσειαν τὸν Σφοδρίαν , ὅτι ἐπεβούλευσε ταῖς Ἀθήναις .
As for the Athenians, those among them who favoured the Boeotians pointed out to the people that the Lacedaemonians had not only not punished Sphodrias, but even commended him, for plotting against Athens.


5.4.34
2363
καὶ ἐκ τούτου οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐπύλωσάν τε τὸν Πειραιᾶ , ναῦς τε ἐναυπηγοῦντο , τοῖς τε Βοιωτοῖς πάσῃ προθυμίᾳ ἐβοήθουν .
Therefore the Athenians furnished Piraeus with gates, set about building ships, and gave aid to the Boeotians with all zeal.


5.4.35
2364
οἱ δ’ αὖ Λακεδαιμόνιοι φρουράν τε ἔφηναν ἐπὶ τοὺς Θηβαίους , καὶ τὸν Ἀγησίλαον νομίσαντες φρονιμώτερον ἂν σφίσι τοῦ Κλεομβρότου ἡγεῖσθαι , ἐδέοντο αὐτοῦ ἄγειν τὴν στρατιάν .
The Lacedaemonians on their side called out the ban against the Thebans, and believing that Agesilaus would lead them with more judgment than Cleombrotus, requested him to act as commander of the army.


5.4.35
2365
ὁ δὲ εἰπὼν ὅτι οὐδὲν ἂν ὅ τι τῇ πόλει δοκοίη ἀντειπεῖν παρεσκευάζετο εἰς τὴν ἔξοδον .
And he, saying that he would offer no objection to whatever the state thought best, made his preparations for the campaign.


5.4.36
2366
γιγνώσκων δ’ ὅτι εἰ μή τις προκαταλήψοιτο τὸν Κιθαιρῶνα , οὐ ῥᾴδιον ἔσται εἰς τὰς Θήβας ἐμβαλεῖν , μαθὼν πολεμοῦντας τοὺς Κλητορίους τοῖς Ὀρχομενίοις καὶ ξενικὸν τρέφοντας , ἐκοινολογήσατο αὐτοῖς , ὅπως προσγένοιτο τὸ ξενικὸν αὐτῷ , εἴ τι δεηθείη .
Now he knew that unless one first gained possession of Mount Cithaeron, it would not be easy to effect an entrance into the country of Thebes; he therefore, upon learning that the Cletorians were at war with the Orchomenians and were maintaining a force of mercenaries, came to an agreement with them that their mercenary force should be turned over to him if he had any need of it.


5.4.37
2367
ἐπεὶ δὲ τὰ διαβατήρια ἐγένετο , πέμψας , πρὶν ἐν Τεγέᾳ αὐτὸς εἶναι , πρὸς τὸν ἄρχοντα τῶν παρὰ τοῖς Κλητορίοις ξένων , καὶ μισθὸν δοὺς μηνός , ἐκέλευε προκαταλαβεῖν αὐτοὺς τὸν Κιθαιρῶνα .
And when his sacrifices at the frontier had proved favourable, before he had himself reached Tegea he sent to the commander of the mercenaries at Cletor, gave them pay for a month, and ordered them to occupy Cithaeron in advance.


5.4.37
2368
τοῖς δ’ Ὀρχομενίοις εἶπεν , ἕως στρατεία εἴη , παύσασθαι τοῦ πολέμου ·
Meanwhile he directed the Orchomenians to cease from war so long as his campaign lasted;


5.4.37
2369
εἰ δέ τις πόλις στρατιᾶς οὔσης ἔξω ἐπὶ πόλιν στρατεύσοι , ἐπὶ ταύτην ἔφη πρῶτον ἰέναι κατὰ τὸ δόγμα τῶν συμμάχων .
indeed, if any state undertook an expedition against any other while his army was in the field, he said that his first act would be to go against that state, in accordance with the resolution of the allies.


5.4.38
2370
ἐπεὶ δὲ ὑπερέβαλε τὸν Κιθαιρῶνα , ἐλθὼν εἰς Θεσπιὰς ἐκεῖθεν ὁρμηθεὶς ᾔει ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν Θηβαίων χώραν .
After Agesilaus had crossed Cithaeron and had arrived at Thespiae, he made that his base of operations and proceeded against the country of the Thebans.


5.4.38
2371
εὑρὼν δὲ ἀποτεταφρευμένον τε καὶ ἀπεσταυρωμένον κύκλῳ τὸ πεδίον καὶ τὰ πλείστου ἄξια τῆς χώρας , στρατοπεδευόμενος ἄλλοτ’ ἄλλῃ καὶ μετ’ ἄριστον ἐξάγων ἐδῄου τῆς χώρας τὰ πρὸς ἑαυτοῦ τῶν σταυρωμάτων καὶ τῆς τάφρου .
When he found, however, that the plain and the most valuable portions of their territory had been surrounded by a protecting trench and stockade, he encamped now here and now there, and, leading forth his army after breakfast, laid waste those parts of the country which were on his side of the stockade and trench.


5.4.38
2372
οἱ γὰρ πολέμιοι , ὅπου ἐπιφαίνοιτο ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , ἀντιπαρῇσαν αὐτῷ ἐντὸς τοῦ χαρακώματος ὡς ἀμυνούμενοι .
For wherever Agesilaus appeared, the enemy moved along within the stockade and kept in his front, for the purpose of offering resistance.


5.4.39
2373
καί ποτε ἀποχωροῦντος αὐτοῦ ἤδη τὴν ἐπὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον , οἱ τῶν Θηβαίων ἱππεῖς τέως ἀφανεῖς ὄντες ἐξαίφνης διὰ τῶν ὡδοποιημένων τοῦ χαρακώματος ἐξόδων ἐξελαύνουσι , καὶ οἷα δὴ ἀπιόντων πρὸς δεῖπνον καὶ συσκευαζομένων τῶν πελταστῶν , τῶν δ’ ἱππέων τῶν μὲν ἔτι καταβεβηκότων , τῶν δ’ ἀναβαινόντων , ἐπελαύνουσι ·
And once, when he was already withdrawing in the direction of his camp, the cavalry of the Thebans, up to that moment invisible, suddenly dashed out through the exits which had been made in the stockade, and inasmuch as the peltasts of Agesilaus were going away to dinner or were making their preparations for doing so, while the horsemen were some of them still dismounted and others in the act of mounting, the Thebans charged upon them;


5.4.39
2374
καὶ τῶν πελταστῶν συχνοὺς κατέβαλον καὶ τῶν ἱππέων Κλέαν καὶ Ἐπικυδίδαν Σπαρτιάτας , καὶ τῶν περιοίκων ἕνα , Εὔδικον , καὶ τῶν Θηβαίων τινὰς φυγάδας , οὔπω ἀναβεβηκότας ἐπὶ τοὺς ἵππους .
and they not only struck down a large number of the peltasts, but among the horsemen Cleas and Epicydidas, who were Spartiatae, one of the Perioeci, Eudicus, and some Theban exiles, such as had not yet mounted their horses.


5.4.40
2375
ὡς δὲ ἀναστρέψας σὺν τοῖς ὁπλίταις ἐβοήθησεν ὁ Ἀγησίλαος , οἵ τε ἱππεῖς ἤλαυνον ἐναντίον τοῖς ἱππεῦσι καὶ τὰ δέκα ἀφ’ ἥβης ἐκ τῶν ὁπλιτῶν ἔθει σὺν αὐτοῖς .
But when Agesilaus turned about and came to the rescue with the hoplites, his horsemen charged against the enemy’s horsemen and the first ten year-classes of the hoplites ran along with them to the attack.


5.4.40
2376
οἱ μέντοι τῶν Θηβαίων ἱππεῖς ἐῴκεσαν ὑποπεπωκόσι που ἐν μεσημβρίᾳ ·
The Theban horsemen, however, acted like men who had drunk a little at midday;


5.4.40
2377
ὑπέμενον μὲν γὰρ τοῖς ἐπελαύνουσιν ὥστ’ ἐξακοντίζειν τὰ δόρατα , ἐξικνοῦντο δ’ οὔ .
for although they awaited the oncoming enemy in order to throw their spears, they threw before they were within range.


5.4.41
2378
ἀναστρέφοντες δὲ ἐκ τοσούτου ἀπέθανον αὐτῶν δώδεκα .
But when the horsemen of the Thebans as they retired came to an impassable ravine, they first gathered together and then turned to face him, not knowing where they could cross.


5.4.41
2379
ὡς δὲ κατέγνω ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ὅτι ἀεὶ μετ’ ἄριστον καὶ οἱ πολέμιοι ἐφαίνοντο , θυσάμενος ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἦγεν ὡς οἷόν τε τάχιστα , καὶ παρῆλθε δι’ ἐρημίας ἔσω τῶν χαρακωμάτων .
Now the peltasts were few in number; the foremost of them were therefore seized with fear of the horsemen and took to flight;


5.4.41
2380
ἐκ δὲ τούτου τὰ ἐντὸς ἔτεμνε καὶ ἔκαε μέχρι τοῦ ἄστεως .
but when the horsemen, in their turn, saw this, they applied the lesson they had learned from the fugitives and attacked them.


5.4.41
2381
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας καὶ πάλιν ἀποχωρήσας εἰς Θεσπιάς , ἐτείχισε τὸ ἄστυ αὐτοῖς ·
After doing this and withdrawing again to Thespiae, he fortified their city for the Thespians.


5.4.41
2382
καὶ ἐκεῖ μὲν Φοιβίδαν κατέλιπεν ἁρμοστήν , αὐτὸς δὲ ὑπερβαλὼν πάλιν εἰς τὰ Μέγαρα τοὺς μὲν συμμάχους διῆκε , τὸ δὲ πολιτικὸν στράτευμα ἐπ’ οἴκου ἀπήγαγεν .
There he left Phoebidas as governor, while he himself crossed the mountain again to Megara, disbanded the allies, and led his citizen troops back home.


5.4.42
2383
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ὁ Φοιβίδας ἐκπέμπων μὲν λῃστήρια ἔφερε καὶ ἦγε τοὺς Θηβαίους , καταδρομὰς δὲ ποιούμενος ἐκακούργει τὴν χώραν .
After this Phoebidas plundered the Thebans by sending out bands of freebooters, while by making raids he devastated their land.


5.4.42
2384
οἱ δ’ αὖ Θηβαῖοι ἀντιτιμωρεῖσθαι βουλόμενοι στρατεύουσι πανδημεὶ ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν Θεσπιῶν χώραν .
The Thebans, on their side, desiring to avenge themselves, made an expedition with their entire force against the country of the Thespians.


5.4.42
2385
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἦσαν ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ , ὁ Φοιβίδας σὺν τοῖς πελτασταῖς προσκείμενος οὐδαμοῦ εἴα αὐτοὺς ἀποσκεδάννυσθαι τῆς φάλαγγος ·
But when they were within the territory of Thespiae, Phoebidas pressed them close with his peltasts and did not allow them to stray at any point from their phalanx;


5.4.42
2386
ὥστε οἱ Θηβαῖοι μάλα ἀχθόμενοι τῇ ἐμβολῇ θάττονα τὴν ἀποχώρησιν ἐποιοῦντο , καὶ οἱ ὀρεοκόμοι δὲ ἀπορριπτοῦντες ὃν εἰλήφεσαν καρπὸν ἀπήλαυνον οἴκαδε ·
so that the Thebans in great vexation proceeded to retreat more rapidly than they had advanced, and their mule-drivers also threw away the produce which they had seized and pushed for home;


5.4.42
2387
οὕτω δεινὸς φόβος τῷ στρατεύματι ἐνέπεσεν .
so dreadful a panic had fallen upon the army.


5.4.43
2388
ὁ δὲ ἐν τούτῳ θρασέως ἐπέκειτο , περὶ ἑαυτὸν μὲν ἔχων τὸ πελταστικόν , τὸ δ’ ὁπλιτικὸν ἐν τάξει ἕπεσθαι κελεύσας .
Meanwhile Phoebidas pressed upon them boldly, having with him his peltasts and giving orders to the hoplites to follow in battle order.


5.4.43
2389
καὶ ἐν ἐλπίδι ἐγένετο τροπὴν τῶν ἀνδρῶν ποιήσασθαι ·
Indeed, he conceived the hope of putting the Thebans to rout;


5.4.43
2390
αὐτός τε γὰρ ἐρρωμένως ἡγεῖτο , καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἅπτεσθαι τῶν ἀνδρῶν παρεκελεύετο , καὶ τοὺς τῶν Θεσπιῶν ὁπλίτας ἀκολουθεῖν ἐκέλευεν .
for while he himself was leading on stoutly, he was exhorting the others to attack the enemy and ordering the hoplites of the Thespians to follow.


5.4.44
2391
ὡς δὲ ἀποχωροῦντες οἱ τῶν Θηβαίων ἱππεῖς ἐπὶ νάπῃ ἀδιαβάτῳ ἐγίγνοντο , πρῶτον μὲν ἡθροίσθησαν , ἔπειτα δὲ ἀνέστρεφον διὰ τὸ ἀπορεῖν ὅπῃ διαβαῖεν .
But when the horsemen of the Thebans as they retired came to an impassable ravine, they first gathered together and then turned to face him, not knowing where they could cross.


5.4.44
2392
οἱ μὲν οὖν πελτασταὶ ὀλίγοι ὄντες οἱ πρῶτοι φοβηθέντες αὐτοὺς ἔφυγον ·
Now the peltasts were few in number; the foremost of them were therefore seized with fear of the horsemen and took to flight;


5.4.44
2393
οἱ δὲ ἱππεῖς αὖ τοῦτο ὡς εἶδον , ἐδιδάχθησαν ὑπὸ τῶν φευγόντων ἐπιθέσθαι αὐτοῖς .
but when the horsemen, in their turn, saw this, they applied the lesson they had learned from the fugitives and attacked them.


5.4.45
2394
καὶ ὁ μὲν δὴ Φοιβίδας καὶ δύο ἢ τρεῖς μετ’ αὐτοῦ μαχόμενοι ἀπέθανον , οἱ δὲ μισθοφόροι τούτου γενομένου πάντες ἔφυγον .
So then Phoebidas and two or three with him fell fighting, and when this happened the mercenaries all took to flight.


5.4.45
2395
ἐπεὶ δὲ φεύγοντες ἀφίκοντο πρὸς τοὺς ὁπλίτας τῶν Θεσπιῶν , κ- ἐκεῖνοι , μάλα πρόσθεν μέγα φρονοῦντες μὴ ὑπείξειν τοῖς Θηβαίοις , ἔφυγον , οὐδέν τι πάνυ διωκόμενοι ·
And when as they fled they came to the hoplites of the Thespians, these also, though previously they had been quite proudly confident that they would not give way before the Thebans, took to flight without so much as being pursued at all.


5.4.45
2396
καὶ γὰρ ἦν ἤδη ὀψέ .
For by this time it was too late in the day for a pursuit.


5.4.45
2397
καὶ ἀπέθανον μὲν οὐ πολλοί , ὅμως δὲ οὐ πρόσθεν ἔστησαν οἱ Θεσπιεῖς , πρὶν ἐν τῷ τείχει ἐγένοντο .
Now not many of the Thespians were killed, but nevertheless they did not stop until they got within their wall.


5.4.46
2398
ἐκ δὲ τούτου πάλιν αὖ τὰ τῶν Θηβαίων ἀνεζωπυρεῖτο , καὶ ἐστρατεύοντο εἰς Θεσπιὰς καὶ εἰς τὰς ἄλλας τὰς περιοικίδας πόλεις .
As a result of this affair the spirits of the Thebans were kindled again, and they made expeditions to Thespiae and to the other cities round about them.


5.4.46
2399
ὁ μέντοι δῆμος ἐξ αὐτῶν εἰς τὰς Θήβας ἀπεχώρει ·
The democratic factions, however, withdrew from these cities to Thebes.


5.4.46
2400
ἐν πάσαις γὰρ ταῖς πόλεσι δυναστεῖαι καθειστήκεσαν , ὥσπερ ἐν Θήβαις ·
For in all of them oligarchical governments had been established, just as in Thebes;


5.4.46
2401
ὥστε καὶ οἱ ἐν ταύταις ταῖς πόλεσι φίλοι τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων βοηθείας ἐδέοντο .
the result was that the friends of the Lacedaemonians in these cities were in need of aid.


5.4.46
2402
μετὰ δὲ τὸν Φοιβίδα θάνατον πολέμαρχον μὲν καὶ μόραν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι κατὰ θάλατταν πέμψαντες τὰς Θεσπιὰς ἐφύλαττον .
But after the death of Phoebidas the Lacedaemonians merely sent over by sea a polemarch and one regiment, and thus kept Thespiae garrisoned.


5.4.47
2403
ἐπεὶ δὲ τὸ ἔαρ ἐπέστη , πάλιν ἔφαινον φρουρὰν οἱ ἔφοροι εἰς τὰς Θήβας , καὶ τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου , ᾗπερ τὸ πρόσθεν , ἐδέοντο ἡγεῖσθαι .
When the spring came, however, the ephors again called out the ban against Thebes and, just as before, requested Agesilaus to take command.


5.4.47
2404
ὁ δ’ ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐμβολῆς τ- αὐτὰ γιγνώσκων , πρὶν καὶ τὰ διαβατήρια θύεσθαι , πέμψας πρὸς τὸν ἐν Θεσπιαῖς πολέμαρχον ἐκέλευε προκαταλαβεῖν τὸ ὑπὲρ τῆς κατὰ τὸν Κιθαιρῶνα ὁδοῦ ἄκρον καὶ φυλάττειν , ἕως ἂν αὐτὸς ἔλθῃ .
Now since he held the same views as before about invading Boeotia, he sent to the polemarch at Thespiae before even offering the sacrifice at the frontier and ordered him to occupy in advance the summit overlooking the road which leads over Cithaeron and to guard it until he himself arrived.


5.4.48
2405
ἐπεὶ δὲ τοῦτο ὑπερβαλὼν ἐν ταῖς Πλαταιαῖς ἐγένετο , πάλιν προσεποιήσατο εἰς τὰς Θεσπιὰς πρῶτον ἰέναι , καὶ πέμπων ἀγοράν τε ἐκέλευε παρασκευάζειν καὶ τὰς πρεσβείας ἐκεῖ περιμένειν ·
And when he had passed this point and arrived at Plataea, he pretended that he was again going to Thespiae first, and sending thither he gave orders that a market should be made ready and that the embassies should await him there;


5.4.48
2406
ὥστε οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἰσχυρῶς τὴν πρὸς Θεσπιῶν ἐμβολὴν ἐφύλαττον .
so that the Thebans guarded strongly the pass leading from Thespiae into their country.


5.4.49
2407
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ θυσάμενος ἐπορεύετο τὴν ἐπ’ Ἐρυθράς ·
But on the following day at daybreak, after offering sacrifices, Agesilaus proceeded by the road to Erythrae.


5.4.49
2408
καὶ ὡς στρατεύματι δυοῖν ἡμέραιν ὁδὸν ἐν μιᾷ καθανύσας ἔφθασεν ὑπερβὰς τὸ κατὰ Σκῶλον σταύρωμα , πρὶν ἐλθεῖν τοὺς Θηβαίους ἀπὸ τῆς φυλακῆς , καθ’ ἣν τὸ πρόσθεν εἰσῆλθε .
And after accomplishing in one day a two days’ march for an army, he passed the line of the stockade at Scolus before the Thebans returned from keeping guard at the place where he had entered on the previous occasion.


5.4.49
2409
τοῦτο δὲ ποιήσας τὰ πρὸς ἕω τῆς τῶν Θηβαίων πόλεως ἐδῄου μέχρι τῆς Ταναγραίων ·
Having done this, he laid waste the region to the east of the city of the Thebans, as far as the territory of the Tanagraeans;


5.4.49
2410
ἔτι γὰρ τότε καὶ τὴν Τάναγραν οἱ περὶ Ὑπατόδωρον , φίλοι ὄντες τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων , εἶχον .
for at that time Hypatodorus and his followers, who were friends of the Lacedaemonians, still held possession of Tanagra.


5.4.49
2411
καὶ ἐκ τούτου δὴ ἀπῄει ἐν ἀριστερᾷ ἔχων τὸ τεῖχος .
After this he proceeded to retire, keeping the wall of Tanagra on his left.


5.4.50
2412
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ὑπελθόντες ἀντετάξαντο ἐπὶ Γραὸς στήθει , ὄπισθεν ἔχοντες τήν τε τάφρον καὶ τὸ σταύρωμα , νομίζοντες καλὸν εἶναι ἐνταῦθα διακινδυνεύειν ·
Meanwhile the Thebans came up quietly and formed in line of battle against him on the hill called Old Woman’s Breast, with the trench and the stockade in their rear, believing that this was a good place to risk a battle;


5.4.50
2413
καὶ γὰρ στενὸν ἦν ταύτῃ ἐπιεικῶς καὶ δύσβατον τὸ χωρίον .
for the ground at this point was a rather narrow strip and hard to traverse.


5.4.50
2414
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος ἰδὼν ταῦτα πρὸς ἐκείνους μὲν οὐκ ἦγεν , ἐπισιμώσας δὲ πρὸς τὴν πόλιν ᾔει .
When Agesilaus observed this, he did not lead his army against them, but turned aside and proceeded in the direction of the city.


5.4.51
2415
οἱ δ’ αὖ Θηβαῖοι δείσαντες περὶ τῆς πόλεως , ὅτι ἐρήμη ἦν , ἀπολιπόντες ἔνθα παρατεταγμένοι ἦσαν δρόμῳ ἔθεον εἰς τὴν πόλιν τὴν ἐπὶ Ποτνιὰς ὁδόν ·
The Thebans, on the other hand, being seized with fear for their city, because it was empty of defenders, abandoned the place where they were drawn up and hurried toward the city on the run, by the road which leads to Potniae;


5.4.51
2416
ἦν γὰρ αὕτη ἀσφαλεστέρα .
for this was the safer route.


5.4.51
2417
καὶ μέντοι ἐδόκει καλὸν γενέσθαι τὸ ἐνθύμημα τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου , ὅτι πόρρω ἀπαγαγὼν ἀπὸ τῶν πολεμίων ἀποχωρεῖν δρόμῳ αὐτοὺς ἐποίησεν ·
And it really seemed that Agesilaus’ expedient proved a clever one, for though he led his army directly away from the enemy, he caused the latter to retire on the run,


5.4.51
2418
ὅμως μέντοι ἐπὶ παραθέοντας αὐτοὺς τῶν πολεμάρχων τινὲς ἐπέδραμον σὺν ταῖς μόραις .
and while the enemy ran past, some of his polemarchs with their regiments nevertheless succeeded in charging upon them.


5.4.52
2419
οἱ μέντοι Θηβαῖοι ἀπὸ τῶν λόφων τὰ δόρατα ἐξηκόντιζον , ὥστε καὶ ἀπέθανεν Ἀλύπητος , εἷς τῶν πολεμάρχων , ἀκοντισθεὶς δόρατι ·
The Thebans, however, hurled their spears from the hill-tops, so that Alypetus, one of the polemarchs, was struck and killed;


5.4.52
2420
ὅμως δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ τούτου τοῦ λόφου ἐτράπησαν οἱ Θηβαῖοι ·
but in spite of that the Thebans were put to flight from this hill also.


5.4.52
2421
ὥστε ἀναβάντες οἱ Σκιρῖται καὶ τῶν ἱππέων τινὲς ἔπαιον τοὺς τελευταίους τῶν Θηβαίων παρελαύνοντας εἰς τὴν πόλιν .
Consequently the Sciritans and some of the horsemen climbed the hill and showered blows upon the hind-most of the Thebans as they rushed past them toward the city.


5.4.53
2422
ὡς μέντοι ἐγγὺς τοῦ τείχους ἐγένοντο , ὑποστρέφουσιν οἱ Θηβαῖοι ·
As soon as they got near the wall, however, the Thebans turned about;


5.4.53
2423
οἱ δὲ Σκιρῖται ἰδόντες αὐτοὺς θᾶττον ἢ βάδην ἀπῆλθον .
and the Sciritans, upon seeing them, fell back at a faster pace than a walk.


5.4.53
2424
καὶ ἀπέθανε μὲν οὐδεὶς αὐτῶν ·
Now not one of them was killed;


5.4.53
2425
ὅμως δὲ οἱ Θηβαῖοι τροπαῖόν τε ἐστήσαντο , ὅτι ἀπεχώρησαν οἱ ἀναβάντες .
nevertheless, the Thebans set up a trophy, because after climbing the hill the Sciritans had retired.


5.4.54
2426
ὁ μέντοι Ἀγησίλαος , ἐπεὶ ὥρα ἦν , ἀπελθὼν ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο ἔνθαπερ τοὺς πολεμίους εἶδε παρατεταγμένους ·
As for Agesilaus, when it was time for him to do so, he withdrew and encamped at the very spot where he had seen the enemy drawn up;


5.4.54
2427
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἀπήγαγε τὴν ἐπὶ Θεσπιάς .
then on the following day he led his army away by the road to Thespiae.


5.4.54
2428
θρασέως δὲ παρακολουθούντων τῶν πελταστῶν , οἳ ἦσαν μισθοφόροι τοῖς Θηβαίοις , καὶ τὸν Χαβρίαν ἀνακαλούντων , ὅτι οὐκ ἠκολούθει , ὑποστραφέντες οἱ τῶν Ὀλυνθίων ἱππεῖς , ἤδη γὰρ κατὰ τοὺς ὅρκους συνεστρατεύοντο , ἐδίωξάν τε αὐτοὺς πρὸς ὄρθιον , καθάπερ ἠκολούθουν , καὶ ἀπέκτειναν αὐτῶν μάλα πολλούς ·
But since the peltasts who were mercenaries in the service of the Thebans clung boldly at his heels, and kept calling out to Chabrias because he was not doing the same, the horsemen of the Olynthians  —  for they were now serving with the Lacedaemonians in accordance with their sworn agreement  —  wheeled about and, once in pursuit of the peltasts, chased them on up a slope and killed very many of them;


5.4.54
2429
ταχὺ γὰρ πρὸς ἄναντες εὐήλατον ἁλίσκονται πεζοὶ ὑφ’ ἱππέων .
for when going up a hill where the riding is good foot-soldiers are quickly overtaken by horsemen.


5.4.55
2430
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐγένετο ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ἐν ταῖς Θεσπιαῖς , εὑρὼν στασιάζοντας τοὺς πολίτας , καὶ βουλομένων τῶν φασκόντων λακωνίζειν ἀποκτεῖναι τοὺς ἐναντίους , ὧν καὶ Μένων ἦν , τοῦτο μὲν οὖν οὐκ ἐπέτρεψε ·
Now when Agesilaus had arrived at Thespiae, finding that the citizens were involved in factional strife, and that those who said they were supporters of Lacedaemon wanted to put to death their opponents, of whom Menon was one, he did not allow this proceeding;


5.4.55
2431
διαλλάξας δὲ αὐτοὺς καὶ ὅρκους ὀμόσαι ἀλλήλοις ἀναγκάσας , οὕτως ἀπῆλθε πάλιν διὰ τοῦ Κιθαιρῶνος τὴν ἐπὶ Μέγαρα .
but he reconciled them and compelled them to give oaths to one another, and then, this being accomplished, he came back again by way of Cithaeron, taking the road leading to Megara.


5.4.55
2432
καὶ ἐκεῖθεν τοὺς μὲν συμμάχους ἀφῆκε , τὸ δὲ πολιτικὸν στράτευμα οἴκαδε ἀπήγαγε .
From there he dismissed the allies and led his citizen troops back home.


5.4.56
2433
μάλα δὲ πιεζόμενοι οἱ Θηβαῖοι σπάνει σίτου διὰ τὸ δυοῖν ἐτοῖν μὴ εἰληφέναι καρπὸν ἐκ τῆς γῆς , πέμπουσιν ἐπὶ δυοῖν τριήροιν ἄνδρας εἰς Παγασὰς ἐπὶ σῖτον δέκα τάλαντα δόντες .
The Thebans were now greatly pinched for want of corn, because they had got no crops from their land for two years; they therefore sent men and two triremes to Pagasae after corn, giving them ten talents.


5.4.56
2434
Ἀλκέτας δὲ ὁ Λακεδαιμόνιος φυλάττων Ὠρεόν , ἐν ᾧ ἐκεῖνοι τὸν σῖτον συνεωνοῦντο , ἐπληρώσατο τρεῖς τριήρεις , ἐπιμεληθεὶς ὅπως μὴ ἐξαγγελθείη .
But while they were buying up the corn, Alcetas, the Lacedaemonian who was keeping guard in Oreus, manned three triremes, taking care that the fact should not be reported.


5.4.56
2435
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπήγετο ὁ σῖτος , λαμβάνει ὁ Ἀλκέτας τόν τε σῖτον καὶ τὰς τριήρεις , καὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐζώγρησεν οὐκ ἐλάττους ἢ τριακοσίους .
And when the corn was on its way from Pagasae, Alcetas captured both corn and triremes, and made prisoners of the men, who were not fewer than three hundred in number.


5.4.56
2436
τούτους δὲ εἶρξεν ἐν τῇ ἀκροπόλει , οὗπερ αὐτὸς ἐσκήνου .
These men he then shut up in the Acropolis, where he himself had his quarters.


5.4.57
2437
ἀκολουθοῦντος δέ τινος τῶν Ὠρειτῶν παιδός , ὡς ἔφασαν , μάλα καλοῦ τε κ- ἀγαθοῦ , καταβαίνων ἐκ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως περὶ τοῦτον ἦν .
Now since, as the story ran, there was a boy of Oreus, an extremely fine lad too, who was always in attendance upon him, Alcetas went down from the Acropolis and occupied himself with this boy.


5.4.57
2438
καταγνόντες δὲ οἱ αἰχμάλωτοι τὴν ἀμέλειαν , καταλαμβάνουσι τὴν ἀκρόπολιν , καὶ ἡ πόλις ἀφίσταται ·
Accordingly the prisoners, observing his carelessness, seized the Acropolis, and the city revolted;


5.4.57
2439
ὥστ’ εὐπόρως ἤδη οἱ Θηβαῖοι σῖτον παρεκομίζοντο .
so that thereafter the Thebans brought in supplies of corn easily.


5.4.58
2440
ὑποφαίνοντος δὲ πάλιν τοῦ ἦρος ὁ μὲν Ἀγησίλαος κλινοπετὴς ἦν .
As the spring came on again, Agesilaus was confined to his bed.


5.4.58
2441
ὅτε γὰρ ἀπῆγε τὸ στράτευμα ἐκ τῶν Θηβῶν , ἐν τοῖς Μεγάροις ἀναβαίνοντος αὐτοῦ ἐκ τοῦ Ἀφροδισίου εἰς τὸ ἀρχεῖον ῥήγνυται ὁποία δὴ φλέψ , καὶ ἐρρύη τὸ ἐκ τοῦ σώματος αἷμα εἰς τὸ ὑγιὲς σκέλος .
For when he was leading his army back from Thebes, and, in Megara, was ascending from the Aphrodisium to the government building, some vein or other was ruptured, and the blood from his body poured into his sound leg.


5.4.58
2442
γενομένης δὲ τῆς κνήμης ὑπερόγκου καὶ ὀδυνῶν ἀφορήτων , Συρακόσιός τις ἰατρὸς σχάζει τὴν παρὰ τῷ σφυρῷ φλέβα αὐτοῦ .
Then as the lower part of his leg became immensely swollen and the pain unendurable, a Syracusan surgeon opened the vein at his ankle.


5.4.58
2443
ὡς δὲ ἅπαξ ἤρξατο , ἔρρει αὐτῷ νύκτα τε καὶ ἡμέραν τὸ αἷμα , καὶ πάντα ποιοῦντες οὐκ ἐδύναντο σχεῖν τὸ ῥεῦμα πρὶν ἐλιποψύχησε ·
But when once the blood had begun to flow, it ran night and day, and with all they could do they were unable to check the flow until he lost consciousness;


5.4.58
2444
τότε μέντοι ἐπαύσατο .
then, however, it stopped.


5.4.58
2445
καὶ οὕτως ἐκεῖνος μὲν ἀποκομισθεὶς εἰς Λακεδαίμονα ἠρρώστει τό τε λοιπὸν θέρος καὶ διὰ χειμῶνος .
So it came about that after being carried back to Lacedaemon he was ill the rest of the summer and throughout the winter.


5.4.59
2446
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ἐπεὶ ἔαρ ὑπέφαινε , πάλιν φρουράν τε ἔφαινον καὶ Κλεόμβροτον ἡγεῖσθαι ἐκέλευον .
The Lacedaemonians, however, when spring was just beginning, again called out the ban and directed Cleombrotus to take command.


5.4.59
2447
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἔχων τὸ στράτευμα πρὸς τῷ Κιθαιρῶνι ἐγένετο , προῇσαν αὐτῷ οἱ πελτασταὶ ὡς προκαταληψόμενοι τὰ ὑπὲρ τῆς ὁδοῦ .
Now when he arrived at Cithaeron with the army, his peltasts went on ahead for the purpose of occupying in advance the heights above the road.


5.4.59
2448
Θηβαίων δὲ καὶ Ἀθηναίων προκατέχοντές τινες τὸ ἄκρον τέως μὲν εἴων αὐτοὺς ἀναβαίνειν ·
But some of the Thebans and Athenians who were already in possession of the summit allowed the peltasts to pursue their ascent for a time,


5.4.59
2449
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐπ’ αὐτοῖς ἦσαν , ἐξαναστάντες ἐδίωκον καὶ ἀπέκτειναν περὶ τετταράκοντα .
but when they were close upon them, rose from their concealment, pursued them, and killed about forty.


5.4.59
2450
τούτου δὲ γενομένου ὁ Κλεόμβροτος ἀδύνατον νομίσας τὸ ὑπερβῆναι εἰς τὴν τῶν Θηβαίων , ἀπῆγέ τε καὶ διῆκε τὸ στράτευμα .
After this had happened, Cleombrotus, in the belief that it was impossible to cross over the mountain into the country of the Thebans, led back and disbanded his army.


5.4.60
2451
συλλεγέντων δὲ τῶν συμμάχων εἰς Λακεδαίμονα , λόγοι ἐγίγνοντο ἀπὸ τῶν συμμάχων ὅτι διὰ μαλακίαν κατατριβήσοιντο ὑπὸ τοῦ πολέμου .
When the allies gathered together at Lacedaemon, speeches were forthcoming from them to the effect that, through slackness in prosecuting the war, they were going to be worn out by it.


5.4.60
2452
ἐξεῖναι γὰρ σφίσι ναῦς πληρώσαντας πολὺ πλείους τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἑλεῖν λιμῷ τὴν πόλιν αὐτῶν ·
For they said it was within their power to man far more ships than the Athenians had and to capture their city by starvation;


5.4.60
2453
ἐξεῖναι δ’ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς ταύταις ναυσὶ καὶ εἰς Θήβας στράτευμα διαβιβάζειν , εἰ μὲν βούλοιντο , ἐπὶ Φωκέων , εἰ δὲ βούλοιντο , ἐπὶ Κρεύσιος .
and it was also within their power to transport an army across to Thebes in these same ships, steering for Phocis if they chose, or, if they chose, for Creusis.


5.4.61
2454
ταῦτα δὲ λογισάμενοι ἑξήκοντα μὲν τριήρεις ἐπλήρωσαν , Πόλλις δ’ αὐτῶν ναύαρχος ἐγένετο .
Influenced by these considerations they manned sixty triremes, and Pollis was made admiral of them.


5.4.61
2455
καὶ μέντοι οὐκ ἐψεύσθησαν οἱ ταῦτα γνόντες , ἀλλ’ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐπολιορκοῦντο ·
And those who had conceived these views were not disappointed, for the Athenians were in fact as good as besieged;


5.4.61
2456
τὰ γὰρ σιταγωγὰ αὐτοῖς πλοῖα ἐπὶ μὲν τὸν Γεραστὸν ἀφίκετο , ἐκεῖθεν δ’ οὐκέτι ἤθελε παραπλεῖν , τοῦ ναυτικοῦ ὄντος τοῦ Λακεδαιμονίων περί τε Αἴγιναν καὶ Κέω καὶ Ἄνδρον .
for while their corn ships got as far as Gerastus, they would not now venture to sail along the coast from that point, since the Lacedaemonian fleet was in the neighbourhood of Aegina, Ceos, and Andros.


5.4.61
2457
γνόντες δ’ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι τὴν ἀνάγκην , ἐνέβησαν αὐτοὶ εἰς τὰς ναῦς , καὶ ναυμαχήσαντες πρὸς τὸν Πόλλιν Χαβρίου ἡγουμένου νικῶσι τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ .
Then the Athenians, realizing the necessity that was upon them, went on board their ships themselves, joined battle with Pollis under the leadership of Chabrias, and were victorious in the battle.


5.4.61
2458
καὶ ὁ μὲν σῖτος τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις οὕτω παρεκομίσθη .
Thus the corn was brought in for the Athenians.


5.4.62
2459
παρασκευαζομένων δὲ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων στράτευμα διαβιβάζειν ἐπὶ τοὺς Βοιωτούς , ἐδεήθησαν οἱ Θηβαῖοι τῶν Ἀθηναίων περὶ Πελοπόννησον στράτευμα πέμψαι , νομίσαντες εἰ τοῦτο γένοιτο , οὐ δυνατὸν ἔσεσθαι τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ἅμα μὲν τὴν ἑαυτῶν χώραν φυλάττειν , ἅμα δὲ τὰς περὶ ἐκεῖνα τὰ χωρία συμμαχίδας πόλεις , ἅμα δὲ στράτευμα διαβιβάζειν ἱκανὸν πρὸς ἑαυτούς .
Again, while the Lacedaemonians were preparing to transport an army across the gulf to proceed against the Boeotians, the Thebans requested the Athenians to send an expedition around Peloponnesus, believing that if this were done it would not be possible for the Lacedaemonians at one and the same time to guard their own country and likewise the allied cities in their neighbourhood, and also to send across an army large enough to oppose themselves, the Thebans.


5.4.63
2460
καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι μέντοι ὀργιζόμενοι τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις διὰ τὸ Σφοδρία ἔργον , προθύμως ἐξέπεμψαν περὶ τὴν Πελοπόννησον ναῦς τε ἑξήκοντα πληρώσαντες καὶ στρατηγὸν αὐτῶν Τιμόθεον ἑλόμενοι .
And the Athenians, angry as they were with the Lacedaemonians on account of Sphodrias’ act, did eagerly dispatch the expedition around Peloponnesus, manning sixty ships and choosing Timotheus as their commander.


5.4.63
2461
ἅτε δὲ εἰς τὰς Θήβας οὐκ ἐμβεβληκότων τῶν πολεμίων οὔτ’ ἐν ᾧ Κλεόμβροτος ἦγε τὴν στρατιὰν ἔτει οὔτ’ ἐν ᾧ Τιμόθεος περιέπλευσε , θρασέως δὴ ἐστρατεύοντο οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἐπὶ τὰς περιοικίδας πόλεις καὶ πάλιν αὐτὰς ἀνελάμβανον .
Now since the enemy had not invaded the territory of Thebes in the year when Cleombrotus was in command of the army and did not do so in the year when Timotheus made his voyage, the Thebans boldly undertook expeditions against the neighbouring cities of Boeotia and recovered them a second time.


5.4.64
2462
ὁ μέντοι Τιμόθεος περιπλεύσας Κέρκυραν μὲν εὐθὺς ὑφ’ ἑαυτῷ ἐποιήσατο ·
As for Timotheus, after he had sailed round Peloponnesus he brought Corcyra at once under his control;


5.4.64
2463
οὐ μέντοι ἠνδραποδίσατο οὐδὲ ἄνδρας ἐφυγάδευσεν οὐδὲ νόμους μετέστησεν ·
he did not, however, enslave the inhabitants or banish individuals or change the government.


5.4.64
2464
ἐξ ὧν τὰς περὶ ἐκεῖνα πόλεις πάσας εὐμενεστέρας ἔσχεν .
As a result of this he made all the states in that region more favourably inclined to him.


5.4.65
2465
ἀντεπλήρωσαν δὲ καὶ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ναυτικόν , καὶ Νικόλοχον ναύαρχον , μάλα θρασὺν ἄνδρα , ἐξέπεμψαν ·
The Lacedaemonians, however, manned a fleet to oppose him, and sent out Nicolochus, a very daring man, as admiral;


5.4.65
2466
ὃς ἐπειδὴ εἶδε τὰς μετὰ Τιμοθέου ναῦς , οὐκ ἐμέλλησε , καίπερ ἓξ νεῶν αὐτῷ ἀπουσῶν τῶν Ἀμβρακιωτίδων , ἀλλὰ πέντε καὶ πεντήκοντα ἔχων ναῦς ἑξήκοντα οὔσαις ταῖς μετὰ Τιμοθέου ἐναυμάχησε .
and as soon as he sighted the ships under Timotheus, he did not delay, even though six of his ships, those from Ambracia, were not with him, but with fifty-five ships he joined battle with those under Timotheus, which numbered sixty.


5.4.65
2467
καὶ τότε μὲν ἡττήθη , καὶ τροπαῖον ὁ Τιμόθεος ἔστησεν ἐν Ἀλυζείᾳ .
And at that time he was defeated, and Timotheus set up a trophy at Alyzeia.


5.4.66
2468
ὁ δὲ ἀνειλκυσμένων τῶν Τιμοθέου νεῶν καὶ ἐπισκευαζομένων , ἐπεὶ παρεγένοντο αὐτῷ αἱ Ἀμβρακιώτιδες ἓξ τριήρεις , ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀλύζειαν ἔπλευσεν , ἔνθα ἦν ὁ Τιμόθεος .
But when the ships of Timotheus had been hauled up and were being refitted, and meanwhile the six Ambraciot triremes had joined Nicolochus, he sailed to Alyzeia, where Timotheus was.


5.4.66
2469
ὡς δὲ οὐκ ἀντανῆγε , τροπαῖον αὖ κ- ἐκεῖνος ἐστήσατο ἐν ταῖς ἐγγυτάτω νήσοις .
And since the latter did not put out against him, he in his turn set up a trophy on the nearest islands.


5.4.66
2470
ὁ δὲ Τιμόθεος ἐπεὶ ἅς τε εἶχεν ἐπεσκεύασε καὶ ἐκ Κερκύρας ἄλλας προσεπληρώσατο , γενομένων αὐτῷ τῶν πασῶν πλέον ἑβδομήκοντα , πολὺ δὴ ὑπερεῖχε ναυτικῷ ·
When, however, Timotheus finished refitting the ships which he had and had manned, besides, others from Corcyra, the whole number of his ships now amounting to more than seventy, he was far superior to the enemy in the size of his fleet.


5.4.66
2471
χρήματα μέντοι μετεπέμπετο Ἀθήνηθεν ·
But he kept sending for money from Athens;


5.4.66
2472
πολλῶν γὰρ ἐδεῖτο , ἅτε πολλὰς ναῦς ἔχων .
for he needed a great deal, inasmuch as he had a great many ships.




6.1.1
2473
οἱ μὲν οὖν Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι περὶ ταῦτα ἦσαν .
The Athenians and Lacedaemonians, then, were occupied with these things.


6.1.1
2474
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ἐπεὶ κατεστρέψαντο τὰς ἐν τῇ Βοιωτίᾳ πόλεις , ἐστράτευον καὶ εἰς τὴν Φωκίδα .
As for the Thebans, after they had subdued the cities in Boeotia they made an expedition into Phocis also.


6.1.1
2475
ὡς δ’ αὖ καὶ οἱ Φωκεῖς ἐπρέσβευον εἰς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα καὶ ἔλεγον ὅτι εἰ μὴ βοηθήσοιεν , οὐ δυνήσοιντο μὴ πείθεσθαι τοῖς Θηβαίοις , ἐκ τούτου οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι διαβιβάζουσι κατὰ θάλατταν εἰς Φωκέας Κλεόμβροτόν τε τὸν βασιλέα καὶ μετ’ αὐτοῦ τέτταρας μόρας καὶ τῶν συμμάχων τὸ μέρος .
And when the Phocians, on their side, sent ambassadors to Lacedaemon and said that unless the Lacedaemonians came to their assistance they would not be able to escape yielding to the Thebans, thereupon the Lacedaemonians sent Cleombrotus, the king, across to Phocis by sea, and with him four regiments of their own and the corresponding contingents of the allies.


6.1.2
2476
σχεδὸν δὲ περὶ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον καὶ ἐκ Θετταλίας ἀφικνεῖται πρὸς τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων Πολυδάμας Φαρσάλιος .
At about this time Polydamas of Pharsalus also arrived from Thessaly and presented himself before the general assembly of the Lacedaemonians.


6.1.2
2477
οὗτος δὲ καὶ ἐν τῇ ἄλλῃ Θετταλίᾳ μάλα ηὐδοκίμει , καὶ ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ πόλει οὕτως ἐδόκει καλός τε κ- ἀγαθὸς εἶναι ὥστε καὶ στασιάσαντες οἱ Φαρσάλιοι παρακατέθεντο αὐτῷ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν , καὶ τὰς προσόδους ἐπέτρεψαν λαμβάνοντι , ὅσα ἐγέγραπτο ἐν τοῖς νόμοις , εἴς τε τὰ ἱερὰ ἀναλίσκειν καὶ εἰς τὴν ἄλλην διοίκησιν .
This man was not only held in very high repute throughout all Thessaly, but in his own city was regarded as so honourable a man that, when the Pharsalians fell into factional strife, they put their Acropolis in his hands and entrusted to him the duty of receiving the revenues, and of expending, both for religious purposes and for the administration in general, all the sums which were prescribed in their laws.


6.1.3
2478
κ- ἐκεῖνος μέντοι ἀπὸ τούτων τῶν χρημάτων τήν τε ἄκραν φυλάττων διέσῳζεν αὐτοῖς καὶ τ- ἄλλα διοικῶν ἀπελογίζετο κατ’ ἐνιαυτόν .
And he did, in fact, use these funds to guard the Acropolis and keep it safe for them, and likewise to administer their other affairs, rendering them an account yearly.


6.1.3
2479
καὶ ὁπότε μὲν ἐνδεήσειε , παρ’ ἑαυτοῦ προσετίθει , ὁπότε δὲ περιγένοιτο τῆς προσόδου , ἀπελάμβανεν .
And whenever there was a deficit he made it up from his own private purse, and whenever there was a surplus of revenue he paid himself back.


6.1.3
2480
ἦν δὲ καὶ ἄλλως φιλόξενός τε καὶ μεγαλοπρεπὴς τὸν Θετταλικὸν τρόπον .
Besides, he was hospitable and magnificent, after the Thessalian manner.


6.1.3
2481
οὗτος οὖν ἐπεὶ ἀφίκετο εἰς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα , εἶπε τοιάδε .
Now when this man arrived at Lacedaemon he spoke as follows:


6.1.4
2482
ἐγώ , ὦ ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , πρόξενος ὑμῶν ὢν καὶ εὐεργέτης ἐκ πάντων ὧν μεμνήμεθα προγόνων , ἀξιῶ , ἐάν τέ τι ἀπορῶ , πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἰέναι , ἐάν τέ τι χαλεπὸν ὑμῖν ἐν τῇ Θετταλίᾳ συνιστῆται , σημαίνειν .
Men of Lacedaemon, I am your diplomatic agent and benefactor, as all my ancestors have been of whom we have any knowledge; I therefore deem it proper, if I am in any difficulty, to come to you, and if any trouble is gathering for you in Thessaly, to make it known to you.


6.1.4
2483
ἀκούετε μὲν οὖν εὖ οἶδ’ ὅτι καὶ ὑμεῖς Ἰάσονος ὄνομα ·
Now you also, I am very sure, often hear the name of Jason spoken,


6.1.4
2484
ὁ γὰρ ἀνὴρ καὶ δύναμιν ἔχει μεγάλην καὶ ὀνομαστός ἐστιν .
for the man has great power and is famous.


6.1.4
2485
οὗτος δὲ σπονδὰς ποιησάμενος συνεγένετό μοι , καὶ εἶπε τάδε ·
This man, after concluding a truce with my city, had a meeting with me and spoke as follows:


6.1.5
2486
ὅτι μέν , ὦ Πολυδάμα , καὶ ἄκουσαν τὴν ὑμετέραν πόλιν Φάρσαλον δυναίμην ἂν παραστήσασθαι ἔξεστί σοι ἐκ τῶνδε λογίζεσθαι .
Polydamas, that I could bring over your city, Pharsalus, even against its will, you may conclude from the following facts.


6.1.5
2487
ἐγὼ γάρ , ἔφη , ἔχω μὲν Θετταλίας τὰς πλείστας καὶ μεγίστας πόλεις συμμάχους ·
You know,  he said,  that I have as allies the greater number and the largest of the cities of Thessaly;


6.1.5
2488
κατεστρεψάμην δ’ αὐτὰς ὑμῶν σὺν αὐταῖς τὰ ἐναντία ἐμοὶ στρατευομένων .
and I subdued them when you were with them in the field against me.


6.1.5
2489
καὶ μὴν οἶσθά γε ὅτι ξένους ἔχω μισθοφόρους εἰς ἑξακισχιλίους , οἷς , ὡς ἐγὼ οἶμαι , οὐδεμία πόλις δύναιτ’ ἂν ῥᾳδίως μάχεσθαι .
Furthermore, you are aware that I have men of other states as mercenaries to the number of six thousand, with whom, as I think, no city could easily contend.


6.1.5
2490
ἀριθμὸς μὲν γάρ , ἔφη , καὶ ἄλλοθεν οὐκ ἂν ἐλάττων ἐξέλθοι ·
As for numbers,  he said,  of course as great a force might march out of some other city also;


6.1.5
2491
ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν ἐκ τῶν πόλεων στρατεύματα τοὺς μὲν προεληλυθότας ἤδη ταῖς ἡλικίαις ἔχει , τοὺς δ’ οὔπω ἀκμάζοντας ·
but armies made up of citizens include men who are already advanced in years and others who have not yet come to their prime.


6.1.5
2492
σωμασκοῦσί γε μὴν μάλα ὀλίγοι τινὲς ἐν ἑκάστῃ πόλει ·
Furthermore, in every city very few men train their bodies,


6.1.5
2493
παρ’ ἐμοὶ δὲ οὐδεὶς μισθοφορεῖ , ὅστις μὴ ἱκανός ἐστιν ἐμοὶ ἴσα πονεῖν .
but among my mercenaries no one serves unless he is able to endure as severe toils as I myself.


6.1.6
2494
αὐτὸς δ’ ἐστί , λέγειν γὰρ χρὴ πρὸς ὑμᾶς τ- ἀληθῆ , καὶ τὸ σῶμα μάλα εὔρωστος καὶ ἄλλως φιλόπονος .
And he himself  —  for I must tell you the truth  —  is exceedingly strong of body and a lover of toil besides.


6.1.6
2495
καὶ τοίνυν τῶν παρ’ αὐτῷ πεῖραν λαμβάνει καθ’ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν ·
Indeed, he makes trial every day of the men under him,


6.1.6
2496
ἡγεῖται γὰρ σὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις καὶ ἐν τοῖς γυμνασίοις καὶ ὅταν πῃ στρατεύηται .
for in full armour he leads them, both on the parade-ground and whenever he is on a campaign anywhere.


6.1.6
2497
καὶ οὓς μὲν ἂν μαλακοὺς τῶν ξένων αἰσθάνηται , ἐκβάλλει , οὓς δ’ ἂν ὁρᾷ φιλοπόνως καὶ φιλοκινδύνως ἔχοντας πρὸς τοὺς πολέμους , τιμᾷ τοὺς μὲν διμοιρίαις , τοὺς δὲ τριμοιρίαις , τοὺς δὲ καὶ τετραμοιρίαις , καὶ ἄλλοις δώροις , καὶ νόσων γε θεραπείαις καὶ περὶ ταφὰς κόσμῳ ·
And whomsoever among his mercenaries he finds to be weaklings he casts out, but whomsoever he sees to be fond of toil and fond of the dangers of war he rewards, some with double pay, others with triple pay, others even with quadruple pay, and with gifts besides, as well as with care in sickness and magnificence in burial;


6.1.6
2498
ὥστε πάντες ἴσασιν οἱ παρ’ ἐκείνῳ ξένοι ὅτι ἡ πολεμικὴ αὐτοῖς ἀρετὴ ἐντιμότατόν τε βίον καὶ ἀφθονώτατον παρέχεται .
so that all the mercenaries in his service know that martial prowess assures to them a life of greatest honour and abundance.


6.1.7
2499
ἐπεδείκνυε δέ μοι εἰδότι ὅτι καὶ ὑπήκοοι ἤδη αὐτῷ εἶεν Μαρακοὶ καὶ Δόλοπες καὶ Ἀλκέτας ὁ ἐν τῇ Ἠπείρῳ ὕπαρχος ·
He pointed out to me, further, although I knew it before, that he already had as subjects the Maracians, the Dolopians, and Alcetas, the ruler in Epirus.


6.1.7
2500
ὥστε , ἔφη , τί ἂν ἐγὼ φοβούμενος οὐ ῥᾳδίως ἂν ὑμᾶς οἰοίμην καταστρέψασθαι ;
Therefore,  he said,  what have I to fear that I should not expect to subdue you easily?


6.1.7
2501
τάχα οὖν ὑπολάβοι ἄν τις ἐμοῦ ἄπειρος ·
To be sure, one who did not know me might perhaps retort,


6.1.7
2502
τί οὖν μέλλεις καὶ οὐκ ἤδη στρατεύεις ἐπὶ τοὺς Φαρσαλίους ;
Then why do you delay, instead of prosecuting your campaign against the Pharsalians at once?


6.1.7
2503
ὅτι νὴ Δία τῷ παντὶ κρεῖττόν μοι δοκεῖ εἶναι ἑκόντας ὑμᾶς μᾶλλον ἢ ἄκοντας προσαγαγέσθαι .
Because, by Zeus, it seems to me to be altogether better to bring you over to my side willingly rather than unwillingly.


6.1.7
2504
βιασθέντες μὲν γὰρ ὑμεῖς τ’ ἂν βουλεύοισθε ὅ τι δύναισθε κακὸν ἐμοί , ἐγώ τ’ ἂν ὑμᾶς ὡς ἀσθενεστάτους βουλοίμην εἶναι ·
For if you were constrained by force, you, on the one hand, would be planning whatever harm you could against me, and I, on the other, should be wanting to keep you as weak as I could;


6.1.7
2505
εἰ δὲ πεισθέντες μετ’ ἐμοῦ γένοισθε , δῆλον ὅτι αὔξοιμεν ἂν ὅ τι δυναίμεθα ἀλλήλους .
but if it was through persuasion that you joined with me, it is clear that we should advance one another’s interests to the best of our ability.


6.1.8
2506
γιγνώσκω μὲν οὖν , ὦ Πολυδάμα , ὅτι ἡ σὴ πατρὶς εἰς σὲ ἀποβλέπει ·
Now I know, Polydamas, that your city looks to you,


6.1.8
2507
ἐὰν δέ μοι φιλικῶς αὐτὴν ἔχειν παρασκευάσῃς , ὑπισχνοῦμαί σοι , ἔφη , ἐγὼ μέγιστόν σε τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι μετ’ ἐμὲ καταστήσειν .
and if you make her friendly to me I promise you, he said, that I will make you the greatest, next to myself, of all the men in Greece;


6.1.8
2508
οἵων δὲ πραγμάτων τὰ δεύτερά σοι δίδωμι ἄκουε , καὶ μηδὲν πίστευέ μοι ὅ τι ἂν μὴ λογιζομένῳ σοι ἀληθὲς φαίνηται .
and what manner of fortune it is wherein I offer you the second place, hear from me, and believe nothing that I say unless upon consideration it appears to you true.


6.1.8
2509
οὐκοῦν τοῦτο μὲν εὔδηλον ἡμῖν , ὅτι Φαρσάλου προσγενομένης καὶ τῶν ἐξ ὑμῶν ἠρτημένων πόλεων εὐπετῶς ἂν ἐγὼ ταγὸς Θετταλῶν ἁπάντων κατασταίην ·
Well, then, this is plain to us, that if Pharsalus and the cities which are dependent upon you should be added to my power, I could easily become Tagus of all the Thessalians;


6.1.8
2510
ὥς γε μήν , ὅταν ταγεύηται Θετταλία , εἰς ἑξακισχιλίους μὲν οἱ ἱππεύοντες γίγνονται , ὁπλῖται δὲ πλείους ἢ μύριοι καθίστανται .
and, further, that whenever Thessaly is under a Tagus, her horsemen amount to six thousand and more than ten thousand men become hoplites.


6.1.9
2511
ὧν ἐγὼ καὶ τὰ σώματα καὶ τὴν μεγαλοψυχίαν ὁρῶν οἶμαι ἂν αὐτῶν εἰ καλῶς τις ἐπιμελοῖτο , οὐκ εἶναι ἔθνος ὁποίῳ ἂν ἀξιώσαιεν ὑπήκοοι εἶναι Θετταλοί .
And when I see both their bodies and their high spirit, I think that if one should handle them rightly, there would be no people to whom the Thessalians would deign to be subject.


6.1.9
2512
πλατυτάτης γε μὴν γῆς οὔσης Θετταλίας , πάντα τὰ κύκλῳ ἔθνη ὑπήκοα μέν ἐστιν , ὅταν ταγὸς ἐνθάδε καταστῇ ·
Again, while Thessaly is an exceedingly flat land, all the peoples round about are subject to her as soon as a Tagus is established here;


6.1.9
2513
σχεδὸν δὲ πάντες οἱ ταύτῃ ἀκοντισταί εἰσιν ·
and almost all who dwell in these neighbouring regions are javelin-men,


6.1.9
2514
ὥστε καὶ πελταστικῷ εἰκὸς ὑπερέχειν τὴν ἡμετέραν δύναμιν .
so that it is likely that our force would be far superior in peltasts also.


6.1.10
2515
καὶ μὴν Βοιωτοί γε καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι πάντες ὅσοι Λακεδαιμονίοις πολεμοῦντες ὑπάρχουσί μοι σύμμαχοι ·
Furthermore, the Boeotians and all the others who are at war with the Lacedaemonians are my allies,


6.1.10
2516
καὶ ἀκολουθεῖν τοίνυν ἀξιοῦσιν ἐμοί , ἂν μόνον ἀπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων ἐλευθερῶ αὐτούς .
and they are ready to be my followers, too, if only I free them from the Lacedaemonians.


6.1.10
2517
καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ εὖ οἶδ’ ὅτι πάντα ποιήσαιεν ἂν ὥστε σύμμαχοι ἡμῖν γενέσθαι ·
The Athenians also, I know very well, would do anything to become allies of ours,


6.1.10
2518
ἀλλ’ ἐγὼ οὐκ ἄν μοι δοκῶ πρὸς αὐτοὺς φιλίαν ποιήσασθαι .
but I do not think it best to establish a friendship with them;


6.1.10
2519
νομίζω γὰρ ἔτι ῥᾷον τὴν κατὰ θάλατταν ἢ τὴν κατὰ γῆν ἀρχὴν παραλαβεῖν ἄν .
for I believe that I could obtain empire by sea even more easily than by land.


6.1.11
2520
εἰ δὲ εἰκότα λογίζομαι , σκόπει , ἔφη , καὶ ταῦτα .
To see whether my calculations are reasonable, he said, consider these points also.


6.1.11
2521
ἔχοντες μέν γε Μακεδονίαν , ἔνθεν καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι τὰ ξύλα ἄγονται , πολὺ δήπου πλείους ἐκείνων ἱκανοὶ ἐσόμεθα ναῦς ποιήσασθαι .
With Macedonia in our possession, the place from which the Athenians get their timber, we shall of course be able to construct far more ships than they.


6.1.11
2522
ἀνδρῶν γε μὴν ταύτας πληροῦν πότερον Ἀθηναίους ἢ ἡμᾶς εἰκὸς μᾶλλον δύνασθαι , τοσούτους καὶ τοιούτους ἔχοντας πενέστας ;
Again, who are likely to be better able to supply these ships with men, the Athenians or ourselves, who have so many serfs of so excellent a sort?


6.1.11
2523
τούς γε μὴν ναύτας τρέφειν πότερον ἡμᾶς ἱκανωτέρους εἰκὸς εἶναι τοὺς δι’ ἀφθονίαν καὶ ἄλλοσε σῖτον ἐκπέμποντας ἢ Ἀθηναίους τοὺς μηδ’ αὑτοῖς ἱκανὸν ἔχοντας , ἂν μὴ πρίωνται ;
And who are likely to be better able to maintain the sailors, we, who on account of our abundance even have corn to export to other lands, or the Athenians, who have not even enough for themselves unless they buy it?


6.1.12
2524
καὶ χρήμασί γε εἰκὸς δήπου ἡμᾶς ἀφθονωτέροις χρῆσθαι μὴ εἰς νησύδρια ἀποβλέποντας , ἀλλ’ ἠπειρωτικὰ ἔθνη καρπουμένους .
Then as for money, we surely should be likely to enjoy a greater abundance of it, for we should not be looking to little islands for our revenues, but drawing upon the resources of peoples of the continent.


6.1.12
2525
πάντα γὰρ δήπου τὰ κύκλῳ φόρον φέρει , ὅταν ταγεύηται τὰ κατὰ Θετταλίαν .
For of course all who are round about us pay tribute as soon as Thessaly is under a Tagus.


6.1.12
2526
οἶσθα δὲ δήπου ὅτι καὶ βασιλεὺς ὁ Περσῶν οὐ νήσους ἀλλ’ ἤπειρον καρπούμενος πλουσιώτατος ἀνθρώπων ἐστίν ·
And you certainly know that it is by drawing upon the resources, not of islands, but of a continent, that the King of the Persians is the richest of mortals;


6.1.12
2527
ὃν ἐγὼ ὑπήκοον ποιήσασθαι ἔτι εὐκατεργαστότερον ἡγοῦμαι εἶναι ἢ τὴν Ἑλλάδα .
and yet I think that it is even easier to reduce him to subjection than to reduce Greece.


6.1.12
2528
οἶδα γὰρ πάντας τοὺς ἐκεῖ ἀνθρώπους πλὴν ἑνὸς μᾶλλον δουλείαν ἢ ἀλκὴν μεμελετηκότας , οἶδα δὲ ὑφ’ οἵας δυνάμεως καὶ τῆς μετὰ Κύρου ἀναβάσης καὶ τῆς μετ’ Ἀγησιλάου εἰς πᾶν ἀφίκετο βασιλεύς .
For I know that everybody there, save one person, has trained himself to servitude rather than to prowess, and I know what manner of force it was  —  both that which went up with Cyrus and that which went up with Agesilaus  —  that brought the King to extremities.


6.1.13
2529
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταῦτ’ εἰπόντος αὐτοῦ ἐγὼ ἀπεκρινάμην ὅτι τὰ μὲν ἄλλα ἀξιόσκεπτα λέγει , τὸ δὲ Λακεδαιμονίοις ὄντας φίλους ἀποστῆναι πρὸς τοὺς ἐναντίους , μηδὲν ἔχοντας ἐγκαλεῖν , τοῦτ’ , ἔφην , ἄπορόν μοι δοκεῖ εἶναι ·
Now in answer to these statements I replied that while the other matters which he mentioned were worth considering, nevertheless for people who were friends of the Lacedaemonians to secede and go over to their enemies without having any charge to bring against them  —  this, I said, seemed to me to be impracticable.


6.1.13
2530
ὁ δ’ ἐπαινέσας με καὶ εἰπὼν ὅτι μᾶλλον ἑκτέον μου εἴη , ὅτι τοιοῦτος εἴην , ἀφῆκέ μοι ἐλθόντι πρὸς ὑμᾶς λέγειν τ- ἀληθῆ , ὅτι διανοοῖτο στρατεύειν ἐπὶ Φαρσαλίους , εἰ μὴ πεισοίμεθα .
He thereupon, after commending me and saying that he must cling to me the more because I was that sort of a man, permitted me to come to you and say the truth, that he was intending to undertake a campaign against the Pharsalians if we did not yield to him.


6.1.13
2531
αἰτεῖν οὖν ἐκέλευε βοήθειαν παρ’ ὑμῶν .
Therefore he bade me ask assistance from you.


6.1.13
2532
καὶ ἐὰν μέν σοι , ἔφη , διδῶσιν ὥστε σε πείθειν ἱκανὴν πέμπειν συμμαχίαν ὡς ἐμοὶ πολεμεῖν , ἄγ’ , ἔφη , καὶ τούτῳ χρώμεθα ὅ τι ἂν ἀποβαίνῃ ἐκ τοῦ πολέμου ·
And if, said he, the gods grant that you persuade them to send a supporting force large enough to make war with me, so be it, he said, and let us abide by whatever may be the result of the war;


6.1.13
2533
ἂν δέ σοι μὴ δοκῶσιν ἱκανῶς βοηθεῖν , οὐκ ἤδη ἀνέγκλητος ἂν δικαίως εἴης εἰ τῇ πατρίδι ἥ σε τιμᾷ καὶ σὺ πράττοις τὰ κράτιστα ;
but if it seems to you that they do not give you adequate assistance, would you not justly be blameless thenceforth if you should follow the course that is best for your city, which honours you?


6.1.14
2534
περὶ τούτων δὴ ἐγὼ ἥκω πρὸς ὑμᾶς καὶ λέγω πάντα ὅσα ἐκεῖ αὐτός τε ὁρῶ καὶ ἐκείνου ἀκήκοα .
It is about these matters, then, that I have come to you, and I tell you the whole situation there as I myself see it and have heard it from his lips.


6.1.14
2535
καὶ νομίζω οὕτως ἔχειν , ὦ ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ὡς εἰ μὲν πέμψετε ἐκεῖσε δύναμιν μὴ ἐμοὶ μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις Θετταλοῖς ἱκανὴν δοκεῖν εἶναι πρὸς Ἰάσονα πολεμεῖν , ἀποστήσονται αὐτοῦ αἱ πόλεις ·
And I believe that this is the case, men of Lacedaemon, that if you send thither a force such as shall seem, not to me only, but also to the rest of the Thessalians, large enough to make war upon Jason, the cities will revolt from him;


6.1.14
2536
πᾶσαι γὰρ φοβοῦνται ὅποι ποτὲ προβήσεται ἡ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς δύναμις ·
for all of them are afraid of the lengths to which the man’s power will go.


6.1.14
2537
εἰ δὲ νεοδαμώδεις καὶ ἄνδρα ἰδιώτην οἴεσθε ἀρκέσειν , συμβουλεύω ἡσυχίαν ἔχειν .
But if you imagine that emancipated Helots and a private individual as commander will suffice, I advise you to remain quiet.


6.1.15
2538
εὖ γὰρ ἴστε , πρός τε μεγάλην ἔσται ῥώμην ὁ πόλεμος , καὶ πρὸς ἄνδρα ὃς φρόνιμος μὲν οὕτω στρατηγός ἐστιν ὡς ὅσα τε λανθάνειν καὶ ὅσα φθάνειν καὶ ὅσα βιάζεσθαι ἐπιχειρεῖ οὐ μάλα ἀφαμαρτάνει .
For, be well assured, the war will be against strong forces and against a man who is so sagacious a general that whatsoever he undertakes to accomplish, whether it be by secrecy, or by getting ahead of an enemy, or by sheer force, he is not very apt to fail of his object.


6.1.15
2539
ἱκανὸς γάρ ἐστι καὶ νυκτὶ ὅσαπερ ἡμέρᾳ χρῆσθαι , καὶ ὅταν σπεύδῃ , ἄριστον καὶ δεῖπνον ποιησάμενος ἅμα πονεῖσθαι .
For he is able to make as good use of night as of day, and when he is in haste, to take breakfast and dinner together and go on with his labours.


6.1.15
2540
οἴεται δὲ καὶ ἀναπαύεσθαι χρῆναι , ὅταν ἀφίκηται ἔνθ’ ἂν ὡρμημένος ᾖ καὶ διαπράξηται ἃ δεῖ ·
And he thinks it is proper to rest only after he has reached the goal for which he had set out and has accomplished the things that are needful;


6.1.15
2541
καὶ τοὺς μεθ’ αὑτοῦ δὲ ταῦτα εἴθικεν .
moreover, he has accustomed his followers also to the same habits.


6.1.15
2542
ἐπίσταται δὲ καὶ ὅταν ἐπιπονήσαντες ἀγαθόν τι πράξωσιν οἱ στρατιῶται , ἐκπλῆσαι τὰς γνώμας αὐτῶν ·
Yet he also knows how to satisfy the wishes of his soldiers when by added toils they have achieved some success;


6.1.15
2543
ὥστε καὶ τοῦτο μεμαθήκασι πάντες οἱ μετ’ αὐτοῦ , ὅτι ἐκ τῶν πόνων καὶ τὰ μαλακὰ γίγνεται .
so that all who are with him have learned this lesson too, that from toils come indulgences.


6.1.16
2544
καὶ μὴν ἐγκρατέστατός γ’ ἐστὶν ὧν ἐγὼ οἶδα τῶν περὶ τὸ σῶμα ἡδονῶν ·
Again, he has greater self-control than any man I know as regards the pleasures of the body,


6.1.16
2545
ὥστε οὐδὲ διὰ ταῦτα ἀσχολίαν ἔχει τὸ μὴ εἰς τὸ πράττειν ἀεὶ τὸ δεόμενον .
Therefore, he is not prevented by such things, either, from doing always what needs to be done.


6.1.16
2546
ὑμεῖς οὖν σκεψάμενοι εἴπατε πρὸς ἐμέ , ὥσπερ ὑμῖν προσήκει , ὁποῖα δυνήσεσθέ τε καὶ μέλλετε ποιήσειν .
Consider, therefore, and tell me, as beseems you, what you will be able to do and intend to do.


6.1.17
2547
ὁ μὲν ταῦτ’ εἶπεν .
Thus he spoke.


6.1.17
2548
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τότε μὲν ἀνεβάλοντο τὴν ἀπόκρισιν ·
As for the Lacedaemonians, at the time they deferred their answer;


6.1.17
2549
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ καὶ τῇ τρίτῃ λογισάμενοι τάς τε ἔξω μόρας ὅσαι αὐτοῖς εἶεν καὶ τὰς περὶ Λακεδαίμονα πρὸς τὰς ἔξω τῶν Ἀθηναίων τριήρεις καὶ τὸν πρὸς τοὺς ὁμόρους πόλεμον , ἀπεκρίναντο ὅτι ἐν τῷ παρόντι οὐκ ἂν δύναιντο ἱκανὴν αὐτῷ ἐκπέμψαι ἐπικουρίαν , ἀλλ’ ἀπιόντα συντίθεσθαι αὐτὸν ἐκέλευον ὅπῃ δύναιτο ἄριστα τά τε ἑαυτοῦ καὶ τὰ τῆς πόλεως .
but after reckoning up on the next day and on the third their regiments abroad, to see how many they numbered, and the regiments which were in the vicinity of Lacedaemon to be employed against the triremes of the Athenians and for the war upon their neighbours, they replied that at present they could not send him an adequate supporting force, and told him to go home and arrange his own affairs and those of his city as best he could.


6.1.18
2550
κ- ἐκεῖνος μέντοι ἐπαινέσας τὴν ἁπλότητα τῆς πόλεως ἀπῆλθε .
He, then, after commending the straightforwardness of the state, departed.


6.1.18
2551
καὶ τὴν μὲν ἀκρόπολιν τῶν Φαρσαλίων ἐδεῖτο τοῦ Ἰάσονος μὴ ἀναγκάσαι αὐτὸν παραδοῦναι , ὅπως τοῖς παρακαταθεμένοις διασῴζῃ ·
And he begged Jason not to force him to give over the Acropolis of the Pharsalians, his wish being that he might still keep it safe for those who had put it into his hands;


6.1.18
2552
τοὺς δὲ ἑαυτοῦ παῖδας ἔδωκεν ὁμήρους , ὑποσχόμενος αὐτῷ τήν τε πόλιν πείσας ἑκοῦσαν σύμμαχον ποιήσειν καὶ ταγὸν συγκαταστήσειν αὐτόν .
but he gave his own children to Jason as hostages, with the promise not only to win over the city and make it his willing ally, but also to help in establishing him as Tagus.


6.1.18
2553
ὡς δὲ τὰ πιστὰ ἔδοσαν ἀλλήλοις , εὐθὺς μὲν οἱ Φαρσάλιοι εἰρήνην ἦγον , ταχὺ δὲ ὁ Ἰάσων ὁμολογουμένως ταγὸς τῶν Θετταλῶν καθειστήκει .
When, accordingly, they had exchanged pledges with one another, the Pharsalians at once observed peace, and Jason was speedily established by common consent as Tagus of the Thessalians.


6.1.19
2554
ἐπεί γε μὴν ἐτάγευσε , διέταξεν ἱππικόν τε ὅσον ἑκάστη πόλις δυνατὴ ἦν παρέχειν καὶ ὁπλιτικόν .
Having become Tagus, he assessed the contingents of cavalry and hoplites that the cities were to furnish, according to the ability of each.


6.1.19
2555
καὶ ἐγένοντο αὐτῷ ἱππεῖς μὲν σὺν τοῖς συμμάχοις πλείους ἢ ὀκτακισχίλιοι , ὁπλῖται δὲ ἐλογίσθησαν οὐκ ἐλάττους δισμυρίων , πελταστικόν γε μὴν ἱκανὸν πρὸς πάντας ἀνθρώπους ἀντιταχθῆναι ·
And the result was that he had more than eight thousand horsemen, including the allies, his hoplites were reckoned at not fewer than twenty thousand, and there were peltasts enough to be set in array against the whole world;


6.1.19
2556
ἔργον γὰρ ἐκείνων γε καὶ τὰς πόλεις ἀριθμῆσαι .
for it is a task even to enumerate the cities which furnished them.


6.1.19
2557
προεῖπε δὲ τοῖς περιοίκοις πᾶσι καὶ τὸν φόρον ὥσπερ ἐπὶ Σκόπα τεταγμένος ἦν φέρειν .
Further, he sent orders to all who dwelt round about to pay the same tribute as had been fixed in the time of Scopas.


6.1.19
2558
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν οὕτως ἐπεραίνετο ·
Thus these events were proceeding to their issue;


6.1.19
2559
ἐγὼ δὲ πάλιν ἐπάνειμι , ὅθεν εἰς τὰς περὶ Ἰάσονος πράξεις ἐξέβην .
I now return to the point at which I digressed when I took up the story of Jason.


6.2.1
2560
οἱ μὲν γὰρ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι συνελέγοντο εἰς τοὺς Φωκέας , οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ἀναχωρήσαντες εἰς τὴν ἑαυτῶν ἐφύλαττον τὰς εἰσβολάς .
The Lacedaemonians, then, and their allies were gathering together in Phocis, and the Thebans had withdrawn to their own country and were guarding the passes.


6.2.1
2561
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι , αὐξανομένους μὲν ὁρῶντες διὰ σφᾶς τοὺς Θηβαίους , χρήματά τε οὐ συμβαλλομένους εἰς τὸ ναυτικόν , αὐτοὶ δὲ ἀποκναιόμενοι καὶ χρημάτων εἰσφοραῖς καὶ λῃστείαις ἐξ Αἰγίνης καὶ φυλακαῖς τῆς χώρας , ἐπεθύμησαν παύσασθαι τοῦ πολέμου , καὶ πέμψαντες πρέσβεις εἰς Λακεδαίμονα εἰρήνην ἐποιήσαντο .
As for the Athenians, since they saw that the Thebans were growing in power through their help and still were not contributing money for their fleet, while they were themselves being worn out by extraordinary taxes, by plundering expeditions from Aegina, and by guarding their territory, they conceived a desire to cease from the war, and sending ambassadors to Lacedaemon, concluded peace.


6.2.2
2562
εὐθὺς δ’ ἐκεῖθεν δύο τῶν πρέσβεων πλεύσαντες κατὰ δόγμα τῆς πόλεως εἶπον τῷ Τιμοθέῳ ἀποπλεῖν οἴκαδε ὡς εἰρήνης οὔσης ·
Two of the Athenian ambassadors, acting in accordance with a decree of the state, sailed directly from there and gave orders to Timotheus to sail back home, inasmuch as there was peace;


6.2.2
2563
ὁ δ’ ἅμα ἀποπλέων τοὺς τῶν Ζακυνθίων φυγάδας ἀπεβίβασεν εἰς τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν .
as he was sailing back, however, he landed in their country the exiles of the Zacynthians.


6.2.3
2564
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως Ζακύνθιοι πέμψαντες πρὸς τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἔλεγον οἷα πεπονθότες εἶεν ὑπὸ τοῦ Τιμοθέου , εὐθὺς οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀδικεῖν τε ἡγοῦντο τοὺς Ἀθηναίους καὶ ναυτικὸν πάλιν κατεσκεύαζον καὶ συνετάττοντο εἰς ἑξήκοντα ναῦς ἀπ’ αὐτῆς τε τῆς Λακεδαίμονος καὶ Κορίνθου καὶ Λευκάδος καὶ Ἀμβρακίας καὶ Ἤλιδος καὶ Ζακύνθου καὶ Ἀχαΐας καὶ Ἐπιδαύρου καὶ Τροιζῆνος καὶ Ἑρμιόνος καὶ Ἁλιῶν .
And when the Zacynthians in the city sent to the Lacedaemonians and told them the sort of treatment they had received at the hands of Timotheus, the Lacedaemonians immediately deemed the Athenians guilty of wrong-doing, set about preparing a fleet again, and fixed the proportionate contingents, for a total of sixty ships, from Lacedaemon itself, Corinth, Leucas, Ambracia, Elis, Zacynthus, Achaea, Epidaurus, Troezen, Hermion, and Haliae.


6.2.4
2565
ἐπιστήσαντες δὲ ναύαρχον Μνάσιππον ἐκέλευον τῶν τε ἄλλων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι τῶν κατ’ ἐκείνην τὴν θάλατταν καὶ στρατεύειν ἐπὶ Κέρκυραν .
Then they put Mnasippus in command of this fleet as admiral and directed him to look after all their interests in that part of the sea, and especially to make an expedition against Corcyra.


6.2.4
2566
ἔπεμψαν δὲ καὶ πρὸς Διονύσιον διδάσκοντες ὡς καὶ ἐκείνῳ χρήσιμον εἴη τὴν Κέρκυραν μὴ ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίοις εἶναι .
They likewise sent to Dionysius, pointing out that it was advantageous to him also that Corcyra should not be under the Athenians.


6.2.5
2567
καὶ ὁ μὲν δὴ Μνάσιππος , ἐπεὶ συνελέγη αὐτῷ τὸ ναυτικόν , ἔπλευσεν εἰς τὴν Κέρκυραν ·
Mnasippus, accordingly, as soon as his fleet had been gathered together, set sail to Corcyra;


6.2.5
2568
εἶχε δὲ καὶ μισθοφόρους σὺν τοῖς ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος μετ’ αὐτοῦ στρατευομένοις οὐκ ἐλάττους χιλίων καὶ πεντακοσίων .
and besides the troops from Lacedaemon who served with him he also had no fewer than one thousand five hundred mercenaries.


6.2.6
2569
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπέβη , ἐκράτει τε τῆς γῆς καὶ ἐδῄου ἐξειργασμένην μὲν παγκάλως καὶ πεφυτευμένην τὴν χώραν , μεγαλοπρεπεῖς δὲ οἰκήσεις καὶ οἰνῶνας κατεσκευασμένους ἐπὶ τῶν ἀγρῶν ·
Now when he had disembarked he was master of the country, laid waste the land, which was most beautifully cultivated and planted, and destroyed magnificent dwellings and wine-cellars with which the farms were furnished;


6.2.6
2570
ὥστ’ ἔφασαν τοὺς στρατιώτας εἰς τοῦτο τρυφῆς ἐλθεῖν ὥστ’ οὐκ ἐθέλειν πίνειν , εἰ μὴ ἀνθοσμίας εἴη .
the result was, it was said, that his soldiers became so luxurious that they would not drink any wine unless it had a fine bouquet.


6.2.6
2571
καὶ ἀνδράποδα δὲ καὶ βοσκήματα πάμπολλα ἡλίσκετο ἐκ τῶν ἀγρῶν .
Furthermore, very many slaves and cattle were captured on the farms.


6.2.7
2572
ἔπειτα δὲ κατεστρατοπεδεύσατο τῷ μὲν πεζῷ ἐπὶ λόφῳ ἀπέχοντι τῆς πόλεως ὡς πέντε στάδια , πρὸ τῆς χώρας ὄντι , ὅπως ἀποτέμνοιτο ἐντεῦθεν , εἴ τις ἐπὶ τὴν χώραν τῶν Κερκυραίων ἐξίοι ·
Afterwards he encamped with his land forces on a hill which was distant from the city about five stadia and situated between the city and the country, so that he might from there intercept any of the Corcyraeans who might try to go out to their lands;


6.2.7
2573
τὸ δὲ ναυτικὸν εἰς τ- ἐπὶ θάτερα τῆς πόλεως κατεστρατοπέδευσεν , ἔνθεν ᾤετ’ ἂν τὰ προσπλέοντα καὶ προαισθάνεσθαι καὶ διακωλύειν .
then he had the sailors from his ships encamp on the other side of the city, at a point from which he thought they would observe in good time any vessels that approached and prevent their coming in.


6.2.7
2574
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις καὶ ἐπὶ τῷ λιμένι , ὁπότε μὴ χειμὼν κωλύοι , ἐφώρμει .
In addition he also maintained a blockade at the mouth of the harbour when the weather did not interfere.


6.2.8
2575
ἐπολιόρκει μὲν δὴ οὕτω τὴν πόλιν .
In this way, then, he held the city besieged.


6.2.8
2576
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ Κερκυραῖοι ἐκ μὲν τῆς γῆς οὐδὲν ἐλάμβανον διὰ τὸ κρατεῖσθαι κατὰ γῆν , κατὰ θάλατταν δὲ οὐδὲν εἰσήγετο αὐτοῖς διὰ τὸ ναυκρατεῖσθαι , ἐν πολλῇ ἀπορίᾳ ἦσαν ·
When the Corcyraeans found themselves unable to get anything from their farms because they were overmastered by land, while on the other hand nothing was brought in to them by water because they were overmastered by sea, they were in great straits.


6.2.9
2577
καὶ πέμποντες πρὸς τοὺς Ἀθηναίους βοηθεῖν τε ἐδέοντο καὶ ἐδίδασκον ὡς μέγα μὲν ἀγαθὸν ἀποβάλοιεν ἄν , εἰ Κερκύρας στερηθεῖεν , τοῖς δὲ πολεμίοις μεγάλην ἂν ἰσχὺν προσβάλοιεν ·
Accordingly, sending to the Athenians, they begged them to come to their assistance, and pointed out that they would lose a great advantage if they were deprived of Corcyra, and would add great strength to their enemies;


6.2.9
2578
ἐξ οὐδεμιᾶς γὰρ πόλεως πλήν γε Ἀθηνῶν οὔτε ναῦς οὔτε χρήματα πλείω ἂν γενέσθαι .
for from no other state, they said, except Athens, could come a greater number of ships or a greater amount of money.


6.2.9
2579
ἔτι δὲ κεῖσθαι τὴν Κέρκυραν ἐν καλῷ μὲν τοῦ Κορινθιακοῦ κόλπου καὶ τῶν πόλεων αἳ ἐπὶ τοῦτον καθήκουσιν , ἐν καλῷ δὲ τοῦ τὴν Λακωνικὴν χώραν βλάπτειν , ἐν καλλίστῳ δὲ τῆς τε ἀντιπέρας Ἠπείρου καὶ τοῦ εἰς Πελοπόννησον ἀπὸ Σικελίας παράπλου .
Further, Corcyra was situated in a favourable position with respect to the Corinthian Gulf and the states which reach down to its shores, in a favourable position for doing damage to the territory of Laconia, and in an extremely favourable position with respect to Epirus across the way and the coastwise route from Sicily to Peloponnesus.


6.2.10
2580
ἀκούσαντες δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐνόμισαν ἰσχυρῶς ἐπιμελητέον εἶναι , καὶ στρατηγὸν πέμπουσι Κτησικλέα εἰς ἑξακοσίους ἔχοντα πελταστάς , Ἀλκέτου δὲ ἐδεήθησαν συνδιαβιβάσαι τούτους .
When the Athenians heard these things they came to the conclusion that they must give serious care to the matter, and they sent out Ctesicles as general with about six hundred peltasts and requested Alcetas to help to convey them across.


6.2.11
2581
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν νυκτὸς διακομισθέντες που τῆς χώρας εἰσῆλθον εἰς τὴν πόλιν .
Accordingly these troops were brought across by night to a place in the country of Corcyra, and made their way into the city.


6.2.11
2582
ἐψηφίσαντο δὲ καὶ ἑξήκοντα ναῦς πληροῦν , Τιμόθεον δ’ αὐτῶν στρατηγὸν ἐχειροτόνησαν .
The Athenians also voted to man sixty ships, and elected Timotheus as commander of them.


6.2.12
2583
ὁ δ’ οὐ δυνάμενος αὐτόθεν τὰς ναῦς πληρῶσαι , ἐπὶ νήσων πλεύσας ἐκεῖθεν ἐπειρᾶτο συμπληροῦν , οὐ φαῦλον ἡγούμενος εἶναι ἐπὶ συγκεκροτημένας ναῦς εἰκῇ περιπλεῦσαι .
But he was unable to man his ships at Athens, and therefore set sail for the islands and endeavoured to complete his crews there, thinking that it was a serious matter to sail light-heartedly around Peloponnesus to attack ships with well-trained crews.


6.2.13
2584
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι νομίζοντες αὐτὸν ἀναλοῦν τὸν τῆς ὥρας εἰς τὸν περίπλουν χρόνον , συγγνώμην οὐκ ἔσχον αὐτῷ , ἀλλὰ παύσαντες αὐτὸν τῆς στρατηγίας Ἰφικράτην ἀνθαιροῦνται .
The Athenians, however, believing that he was using up the time of the year which was favourable for his voyage, did not pardon him, but deposed him from his office and chose Iphicrates in his place.


6.2.14
2585
ὁ δ’ ἐπεὶ κατέστη στρατηγός , μάλα ὀξέως τὰς ναῦς ἐπληροῦτο καὶ τοὺς τριηράρχους ἠνάγκαζε .
As soon as he assumed office, he proceeded to man his ships expeditiously, and compelled his captains to do their duty.


6.2.14
2586
προσέλαβε δὲ παρὰ τῶν Ἀθηναίων καὶ εἴ πού τις ναῦς περὶ τὴν Ἀττικὴν ἔπλει καὶ τὴν Πάραλον καὶ τὴν Σαλαμινίαν , λέγων ὡς ἐὰν τ- ἐκεῖ καλῶς γένηται , πολλὰς αὐτοῖς ναῦς ἀποπέμψοι .
He also obtained from the Athenians whatever war-ships were cruising here or there in the neighbourhood of Attica, as well as the Paralus and the Salaminia, saying that if matters in Corcyra turned out successfully, he would send them back many ships.


6.2.14
2587
καὶ ἐγένοντο αὐτῷ αἱ ἅπασαι περὶ ἑβδομήκοντα .
And his ships amounted in all to about seventy.


6.2.15
2588
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ οἱ Κερκυραῖοι οὕτω σφόδρα ἐπείνων ὥστε διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν αὐτομολούντων ἐκήρυξεν ὁ Μνάσιππος πεπρᾶσθαι ὅστις αὐτομολοίη .
Meanwhile the Corcyraeans were suffering so greatly from hunger that on account of the number of the deserters Mnasippus issued a proclamation directing that whoever deserted should be sold into slavery.


6.2.15
2589
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐδὲν ἧττον ηὐτομόλουν , τελευτῶν καὶ μαστιγῶν ἀπέπεμπεν .
And when they kept on deserting none the less, at last he even tried to drive them back with the scourge.


6.2.15
2590
οἱ μέντοι ἔνδοθεν τούς γε δούλους οὐκ ἐδέχοντο πάλιν εἰς τὸ τεῖχος , ἀλλὰ πολλοὶ ἔξω ἀπέθνῃσκον .
Those in the city, however, would not admit the slaves within the wall again, and many died outside.


6.2.16
2591
ὁ δ’ αὖ Μνάσιππος ὁρῶν ταῦτα , ἐνόμιζέ τε ὅσον οὐκ ἤδη ἔχειν τὴν πόλιν καὶ περὶ τοὺς μισθοφόρους ἐκαινούργει , καὶ τοὺς μέν τινας αὐτῶν ἀπομίσθους ἐπεποιήκει , τοῖς δὲ μένουσι καὶ δυοῖν ἤδη μηνοῖν ὤφειλε τὸν μισθόν , οὐκ ἀπορῶν , ὡς ἐλέγετο , χρημάτων ·
Now Mnasippus, seeing these things, and believing that he all but had possession of the city already, was trying innovations with his mercenaries.


6.2.16
2592
καὶ γὰρ τῶν πόλεων αἱ πολλαὶ αὐτῷ ἀργύριον ἀντὶ τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἔπεμπον , ἅτε καὶ διαποντίου τῆς στρατείας οὔσης .
He had before this dismissed some of them from his service, and he now owed those who remained as much as two months’ pay. This was not, so it was said, because he lacked money, for most of the states had sent him money instead of men, because it was an overseas expedition.


6.2.17
2593
κατιδόντες δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν πύργων οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως τάς τε φυλακὰς χεῖρον ἢ πρόσθεν φυλαττομένας ἐσπαρμένους τε κατὰ τὴν χώραν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους , ἐπεκδραμόντες τοὺς μέν τινας αὐτῶν ἔλαβον , τοὺς δὲ κατέκοψαν .
Now the people in the city, observing from their towers that the enemy’s posts were less carefully guarded than formerly, and that the men were scattered through the country, made a sally, capturing some of them and cutting down others.


6.2.18
2594
αἰσθόμενος δὲ ὁ Μνάσιππος , αὐτός τε ἐξωπλίζετο καὶ ὅσους εἶχεν ὁπλίτας ἅπασιν ἐβοήθει , καὶ τοὺς λοχαγοὺς καὶ τοὺς ταξιάρχους ἐξάγειν ἐκέλευε τοὺς μισθοφόρους .
When Mnasippus perceived this, he put on his armour and went to the rescue himself, with all the hoplites he had, and at the same time ordered the captains and commanders of divisions to lead forth the mercenaries.


6.2.19
2595
ἀποκριναμένων δέ τινων λοχαγῶν ὅτι οὐ ῥᾴδιον εἴη μὴ διδόντας τ- ἐπιτήδεια πειθομένους παρέχειν , τὸν μέν τινα βακτηρίᾳ , τὸν δὲ τῷ στύρακι ἐπάταξεν .
And when some captains replied that it was not easy to keep men obedient unless they were given provisions, he struck one of them with a staff and another with the spike of his spear.


6.2.19
2596
οὕτω μὲν δὴ ἀθύμως ἔχοντες καὶ μισοῦντες αὐτὸν συνεξῆλθον πάντες ·
So it was, then, that when his forces issued from the city with him they were all dispirited and hostile to him  —


6.2.19
2597
ὅπερ ἥκιστα εἰς μάχην συμφέρει .
 a situation that is by no means conducive to fighting.


6.2.20
2598
ὁ δ’ ἐπεὶ παρετάξατο , αὐτὸς μὲν τοὺς κατὰ τὰς πύλας τῶν πολεμίων τρεψάμενος ἐπεδίωκεν .
Now after he had formed the troops in line, Mnasippus himself turned to flight those of the enemy who were in front of the gates, and pursued them.


6.2.20
2599
οἱ δ’ ἐπεὶ ἐγγὺς τοῦ τείχους ἐγένοντο , ἀνεστρέφοντό τε καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν μνημάτων ἔβαλλον καὶ ἠκόντιζον ·
When, however, these came near the wall, they turned about, and from the tombstones threw spears and javelins upon the Lacedaemonians;


6.2.20
2600
ἄλλοι δ’ ἐκδραμόντες καθ’ ἑτέρας πύλας ἐπιτίθενται ἁθρόοι τοῖς ἐσχάτοις ·
meanwhile others sallied out by the other gates and in mass formation attacked those who were at the extreme end of the line.


6.2.21
2601
οἱ δ’ ἐπ’ ὀκτὼ τεταγμένοι , ἀσθενὲς νομίσαντες τὸ ἄκρον τῆς φάλαγγος ἔχειν , ἀναστρέφειν ἐπειρῶντο .
These latter, who were drawn up only eight deep, thinking that the outer end of the phalanx was too weak, undertook to swing it around upon itself.


6.2.21
2602
ὡς δ’ ἤρξαντο ἐπαναχωρεῖν , οἱ μὲν πολέμιοι ὡς φεύγουσιν ἐπέθεντο , οἱ δ’ οὐκέτι ἐπανέστρεψαν ·
But as soon as they began the backward movement, the enemy fell upon them, in the belief that they were in flight, and they did not go on and swing forward;


6.2.21
2603
καὶ οἱ ἐχόμενοι δ’ αὐτῶν εἰς φυγὴν ὥρμων .
furthermore, those who were next to them also began to flee.


6.2.22
2604
ὁ δὲ Μνάσιππος τοῖς μὲν πιεζομένοις οὐκ ἐδύνατο βοηθεῖν διὰ τοὺς ἐκ τοῦ καταντικρὺ προσκειμένους , ἀεὶ δ’ ἐλείπετο σὺν ἐλάττοσι .
As for Mnasippus, while he was unable to aid the troops which were hard pressed, because the enemy was attacking him in front, he was left with an ever smaller number of men.


6.2.22
2605
τέλος δὲ οἱ πολέμιοι ἁθρόοι γενόμενοι πάντες ἐπετίθεντο τοῖς περὶ τὸν Μνάσιππον , ἤδη μάλα ὀλίγοις οὖσι .
Finally, all of the enemy massed themselves together and charged upon Mnasippus and his troops, which were by this time very few.


6.2.22
2606
καὶ οἱ πολῖται ὁρῶντες τὸ γιγνόμενον ἐπεξῇσαν .
And the citizens, seeing what was going on, came out to join in the attack.


6.2.23
2607
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐκεῖνον ἀπέκτειναν , ἐδίωκον ἤδη ἅπαντες .
Then after they had killed Mnasippus, all straightway joined in the pursuit.


6.2.23
2608
ἐκινδύνευσαν δ’ ἂν καὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον ἑλεῖν σὺν τῷ χαρακώματι , εἰ μὴ οἱ διώκοντες τὸν ἀγοραῖόν τε ὄχλον ἰδόντες καὶ τὸν τῶν θεραπόντων καὶ τὸν τῶν ἀνδραπόδων , οἰηθέντες ὄφελός τι αὐτῶν εἶναι , ἀπεστρέφοντο .
And they probably would have captured the very camp, along with its stockade, had not the pursuers turned back upon seeing the crowd of camp-followers, of attendants, and of slaves, imagining that there was some fighting ability in them.


6.2.24
2609
καὶ τότε μὲν τροπαῖόν τε ἵστασαν οἱ Κερκυραῖοι τούς τε νεκροὺς ὑποσπόνδους ἀπεδίδοσαν .
At this time, accordingly, the Corcyraeans set up a trophy and gave back the bodies of the dead under a truce.


6.2.24
2610
ἐκ δὲ τούτου οἱ μὲν ἐν τῇ πόλει ἐρρωμενέστεροι ἐγεγένηντο , οἱ δ’ ἔξω ἐν πάσῃ δὴ ἀθυμίᾳ ἦσαν .
And after this the people in the city were stouter of heart, while those outside were in the utmost despondency.


6.2.24
2611
καὶ γὰρ ἐλέγετο ὅτι Ἰφικράτης τε ὅσον οὐκ ἤδη παρείη , καὶ οἱ Κερκυραῖοι δὲ τῷ ὄντι ναῦς ἐπλήρουν .
For there was not only a report that Iphicrates was already practically at hand, but the Corcyraeans were in fact also manning ships.


6.2.25
2612
ὑπερμένης δέ , ὃς ἐτύγχανεν ἐπιστολιαφόρος τῷ Μνασίππῳ ὤν , τό τε ναυτικὸν πᾶν ὅσον ἦν ἐκεῖ συνεπλήρωσε , καὶ περιπλεύσας πρὸς τὸ χαράκωμα τὰ πλοῖα πάντα γεμίσας τῶν τε ἀνδραπόδων καὶ τῶν χρημάτων ἀπέστελλεν ·
Then Hypermenes, who chanced to be vice-admiral under Mnasippus, manned fully the entire fleet which he had there, and after sailing round to the stockade and filling all his transports with the slaves and the captured property, sent them off;


6.2.25
2613
αὐτὸς δὲ σύν τε τοῖς ἐπιβάταις καὶ τοῖς περισωθεῖσι τῶν στρατιωτῶν διεφύλαττε τὸ χαράκωμα ·
he himself, however, with his marines and such of the soldiers as had been left alive, kept guard over the stockade;


6.2.26
2614
τέλος δὲ καὶ οὗτοι μάλα τεταραγμένοι ἀναβάντες ἐπὶ τὰς τριήρεις ἀπέπλεον , πολὺν μὲν σῖτον , πολὺν δὲ οἶνον , πολλὰ δὲ ἀνδράποδα καὶ ἀσθενοῦντας στρατιώτας καταλιπόντες ·
but finally they, too, embarked upon the triremes in great confusion and went sailing off, leaving behind them a great deal of corn, much wine, and many slaves and sick soldiers;


6.2.26
2615
δεινῶς γὰρ ἐπεφόβηντο μὴ καταληφθεῖεν ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἐν τῇ νήσῳ .
for they were exceedingly afraid that they would be caught on the island by the Athenians.


6.2.26
2616
καὶ ἐκεῖνοι μὲν εἰς Λευκάδα ἀπεσώθησαν .
And so they reached Leucas in safety.


6.2.27
2617
ὁ δὲ Ἰφικράτης ἐπεὶ ἤρξατο τοῦ περίπλου , ἅμα μὲν ἔπλει , ἅμα δὲ πάντα ὅσα εἰς ναυμαχίαν παρεσκευάζετο ·
As for Iphicrates, when he began his voyage around Peloponnesus he went on with all needful preparations for a naval battle as he sailed;


6.2.27
2618
εὐθὺς μὲν γὰρ τὰ μεγάλα ἱστία αὐτοῦ κατέλιπεν , ὡς ἐπὶ ναυμαχίαν πλέων ·
for at the outset he had left his large sails behind him at Athens, since he expected to fight,


6.2.27
2619
καὶ τοῖς ἀκατίοις δέ , καὶ εἰ φορὸν πνεῦμα εἴη , ὀλίγα ἐχρῆτο ·
and now, further, he made but slight use of his smaller sails, even if the wind was favourable;


6.2.27
2620
τῇ δὲ κώπῃ τὸν πλοῦν ποιούμενος ἄμεινόν τε τὰ σώματα ἔχειν τοὺς ἄνδρας καὶ ἄμεινον τὰς ναῦς πλεῖν ἐποίει .
by making his voyage, then, with the oar, he kept his men in better condition of body and caused the ships to go faster.


6.2.28
2621
πολλάκις δὲ καὶ ὅπῃ μέλλοι ἀριστοποιεῖσθαι τὸ στράτευμα ἢ δειπνοποιεῖσθαι , ἐπανήγαγεν ἂν τὸ κέρας ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς κατὰ ταῦτα τὰ χωρία ·
Furthermore, whenever the expedition was going to take the noonday or the evening meal at any particular spot, he would often draw back the head of the column from the shore opposite the place in question;


6.2.28
2622
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐπιστρέψας ἂν καὶ ἀντιπρῴρους καταστήσας τὰς τριήρεις ἀπὸ σημείου ἀφίει ἀνθαμιλλᾶσθαι εἰς τὴν γῆν , μέγα δὴ νικητήριον ἦν τὸ πρώτους καὶ ὕδωρ λαβεῖν καὶ εἴ του ἄλλου ἐδέοντο , καὶ πρώτους ἀριστῆσαι ·
then he would turn the line around again, cause the triremes to head toward the land, and start them off at a signal to race to the shore. It was counted a great prize of victory to be the first to get water or anything else they needed, and the first to get their meal.


6.2.28
2623
τοῖς δ’ ὑστάτοις ἀφικομένοις μεγάλη ζημία ἦν τό τε ἐλαττοῦσθαι πᾶσι τούτοις καὶ ὅτι ἀνάγεσθαι ἅμα ἔδει , ἐπεὶ σημήνειε ·
On the other hand, those who reached the shore last incurred a great penalty in that they came off worse in all these points, and in the fact that they had to put to sea again at the same time as the rest when the signal was given;


6.2.28
2624
συνέβαινε γὰρ τοῖς μὲν πρώτοις ἀφικνουμένοις καθ’ ἡσυχίαν ἅπαντα ποιεῖν , τοῖς δὲ τελευταίοις διὰ σπουδῆς .
for the result was that those who came in first did everything at their leisure, while those who came in last had to hurry.


6.2.29
2625
φυλακάς γε μήν , εἰ τύχοι ἐν τῇ πολεμίᾳ ἀριστοποιούμενος , τὰς μὲν ἐν τῇ γῇ , ὥσπερ προσήκει , καθίστη , ἐν δὲ ταῖς ναυσὶν αἰρόμενος αὖ τοὺς ἱστοὺς ἀπὸ τούτων ἐσκοπεῖτο .
Again, in setting watches, if he chanced to be taking the midday meal in a hostile country, he posted some on the land, as is proper, but besides he hoisted the masts on the ships and had men keep watch from their tops.


6.2.29
2626
πολὺ οὖν ἐπὶ πλέον οὗτοι καθεώρων ἢ οἱ ἐκ τοῦ ὁμαλοῦ , ἀφ’ ὑψηλοτέρου καθορῶντες .
These men, therefore, could see much farther, from their higher point of view, than those on the level.


6.2.29
2627
ὅπου δὲ δειπνοποιοῖτο καὶ καθεύδοι , ἐν μὲν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ νύκτωρ πῦρ οὐκ ἔκαε , πρὸ δὲ τοῦ στρατεύματος φῶς ἐποίει , ἵνα μηδεὶς λάθῃ προσιών .
Further, wherever he dined or slept, he would not have a fire inside the camp during the night, but kept a light burning in front of his forces, so that no one could approach unobserved.


6.2.29
2628
πολλάκις δέ , εἰ εὐδία εἴη , εὐθὺς δειπνήσας ἀνήγετο ·
Frequently, however, if it was good weather, he would put to sea again immediately after dining;


6.2.29
2629
καὶ εἰ μὲν αὔρα φέροι , θέοντες ἅμα ἀνεπαύοντο ·
and if there was a favourable breeze, they sailed and rested at the same time,


6.2.29
2630
εἰ δὲ ἐλαύνειν δέοι , κατὰ μέρος τοὺς ναύτας ἀνέπαυεν .
while if it was necessary to row, he rested the sailors by turns.


6.2.30
2631
ἐν δὲ τοῖς μεθ’ ἡμέραν πλοῖς ἀπὸ σημείων τοτὲ μὲν ἐπὶ κέρως ἦγε , τοτὲ δ’ ἐπὶ φάλαγγος ·
Again, when he sailed by day, he would lead the fleet, by signals, at one time in column and at another in line of battle;


6.2.30
2632
ὥστε ἅμα μὲν ἔπλεον , ἅμα δὲ πάντα ὅσα εἰς ναυμαχίαν καὶ ἠσκηκότες καὶ ἐπιστάμενοι εἰς τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων , ὡς ᾤοντο , κατεχομένην θάλατταν ἀφικνοῦντο .
so that, while still pursuing their voyage, they had at the same time practised and become skilled in all the manoeuvres of battle before they reached the sea which, as they supposed, was held by the enemy.


6.2.30
2633
καὶ τὰ μὲν πολλὰ ἐν τῇ πολεμίᾳ καὶ ἠρίστων καὶ ἐδείπνουν ·
And although for the most part they took both their noonday and their evening meals in the enemy’s country,


6.2.30
2634
διὰ δὲ τὸ τ- ἀναγκαῖα μόνον πράττειν καὶ τὰς βοηθείας ἔφθανεν ἀναγόμενος καὶ ταχὺ ἐπέραινε .
nevertheless, by doing only the necessary things, he always got to sea before the enemy’s forces arrived to repel him and speedily got under way again.


6.2.31
2635
περὶ δὲ τὸν Μνασίππου θάνατον ἐτύγχανεν ὢν τῆς Λακωνικῆς περὶ τὰς Σφαγίας .
At the time of Mnasippus’ death Iphicrates chanced to be near the Sphagiae.


6.2.31
2636
εἰς τὴν Ἠλείαν δὲ ἀφικόμενος καὶ παραπλεύσας τὸ τοῦ Ἀλφειοῦ στόμα ὑπὸ τὸν Ἰχθῦν καλούμενον ὡρμίσατο .
Then, after reaching Elis and sailing past the mouth of the Alpheus, he anchored beneath the promontory called Ichthys.


6.2.31
2637
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐντεῦθεν ἀνήγετο ἐπὶ τῆς Κεφαλληνίας , οὕτω καὶ τεταγμένος καὶ τὸν πλοῦν ποιούμενος ὡς , εἰ δέοι , πάντα ὅσα χρὴ παρεσκευασμένος ναυμαχοίη .
From there he put to sea on the following day for Cephallenia, having his fleet in such order and making the voyage in such a way that, if it should be necessary to fight, he should be ready in all essential respects to do so.


6.2.31
2638
καὶ γὰρ τὰ περὶ τοῦ Μνασίππου αὐτόπτου μὲν οὐδενὸς ἠκηκόει , ὑπώπτευε δὲ μὴ ἀπάτης ἕνεκα λέγοιτο , καὶ ἐφυλάττετο ·
For he had not heard the news of Mnasippus’ death from any eyewitness, but suspected that it was told to deceive him, and hence was on his guard;


6.2.31
2639
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἀφίκετο εἰς τὴν Κεφαλληνίαν , ἐνταῦθα δὴ σαφῶς ἐπύθετο , καὶ ἀνέπαυε τὸ στράτευμα .
when he arrived at Cephallenia, however, he there got definite information, and so rested his forces.


6.2.32
2640
οἶδα μὲν οὖν ὅτι ταῦτα πάντα , ὅταν οἴωνται ναυμαχήσειν ἄνθρωποι , καὶ ἀσκεῖται καὶ μελετᾶται ·
Now I am aware that all these matters of practice and training are customary whenever men expect to engage in a battle by sea,


6.2.32
2641
ἀλλὰ τοῦτο ἐπαινῶ , ὅτι ἐπεὶ ἀφικέσθαι ταχὺ ἔδει ἔνθα τοῖς πολεμίοις ναυμαχήσειν ᾤετο , ηὕρετο ὅπως μήτε διὰ τὸν πλοῦν ἀνεπιστήμονας εἶναι τῶν εἰς ναυμαχίαν μήτε διὰ τὸ ταῦτα μελετᾶν βραδύτερόν τι ἀφικέσθαι .
but that which I commend in Iphicrates is this, that when it was incumbent upon him to arrive speedily at the place where he supposed he should fight with the enemy, he discovered a way to keep his men from being either, by reason of the voyage they had made, unskilled in the tactics of fighting at sea, or, by reason of their having been trained in such tactics, any the more tardy in arriving at their destination.


6.2.33
2642
καταστρεψάμενος δὲ τὰς ἐν τῇ Κεφαλληνίᾳ πόλεις ἔπλευσεν εἰς Κέρκυραν .
After subduing the cities in Cephallenia he sailed to Corcyra.


6.2.33
2643
ἐκεῖ δὲ πρῶτον μὲν ἀκούσας ὅτι προσπλέοιεν δέκα τριήρεις παρὰ Διονυσίου , βοηθήσουσαι τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις , αὐτὸς ἐλθὼν καὶ σκεψάμενος τῆς χώρας ὅθεν τούς τε προσπλέοντας δυνατὸν ἦν ὁρᾶν καὶ τοὺς σημαίνοντας εἰς τὴν πόλιν καταφανεῖς εἶναι , ἐνταῦθα κατέστησε τοὺς σκοπούς .
There, upon hearing that ten triremes were sailing thither from Dionysius to aid the Lacedaemonians, he first went in person and looked over the ground to find a point from which any who approached the island could be seen and the men stationed there to send signals to the city would be visible; he then stationed his watchers at that point.


6.2.34
2644
κ- ἐκείνοις μὲν συνέθετο προσπλεόντων τε καὶ ὁρμούντων ὡς δέοι σημαίνειν ·
He also agreed with them as to how they were to signal when the enemy were approaching and when they were at anchor.


6.2.34
2645
αὐτὸς δὲ τῶν τριηράρχων προσέταξεν εἴκοσιν , οὓς δεήσοι , ἐπεὶ κηρύξειεν , ἀκολουθεῖν ·
Then he gave his orders to twenty of the captains, whose duty it should be to follow him when the herald gave the word;


6.2.34
2646
εἰ δέ τις μὴ ἀκολουθήσοι , προεῖπε μὴ μέμψεσθαι τὴν δίκην .
and in case anyone failed to follow, he warned him that he would not have occasion to find fault with his punishment.


6.2.34
2647
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐσημάνθησαν προσπλέουσαι καὶ ἐκηρύχθη , ἀξία ἐγένετο θέας ἡ σπουδή ·
Now when the signal came that the triremes were approaching, and when the word was given by the herald, the ardour of all was a sight worth seeing;


6.2.34
2648
οὐδεὶς γὰρ ὅστις οὐ δρόμῳ τῶν μελλόντων πλεῖν εἰσέβη εἰς τὰς ναῦς .
for there was no one among those who were to sail who did not run to get aboard his ship.


6.2.35
2649
πλεύσας δὲ ἔνθα ἦσαν αἱ πολέμιαι τριήρεις , καταλαμβάνει ἀπὸ μὲν τῶν ἄλλων τριήρων εἰς τὴν γῆν τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐκβεβηκότας , Μελάνιππος μέντοι ὁ Ῥόδιος τοῖς τε ἄλλοις συνεβούλευε μὴ μένειν ἐνταῦθα καὶ αὐτὸς πληρωσάμενος τὴν ναῦν ἐξέπλει .
When Iphicrates had reached the place where the enemy’s triremes were, he found the crews of all save one already disembarked on the shore,


6.2.35
2650
ἐκεῖνος μὲν οὖν καίπερ ἀπαντῶν ταῖς Ἰφικράτους ναυσὶν ὅμως ἀπέφυγεν ·
but Melanippus, the Rhodian, had not only advised the others not to remain there, but had manned his own ship and was sailing out to sea. Now although he met the ships of Iphicrates, he nevertheless escaped,


6.2.35
2651
αἱ δὲ ἀπὸ Συρακουσῶν νῆες ἅπασαι ἑάλωσαν αὐτοῖς ἀνδράσιν .
but all the ships from Syracuse were captured, along with their crews.


6.2.36
2652
ὁ μέντοι Ἰφικράτης τὰς μὲν τριήρεις ἀκρωτηριασάμενος ἕλκων κατηγάγετο εἰς τὸν τῶν Κερκυραίων λιμένα , τῶν δὲ ἀνδρῶν συνέβη ἑκάστῳ τακτὸν ἀργύριον ἀποτεῖσαι , πλὴν Κρινίππου τοῦ ἄρχοντος ·
Thereupon Iphicrates cut off the beaks and towed the triremes into the harbour of Corcyra; as for the crews, he concluded an agreement that each man should pay a fixed ransom, with the exception of Crinippus the commander.


6.2.36
2653
τοῦτον δ’ ἐφύλαττεν , ὡς ἢ πραξόμενος πάμπολλα χρήματα ἢ ὡς πωλήσων .
This one he kept under guard, intending either to exact a very large ransom or to sell him.


6.2.36
2654
κ- ἐκεῖνος μὲν ὑπὸ λύπης αὐθαιρέτῳ θανάτῳ ἀποθνῄσκει , τοὺς δ’ ἄλλους ὁ Ἰφικράτης ἀφῆκε , Κερκυραίους ἐγγυητὰς δεξάμενος τῶν χρημάτων .
Crinippus, however, was so mortified that he died by a self-inflicted death, and Iphicrates let the rest go, accepting Corcyraeans as sureties for the ransoms.


6.2.37
2655
καὶ τοὺς μὲν ναύτας γεωργοῦντας τοῖς Κερκυραίοις τὸ πλεῖστον διέτρεφε , τοὺς δὲ πελταστὰς καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν ὁπλίτας ἔχων διέβαινεν εἰς τὴν Ἀκαρνανίαν ·
Now he maintained his sailors for the most part by having them work for the Corcyraeans on their lands; the peltasts, however, and the hoplites from his ships he took with him and crossed over to Acarnania.


6.2.37
2656
καὶ ἐκεῖ ταῖς μὲν φιλίαις πόλεσιν ἐπεκούρει , εἴ τίς τι δέοιτο , Θυριεῦσι δέ , μάλα καὶ ἀνδράσιν ἀλκίμοις καὶ χωρίον καρτερὸν ἔχουσιν , ἐπολέμει .
There he gave aid to the cities which were friendly, in case any of them needed aid, and made war upon the Thyrians, who were very valiant men and were in possession of a very strong fortress.


6.2.38
2657
καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ Κερκύρας ναυτικὸν προσλαβών , σχεδὸν περὶ ἐνενήκοντα ναῦς , πρῶτον μὲν εἰς Κεφαλληνίαν πλεύσας χρήματα ἐπράξατο , τὰ μὲν παρ’ ἑκόντων , τὰ δὲ παρ’ ἀκόντων ·
Furthermore, he took over the fleet which was at Corcyra, and with almost ninety ships first sailed to Cephallenia and collected money, in some cases with the consent of the people, in other cases against their will.


6.2.38
2658
ἔπειτα δὲ παρεσκευάζετο τήν τε τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων χώραν κακῶς ποιεῖν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν κατ’ ἐκεῖνα πόλεων πολεμίων οὐσῶν τὰς μὲν ἐθελούσας προσλαμβάνειν , τοῖς δὲ μὴ πειθομένοις πολεμεῖν .
Then he made preparations to inflict damage upon the territory of the Lacedaemonians, and to bring over to his side such of the other hostile states in that region as were willing and to make war upon such as would not yield.


6.2.39
2659
ἐγὼ μὲν δὴ ταύτην τὴν στρατηγίαν τῶν Ἰφικράτους οὐχ ἥκιστα ἐπαινῶ , ἔπειτα καὶ τὸ προσελέσθαι κελεῦσαι ἑαυτῷ Καλλίστρατόν τε τὸν δημηγόρον , οὐ μάλα ἐπιτήδειον ὄντα , καὶ Χαβρίαν , μάλα στρατηγὸν νομιζόμενον .
Now for my part I not only commend this campaign in particular among all the campaigns of Iphicrates, but I commend, further, his directing the Athenians to choose as his colleagues Callistratus, the popular orator, who was not very favourably inclined toward him, and Chabrias, who was regarded as a very good general.


6.2.39
2660
εἴτε γὰρ φρονίμους αὐτοὺς ἡγούμενος εἶναι συμβούλους λαβεῖν ἐβούλετο , σῶφρόν μοι δοκεῖ διαπράξασθαι , εἴτε ἀντιπάλους νομίζων , οὕτω θρασέως μήτε καταρᾳθυμῶν μήτε καταμελῶν μηδὲν φαίνεσθαι , μεγαλοφρονοῦντος ἐφ’ ἑαυτῷ τοῦτό μοι δοκεῖ ἀνδρὸς εἶναι .
For if he thought them to be able men and hence wished to take them as advisers, he seems to me to have done a wise thing, while on the other hand if he believed them to be his adversaries and wished in so bold a way to prove that he was neither remiss nor neglectful in any point, this seems to me to be the act of a man possessed of great confidence in himself.


6.2.39
2661
κ- ἐκεῖνος μὲν δὴ ταῦτ’ ἔπραττεν .
He, then, was occupied with these things.


6.3.1
2662
οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι , ἐκπεπτωκότας μὲν ὁρῶντες ἐκ τῆς Βοιωτίας Πλαταιᾶς , φίλους ὄντας , καὶ καταπεφευγότας πρὸς αὑτούς , ἱκετεύοντας δὲ Θεσπιᾶς μὴ σφᾶς περιιδεῖν ἀπόλιδας γενομένους , οὐκέτι ἐπῄνουν τοὺς Θηβαίους , ἀλλὰ πολεμεῖν μὲν αὐτοῖς τὰ μὲν ᾐσχύνοντο , τὰ δὲ ἀσυμφόρως ἔχειν ἐλογίζοντο ·
Meanwhile the Athenians, seeing that the Plataeans, who were their friends, had been expelled from Boeotia and had fled to them for refuge, and that the Thespians were beseeching them not to allow them to be left without a city, no longer commended the Thebans, but, on the contrary, while they were partly ashamed to make war upon them and partly reckoned it to be inexpedient,


6.3.1
2663
κοινωνεῖν γε μὴν αὐτοῖς ὧν ἔπραττον οὐκέτι ἤθελον , ἐπεὶ ἑώρων στρατεύοντάς τε αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ φίλους ἀρχαίους τῇ πόλει Φωκέας , καὶ πόλεις πιστάς τ’ ἐν τῷ πρὸς τὸν βάρβαρον πολέμῳ καὶ φίλας ἑαυτοῖς ἀφανίζοντας .
they nevertheless refused any longer to take part with them in what they were doing, inasmuch as they saw that they were campaigning against the Phocians, who were old friends of the Athenians, and were annihilating cities which had been faithful in the war against the barbarian and were friendly to Athens.


6.3.2
2664
ἐκ τούτων δὲ ψηφισάμενος ὁ δῆμος εἰρήνην ποιεῖσθαι , πρῶτον μὲν εἰς Θήβας πρέσβεις ἔπεμψε παρακαλοῦντας ἀκολουθεῖν , εἰ βούλοιντο , εἰς Λακεδαίμονα περὶ εἰρήνης ·
For these reasons the Athenian people voted to make peace, and in the first place sent ambassadors to Thebes to invite the Thebans to go with them to Lacedaemon to treat for peace if they so desired;


6.3.2
2665
ἔπειτα δὲ ἐξέπεμψαν καὶ αὐτοὶ πρέσβεις .
then they sent ambassadors to Lacedaemon themselves.


6.3.2
2666
ἦν δὲ τῶν αἱρεθέντων Καλλίας Ἰππονίκου , Αὐτοκλῆς Στρομβιχίδου , Δημόστρατος Ἀριστοφῶντος , Ἀριστοκλῆς , Κηφισόδοτος , Μελάνωπος , Λύκαιθος .
Among those who were chosen were Callias, the son of Hipponicus; Autocles, the son of Strombichides; Demostratus, the son of Aristophon; Aristocles, Cephisodotus, Melanopus, and Lycaethus.


6.3.3
2667
ἐπεὶ δὲ προσῆλθον ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐκκλήτους τε τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ τοὺς συμμάχους ·
When the ambassadors came before the assembly of the Lacedaemonians and the representatives of their allies,


6.3.3
2668
καὶ Καλλίστρατος δὲ ὁ δημηγόρος παρῆν ·
Callistratus, the popular orator, also went with the embassy;


6.3.3
2669
ὑποσχόμενος γὰρ Ἰφικράτει , εἰ αὐτὸν ἀφείη , ἢ χρήματα πέμψειν τῷ ναυτικῷ ἢ εἰρήνην ποιήσειν , οὕτως Ἀθήνησί τε ἦν καὶ ἔπραττε περὶ εἰρήνης ·
for he had promised Iphicrates that if he would let him go home, he would either send money for the fleet or bring about peace, and consequently he had been at Athens and engaged in efforts to secure peace;


6.3.3
2670
ἐπεὶ δὲ κατέστησαν ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐκκλήτους τε τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ τοὺς συμμάχους , πρῶτος ἔλεξεν αὐτῶν Καλλίας ὁ δᾳδοῦχος .
and when the ambassadors came before the assembly of the Lacedaemonians and the representatives of their allies, the first of them who spoke was Callias, the torch-bearer.


6.3.3
2671
ἦν δ’ οὗτος οἷος μηδὲν ἧττον ἥδεσθαι ὑφ’ αὑτοῦ ἢ ὑπ’ ἄλλων ἐπαινούμενος ·
He was the sort of man to enjoy no less being praised by himself than by others,


6.3.3
2672
καὶ τότε δὴ ἤρξατο ὧδέ πως .
and on this occasion he began in about the following words:


6.3.4
2673
ὦ ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , τὴν μὲν προξενίαν ὑμῶν οὐκ ἐγὼ μόνος , ἀλλὰ καὶ πατρὸς πατὴρ πατρῴαν ἔχων παρεδίδου τῷ γένει .
Men of Lacedaemon, as regards the position I hold as your diplomatic agent, I am not the only member of our family who has held it,


6.3.4
2674
βούλομαι δὲ καὶ τοῦτο ὑμῖν δηλῶσαι , ὡς ἔχουσα ἡ πόλις διατελεῖ πρὸς ἡμᾶς .
but my father’s father received it from his father and handed it on to his descendants; and I also wish to make clear to you how highly esteemed we have been by our own state.


6.3.4
2675
ἐκείνη γάρ , ὅταν μὲν πόλεμος ᾖ , στρατηγοὺς ἡμᾶς αἱρεῖται , ὅταν δὲ ἡσυχίας ἐπιθυμήσῃ , εἰρηνοποιοὺς ἡμᾶς ἐκπέμπει .
For whenever there is war she chooses us as generals, and whenever she becomes desirous of tranquillity she sends us out as peacemakers.


6.3.4
2676
κ- ἐγὼ πρόσθεν δὶς ἤδη ἦλθον περὶ πολέμου καταλύσεως , καὶ ἐν ἀμφοτέραις ταῖς πρεσβείαις διεπραξάμην καὶ ὑμῖν καὶ ἡμῖν εἰρήνην ·
I, for example, have twice before now come here to treat for a termination of war, and on both these embassies I succeeded in achieving peace both for you and for ourselves;


6.3.4
2677
νῦν δὲ τρίτον ἥκω , καὶ ἡγοῦμαι πολὺ δικαιότατα νῦν ἂν διαλλαγῆς τυχεῖν .
now for a third time I am come, and it is now, I believe, that with greater justice than ever before I should obtain a reconciliation between us.


6.3.5
2678
ὁρῶ γὰρ οὐκ ἄλλα μὲν ὑμῖν , ἄλλα δὲ ἡμῖν δοκοῦντα , ἀλλ’ ὑμᾶς τε ἀχθομένους καὶ ἡμᾶς τῇ Πλαταιῶν καὶ Θεσπιῶν ἀναιρέσει .
For I see that you do not think one way and we another, but that you as well as we are distressed over the destruction of Plataea and Thespiae.


6.3.5
2679
πῶς οὖν οὐκ εἰκὸς τὰ αὐτὰ γιγνώσκοντας φίλους μᾶλλον ἀλλήλοις ἢ πολεμίους εἶναι ;
How, then, is it not fitting that men who hold the same views should be friends of one another rather than enemies?


6.3.5
2680
καὶ σωφρόνων μὲν δήπου ἐστὶ μηδὲ εἰ μικρὰ τὰ διαφέροντα εἴη πόλεμον ἀναιρεῖσθαι ·
Again, it is certainly the part of wise men not to undertake war even if they should have differences, if they be slight;


6.3.5
2681
εἰ δὲ δὴ καὶ ὁμογνωμονοῖμεν , οὐκ ἂν πάνυ τῶν θαυμαστῶν εἴη μὴ εἰρήνην ποιεῖσθαι ;
but if, in fact, we should actually find ourselves in complete agreement, should we not be astounding fools not to make peace?


6.3.6
2682
δίκαιον μὲν οὖν ἦν μηδὲ ὅπλα ἐπιφέρειν ἀλλήλοις ἡμᾶς , ἐπεὶ λέγεται μὲν Τριπτόλεμος ὁ ἡμέτερος πρόγονος τὰ Δήμητρος καὶ Κόρης ἄρρητα ἱερὰ πρώτοις ξένοις δεῖξαι Ἡρακλεῖ τε τῷ ὑμετέρῳ ἀρχηγέτῃ καὶ Διοσκούροιν τοῖν ὑμετέροιν πολίταιν , καὶ τοῦ Δήμητρος δὲ καρποῦ εἰς πρώτην τὴν Πελοπόννησον σπέρμα δωρήσασθαι .
The right course, indeed, would have been for us not to take up arms against one another in the beginning, since the tradition is that the first strangers to whom Triptolemus, our ancestor, revealed the mystic rites of Demeter and Core were Heracles, your state’s founder, and the Dioscuri, your citizens; and, further, that it was upon Peloponnesus that he first bestowed the seed of Demeter’s fruit.


6.3.6
2683
πῶς οὖν δίκαιον ἢ ὑμᾶς , παρ’ ὧν ἐλάβετε σπέρματα , τὸν τούτων ποτὲ καρπὸν ἐλθεῖν δῃώσοντας , ἡμᾶς τε , οἷς ἐδώκαμεν , μὴ οὐχὶ βούλεσθαι ὡς πλείστην τούτοις ἀφθονίαν τροφῆς γενέσθαι ;
How, then, can it be right, either that you should ever come to destroy the fruit of those very men from whom you received the seed, or that we should not desire those very men, to whom we gave the seed, to obtain the greatest possible abundance of food?


6.3.6
2684
εἰ δὲ ἄρα ἐκ θεῶν πεπρωμένον ἐστὶ πολέμους ἐν ἀνθρώποις γίγνεσθαι , ἡμᾶς δὲ χρὴ ἄρχεσθαι μὲν αὐτοῦ ὡς σχολαίτατα , ὅταν δὲ γένηται , καταλύεσθαι ᾗ δυνατὸν τάχιστα .
But if it is indeed ordered of the gods that wars should come among men, then we ought to begin war as tardily as we can, and, when it has come, to bring it to an end as speedily as possible.


6.3.7
2685
μετὰ τοῦτον Αὐτοκλῆς , μάλα δοκῶν ἐπιστρεφὴς εἶναι ῥήτωρ , ὧδε ἠγόρευεν ·
After him Autocles, who had the reputation of being a very incisive orator, spoke as follows:


6.3.7
2686
ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ὅτι μὲν ἃ μέλλω λέγειν οὐ πρὸς χάριν ὑμῖν ῥηθήσεται οὐκ ἀγνοῶ ·
Men of Lacedaemon, that what I am about to say will not be said to your pleasure, I am not unaware; but it seems to me that men who desire the friendship which they may establish to endure for the longest possible time, ought to point out to one another the causes of their wars.


6.3.7
2687
ἀλλὰ δοκεῖ μοι , οἵτινες βούλονται , ἣν ἂν ποιήσωνται φιλίαν , ταύτην ὡς πλεῖστον χρόνον διαμένειν , διδακτέον εἶναι ἀλλήλους τὰ αἴτια τῶν πολέμων .
Now you always say,


6.3.7
2688
ὑμεῖς δὲ ἀεὶ μέν φατε ·
The cities must be independent,


6.3.7
2689
αὐτονόμους τὰς πόλεις χρὴ εἶναι , αὐτοὶ δ’ ἐστὲ μάλιστα ἐμποδὼν τῇ αὐτονομίᾳ .
but you are yourselves the greatest obstacle in the way of their independence.


6.3.7
2690
συντίθεσθε μὲν γὰρ πρὸς τὰς συμμαχίδας πόλεις τοῦτο πρῶτον , ἀκολουθεῖν ὅποι ἂν ὑμεῖς ἡγῆσθε .
For the first stipulation you make with your allied cities is this, that they follow wherever you may lead.


6.3.8
2691
καίτοι τί τοῦτο αὐτονομίᾳ προσήκει ;
And yet how is this consistent with independence?


6.3.8
2692
ποιεῖσθε δὲ πολεμίους οὐκ ἀνακοινούμενοι τοῖς συμμάχοις , καὶ ἐπὶ τούτους ἡγεῖσθε ·
And you make for yourselves enemies without taking counsel with your allies, and against those enemies you lead them;


6.3.8
2693
ὥστε πολλάκις ἐπὶ τοὺς εὐμενεστάτους ἀναγκάζονται στρατεύειν οἱ λεγόμενοι αὐτόνομοι εἶναι .
so that frequently they who are said to be independent are compelled to take the field against men most friendly to themselves.


6.3.8
2694
ἔτι δὲ τὸ πάντων ἐναντιώτατον αὐτονομίᾳ , καθίστατε ἔνθα μὲν δεκαρχίας , ἔνθα δὲ τριακονταρχίας ·
Furthermore  —  and there can be nothing in the world more opposed to independence  —  you establish governments of ten here and governments of thirty there;


6.3.8
2695
καὶ τούτων τῶν ἀρχόντων ἐπιμελεῖσθε οὐχ ὅπως νομίμως ἄρχωσιν , ἀλλ’ ὅπως δύνωνται βίᾳ κατέχειν τὰς πόλεις .
and in the case of these rulers your care is, not that they shall rule according to law, but that they shall be able to hold possession of their cities by force.


6.3.8
2696
ὥστ’ ἐοίκατε τυραννίσι μᾶλλον ἢ πολιτείαις ἡδόμενοι .
So that you manifestly take pleasure in despotisms rather than in free governments.


6.3.9
2697
καὶ ὅτε μὲν βασιλεὺς προσέταττεν αὐτονόμους τὰς πόλεις εἶναι , μάλα γιγνώσκοντες ἐφαίνεσθε ὅτι εἰ μὴ ἐάσοιεν οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἑκάστην τῶν πόλεων ἄρχειν τε ἑαυτῆς καὶ οἷς ἂν βούληται νόμοις χρῆσθαι , οὐ ποιήσουσι κατὰ τὰ βασιλέως γράμματα ·
Again, when the King directed that the cities be independent, you showed yourselves strongly of the opinion that if the Thebans did not allow each one of their cities, not only to rule itself, but also to live under whatever laws it chose, they would not be acting in accordance with the King’s writing;


6.3.9
2698
ἐπεὶ δὲ παρελάβετε τὴν Καδμείαν , οὐδ’ αὐτοῖς Θηβαίοις ἐπετρέπετε αὐτονόμους εἶναι .
but when you had seized the Cadmea, you did not permit even the Thebans themselves to be independent.


6.3.9
2699
δεῖ δὲ τοὺς μέλλοντας φίλους ἔσεσθαι οὐ παρὰ τῶν ἄλλων μὲν ἀξιοῦν τῶν δικαίων τυγχάνειν , αὐτοὺς δὲ ὅπως ἂν πλεῖστα δύνωνται πλεονεκτοῦντας φαίνεσθαι .
The right thing, however, is that those who are going to be friends should not insist upon obtaining their full rights from others, and then show themselves disposed to grasp the most they can.


6.3.10
2700
ταῦτα εἰπὼν σιωπὴν μὲν παρὰ πάντων ἐποίησεν , ἡδομένους δὲ τοὺς ἀχθομένους τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ἐποίησε .
By these words he caused silence on the part of all, while at the same time he gave pleasure to those who were angry with the Lacedaemonians.


6.3.10
2701
μετὰ τοῦτον Καλλίστρατος ἔλεξεν ·
After him Callistratus said:


6.3.10
2702
ἀλλ’ ὅπως μέν , ὦ ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , οὐκ ἐγγεγένηται ἁμαρτήματα καὶ ἀφ’ ἡμῶν καὶ ἀφ’ ὑμῶν ἐγὼ μὲν οὐκ ἂν ἔχειν μοι δοκῶ εἰπεῖν ·
Men of Lacedaemon, that mistakes have not been made, both on our side and on yours, I for one do not think I could assert;


6.3.10
2703
οὐ μέντοι οὕτω γιγνώσκω ὡς τοῖς ἁμαρτάνουσιν οὐδέποτε ἔτι χρηστέον ·
but I do not hold to the opinion that one ought never again to have any dealings with people who make mistakes.


6.3.10
2704
ὁρῶ γὰρ τῶν ἀνθρώπων οὐδένα ἀναμάρτητον διατελοῦντα .
For I see that no one in the world remains always free from error.


6.3.10
2705
δοκοῦσι δέ μοι καὶ εὐπορώτεροι ἐνίοτε γίγνεσθαι ἅνθρωποι ἁμαρτάνοντες , ἄλλως τε καὶ ἐὰν κολασθῶσιν ὑπὸ τῶν ἁμαρτημάτων , ὡς ἡμεῖς .
And it seems to me that through making mistakes men sometimes become even easier to deal with, especially if they have incurred punishment in consequence of their mistakes, as we have.


6.3.11
2706
καὶ ὑμῖν δὲ ἔγωγε ὁρῶ διὰ τὰ ἀγνωμόνως πραχθέντα ἔστιν ὅτε πολλὰ ἀντίτυπα γιγνόμενα ·
In your own case, also, I see that sometimes many reverses result from the things you have done with too little judgment.


6.3.11
2707
ὧν ἦν καὶ ἡ καταληφθεῖσα ἐν Θήβαις Καδμεία ·
Among which was, in fact, the seizure of the Cadmea in Thebes;


6.3.11
2708
νῦν γοῦν , ὡς ἐσπουδάσατε αὐτονόμους τὰς πόλεις γενέσθαι , πᾶσαι πάλιν , ἐπεὶ ἠδικήθησαν οἱ Θηβαῖοι , ἐπ’ ἐκείνοις γεγένηνται .
now, at any rate, the cities which you were eager to make independent have all, in consequence of the wrong done to the Thebans, fallen again under their power.


6.3.11
2709
ὥστε πεπαιδευμένους ἡμᾶς ὡς τὸ πλεονεκτεῖν ἀκερδές ἐστι νῦν ἐλπίζω πάλιν μετρίους ἐν τῇ πρὸς ἀλλήλους φιλίᾳ ἔσεσθαι .
Hence I hope that now, when we have been taught that to seek selfish advantage is unprofitable, we shall again be reasonable in our friendship with each other.


6.3.12
2710
ἃ δὲ βουλόμενοί τινες ἀποτρέπειν τὴν εἰρήνην διαβάλλουσιν , ὡς ἡμεῖς οὐ φιλίας δεόμενοι , ἀλλὰ φοβούμενοι μὴ Ἀνταλκίδας ἔλθῃ ἔχων παρὰ βασιλέως χρήματα , διὰ τοῦθ’ ἥκομεν , ἐνθυμήθητε ὡς φλυαροῦσι .
Now touching the slanderous allegations of certain people who wish to defeat the peace, to the effect that we have come here, not because we desire friendship, but rather because we fear that Antalcidas may arrive with money from the King, consider how foolishly they are talking.


6.3.12
2711
βασιλεὺς μὲν γὰρ δήπου ἔγραψε πάσας τὰς ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι πόλεις αὐτονόμους εἶναι ·
For the King directed, as you know, that all the cities in Greece were to be independent;


6.3.12
2712
ἡμεῖς δὲ τ- αὐτὰ ἐκείνῳ λέγοντές τε καὶ πράττοντες τί ἂν φοβοίμεθα βασιλέα ;
why then should we, who agree with the King in both word and deed, be afraid of him?


6.3.12
2713
ἢ τοῦτο οἴεταί τις , ὡς ἐκεῖνος βούλεται χρήματα ἀναλώσας ἄλλους μεγάλους ποιῆσαι μᾶλλον ἢ ἄνευ δαπάνης ἃ ἔγνω ἄριστα εἶναι , ταῦτα ἑαυτῷ πεπρᾶχθαι ;
Or does anyone imagine that the King prefers to spend money and make others great, rather than, without expense, to have those things accomplished for him which he judged to be best?


6.3.13
2714
εἶεν .
So much for that.


6.3.13
2715
τί μὴν ἥκομεν ;
Why, then, have we come?


6.3.13
2716
ὅτι μὲν οὖν οὐκ ἀποροῦντες , γνοίητε ἄν , εἰ μὲν βούλεσθε , πρὸς τὰ κατὰ θάλατταν ἰδόντες , εἰ δὲ βούλεσθε , πρὸς τὰ κατὰ γῆν ἐν τῷ παρόντι .
That it surely is not because we are in straits, you could discover, if you please, by looking at the situation by sea or, if you please, at the situation by land at the present time.


6.3.13
2717
τί μήν ἐστιν ;
What, then, is the reason?


6.3.13
2718
εὔδηλον ὅτι εἰ τῶν συμμάχων τινὲς οὐκ ἀρεστὰ πράττουσιν ἡμῖν ἢ ὑμῖν ἀρεστά .
Manifestly that some of our allies are doing what is not pleasing to us.


6.3.13
2719
ἴσως δὲ καὶ βουλοίμεθ’ ἂν ὧν ἕνεκα περιεσώσατε ἡμᾶς ἃ ὀρθῶς ἔγνωμεν ὑμῖν ἐπιδεῖξαι .
And perhaps we also should like to show you the gratitude we rightly conceived toward you because you preserved us.


6.3.14
2720
ἵνα δὲ καὶ τοῦ συμφόρου ἔτι ἐπιμνησθῶ , εἰσὶ μὲν δήπου πασῶν τῶν πόλεων αἱ μὲν τὰ ὑμέτερα , αἱ δὲ τὰ ἡμέτερα φρονοῦσαι , καὶ ἐν ἑκάστῃ πόλει οἱ μὲν λακωνίζουσιν , οἱ δὲ ἀττικίζουσιν .
Furthermore, to mention also the matter of expediency, there are, of course, among all the cities of Greece, some that take your side and others that take ours, and in each single city some people favour the Lacedaemonians and others the Athenians.


6.3.14
2721
εἰ οὖν ἡμεῖς φίλοι γενοίμεθα , πόθεν ἂν εἰκότως χαλεπόν τι προσδοκήσαιμεν ;
If, therefore, we should become friends, from what quarter could we with reason expect any trouble?


6.3.14
2722
καὶ γὰρ δὴ κατὰ γῆν μὲν τίς ἂν ὑμῶν φίλων ὄντων ἱκανὸς γένοιτο ἡμᾶς λυπῆσαι ;
For who could prove strong enough to vex us by land if you were our friends?


6.3.14
2723
κατὰ θάλαττάν γε μὴν τίς ἂν ὑμᾶς βλάψαι τι ἡμῶν ὑμῖν ἐπιτηδείων ὄντων ;
And who could do you any harm by sea if we were favourably inclined toward you?


6.3.15
2724
ἀλλὰ μέντοι ὅτι μὲν πόλεμοι ἀεί ποτε γίγνονται καὶ ὅτι καταλύονται πάντες ἐπιστάμεθα , καὶ ὅτι ἡμεῖς , ἂν μὴ νῦν , ἀλλ’ αὖθίς ποτε εἰρήνης ἐπιθυμήσομεν .
Moreover, we all know that wars are forever breaking out and being concluded, and that we — if not now, still at some future time — shall desire peace again.


6.3.15
2725
τί οὖν δεῖ ἐκεῖνον τὸν χρόνον ἀναμένειν , ἕως ἂν ὑπὸ πλήθους κακῶν ἀπείπωμεν , μᾶλλον ἢ οὐχ ὡς τάχιστα πρίν τι ἀνήκεστον γενέσθαι τὴν εἰρήνην ποιήσασθαι ;
Why, then, should we wait for the time when we shall have become exhausted by a multitude of ills, and not rather conclude peace as quickly as possible before anything irremediable happens?


6.3.16
2726
ἀλλὰ μὴν οὐδ’ ἐκείνους ἔγωγε ἐπαινῶ οἵτινες ἀγωνισταὶ γενόμενοι καὶ νενικηκότες ἤδη πολλάκις καὶ δόξαν ἔχοντες οὕτω φιλονεικοῦσιν ὥστε οὐ πρότερον παύονται , πρὶν ἂν ἡττηθέντες τὴν ἄσκησιν καταλύσωσιν , οὐδέ γε τῶν κυβευτῶν οἵτινες αὖ ἐὰν ἕν τι ἐπιτύχωσι , περὶ διπλασίων κυβεύουσιν ·
Again, I for my part do not commend those men who, when they have become competitors in the games and have already been victorious many times and enjoy fame, are so fond of contest that they do not stop until they are defeated and so end their athletic training;


6.3.16
2727
ὁρῶ γὰρ καὶ τῶν τοιούτων τοὺς πλείους ἀπόρους παντάπασι γιγνομένους .
nor on the other hand do I commend those dicers who, if they win one success, throw for double stakes, for I see that the majority of such people become utterly impoverished.


6.3.17
2728
ἃ χρὴ καὶ ἡμᾶς ὁρῶντας εἰς μὲν τοιοῦτον ἀγῶνα μηδέποτε καταστῆναι , ὥστ’ ἢ πάντα λαβεῖν ἢ πάντ’ ἀποβαλεῖν , ἕως δὲ καὶ ἐρρώμεθα καὶ εὐτυχοῦμεν , φίλους ἀλλήλοις γενέσθαι .
We, then, seeing these things, ought never to engage in a contest of such a sort that we shall either win all or lose all, but ought rather to become friends of one another while we are still strong and successful.


6.3.17
2729
οὕτω γὰρ ἡμεῖς τ’ ἂν δι’ ὑμᾶς καὶ ὑμεῖς δι’ ἡμᾶς ἔτι μείζους ἢ τὸν παρελθόντα χρόνον ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι ἀναστρεφοίμεθα .
For thus we through you, and you through us, could play even a greater part in Greece than in times gone by.


6.3.18
2730
δοξάντων δὲ τούτων καλῶς εἰπεῖν , ἐψηφίσαντο καὶ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι δέχεσθαι τὴν εἰρήνην , ἐφ’ ᾧ τούς τε ἁρμοστὰς ἐκ τῶν πόλεων ἐξάγειν , τά τε στρατόπεδα διαλύειν καὶ τὰ ναυτικὰ καὶ τὰ πεζικά , τάς τε πόλεις αὐτονόμους ἐᾶν .
Since these men were adjudged to have spoken rightly, the Lacedaemonians voted to accept the peace, with the provision that all should withdraw their governors from the cities, disband their armaments both on sea and on land, and leave the cities independent.


6.3.18
2731
εἰ δέ τις παρὰ ταῦτα ποιοίη , τὸν μὲν βουλόμενον βοηθεῖν ταῖς ἀδικουμέναις πόλεσι , τῷ δὲ μὴ βουλομένῳ μὴ εἶναι ἔνορκον συμμαχεῖν τοῖς ἀδικουμένοις .
And if any state should act in violation of this agreement, it was provided that any which so desired might aid the injured cities, but that any which did not so desire was not under oath to be the ally of those who were injured.


6.3.19
2732
ἐπὶ τούτοις ὤμοσαν Λακεδαιμόνιοι μὲν ὑπὲρ αὑτῶν καὶ τῶν συμμάχων , Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι κατὰ πόλεις ἕκαστοι .
On these terms the Lacedaemonians took the oath for themselves and their allies, while the Athenians and their allies took the oath severally, city by city.


6.3.19
2733
ἀπογραψάμενοι δ’ ἐν ταῖς ὀμωμοκυίαις πόλεσι καὶ οἱ Θηβαῖοι , προσελθόντες πάλιν τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ οἱ πρέσβεις αὐτῶν ἐκέλευον μεταγράφειν ἀντὶ Θηβαίων Βοιωτοὺς ὀμωμοκότας .
The Thebans also signed their names among the cities which had sworn, but on the following day their ambassadors came in again and demanded that the writing be changed to read that the Boeotians instead of the Thebans had sworn.


6.3.19
2734
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος ἀπεκρίνατο ὅτι μεταγράψει μὲν οὐδὲν ὧν τὸ πρῶτον ὤμοσάν τε καὶ ἀπεγράψαντο ·
Agesilaus, however, replied that he would change no part of what they had sworn to and signed in the first place;


6.3.19
2735
εἰ μέντοι μὴ βούλοιντο ἐν ταῖς σπονδαῖς εἶναι , ἐξαλείφειν ἂν ἔφη , εἰ κελεύοιεν .
but if they did not wish to be included in the treaty, he said that he would strike out their names if they so directed.


6.3.20
2736
οὕτω δὴ εἰρήνην τῶν ἄλλων πεποιημένων , πρὸς δὲ Θηβαίους μόνους ἀντιλογίας οὔσης , οἱ μὲν Ἀθηναῖοι οὕτως εἶχον τὴν γνώμην ὡς νῦν Θηβαίους τὸ λεγόμενον δὴ δεκατευθῆναι ἐλπὶς εἴη , αὐτοὶ δὲ οἱ Θηβαῖοι παντελῶς ἀθύμως ἔχοντες ἀπῆλθον .
When, accordingly, under these circumstances the others had concluded peace, while the only controversy was with the Thebans, the Athenians were of the opinion that now there was hope that the Thebans would be decimated, as the common saying puts it, and as for the Thebans themselves, they went home utterly despondent.


6.4.1
2737
ἐκ δὲ τούτου οἱ μὲν Ἀθηναῖοι τάς τε φρουρὰς ἐκ τῶν πόλεων ἀπῆγον καὶ Ἰφικράτην καὶ τὰς ναῦς μετεπέμποντο , καὶ ὅσα ὕστερον ἔλαβε μετὰ τοὺς ὅρκους τοὺς ἐν Λακεδαίμονι γενομένους , πάντα ἠνάγκασαν ἀποδοῦναι .
After this the Athenians, on their side, proceeded to withdraw their garrisons from the cities and to send after Iphicrates and his ships, and they compelled him to give back everything which he had captured after the time when the oaths were taken at Lacedaemon.


6.4.2
2738
Λακεδαιμόνιοι μέντοι ἐκ μὲν τῶν ἄλλων πόλεων τούς τε ἁρμοστὰς καὶ τοὺς φρουροὺς ἀπήγαγον , Κλεόμβροτον δὲ ἔχοντα τὸ ἐν Φωκεῦσι στράτευμα καὶ ἐπερωτῶντα τὰ οἴκοι τέλη τί χρὴ ποιεῖν , Προθόου λέξαντος ὅτι αὐτῷ δοκοίη διαλύσαντας τὸ στράτευμα κατὰ τοὺς ὅρκους καὶ περιαγγείλαντας ταῖς πόλεσι συμβαλέσθαι εἰς τὸν ναὸν τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος ὁπόσον βούλοιτο ἑκάστη πόλις , ἔπειτα εἰ μή τις ἐῴη αὐτονόμους τὰς πόλεις εἶναι , τότε πάλιν παρακαλέσαντας , ὅσοι τῇ αὐτονομίᾳ βούλοιντο βοηθεῖν , ἄγειν ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐναντιουμένους ·
But the Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, while they withdrew both their governors and their garrisons from all the other cities, did not follow this course in the case of Cleombrotus, who was at the head of the army in Phocis and now asked the authorities at home what he should do. Prothous did indeed say that it seemed to him they ought first to disband the army in accordance with their oaths and send round word to the various cities to make contributions, as large as each city chose to make, to the temple of Apollo, and afterwards, in case anyone tried to prevent the cities from being independent, to call together again at that time all who wished to support the cause of independence and lead them against those who opposed it;


6.4.2
2739
οὕτω γὰρ ἂν ἔφη οἴεσθαι τούς τε θεοὺς εὐμενεστάτους εἶναι καὶ τὰς πόλεις ἥκιστ’ ἂν ἄχθεσθαι ·
for he thought, he continued, that in this way the gods would be most favourably inclined toward them and the cities would be least annoyed.


6.4.3
2740
ἡ δ’ ἐκκλησία ἀκούσασα ταῦτα ἐκεῖνον μὲν φλυαρεῖν ἡγήσατο ·
The Lacedaemonian assembly, however, upon hearing these words, came to the conclusion that he was talking nonsense;


6.4.3
2741
ἤδη γάρ , ὡς ἔοικε , τὸ δαιμόνιον ἦγεν ·
for at this moment, as it seems, Fate was leading them on;


6.4.3
2742
ἐπέστειλαν δὲ τῷ Κλεομβρότῳ μὴ διαλύειν τὸ στράτευμα , ἀλλ’ εὐθὺς ἄγειν ἐπὶ τοὺς Θηβαίους , εἰ μὴ αὐτονόμους ἀφίοιεν τὰς πόλεις .
and they sent orders to Cleombrotus not to disband his army, but to lead it at once against the Thebans if they did not leave the cities independent.


6.4.3
2743
ὁ δὲ Κλεόμβροτος , ἐπειδὴ ἐπύθετο τὴν εἰρήνην γεγενημένην , πέμψας πρὸς τοὺς ἐφόρους ἠρώτα τί χρὴ ποιεῖν ·
When, therefore, he learned that, so far from leaving the cities independent, the Thebans were not even disbanding their army, in order that they might marshal themselves against him,


6.4.3
2744
οἱ δ’ ἐκέλευσαν αὐτὸν στρατεύειν ἐπὶ τοὺς Θηβαίους , εἰ μὴ ἀφίοιεν τὰς Βοιωτίας πόλεις αὐτονόμους .
under these circumstances he undertook to lead his troops into Boeotia.


6.4.3
2745
ἐπεὶ οὖν ᾔσθετο οὐχ ὅπως τὰς πόλεις ἀφιέντας , ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ τὸ στράτευμα διαλύοντας , ὡς ἀντετάττοντο πρὸς αὐτούς , οὕτω δὴ ἄγει τὴν στρατιὰν εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν .
Now Cleombrotus did not enter Boeotia from Phocis at the point where the Thebans expected him to enter and where they were keeping guard at a narrow pass;


6.4.3
2746
καὶ ᾗ μὲν οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἐμβαλεῖν αὐτὸν ἐκ τῶν Φωκέων προσεδόκων καὶ ἐπὶ στενῷ τινι ἐφύλαττον οὐκ ἐμβάλλει ·
but proceeding by way of Thisbae along a mountainous and unexpected route,


6.4.3
2747
διὰ Θισβῶν δὲ ὀρεινὴν καὶ ἀπροσδόκητον πορευθεὶς ἀφικνεῖται εἰς Κρεῦσιν , καὶ τὸ τεῖχος αἱρεῖ , καὶ τριήρεις τῶν Θηβαίων δώδεκα λαμβάνει .
he arrived at Creusis, captured its wall, and took twelve triremes belonging to the Thebans.


6.4.4
2748
ταῦτα δὲ ποιήσας καὶ ἀναβὰς ἀπὸ τῆς θαλάττης , ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο ἐν Λεύκτροις τῆς Θεσπικῆς .
After accomplishing this exploit and marching up from the sea-coast, he encamped at Leuctra, in the territory of Thespiae.


6.4.4
2749
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ἐστρατοπεδεύσαντο ἐπὶ τῷ ἀπαντικρὺ λόφῳ οὐ πολὺ διαλείποντες , οὐδένας ἔχοντες συμμάχους ἀλλ’ ἢ τοὺς Βοιωτούς .
And the Thebans encamped on the opposite hill not very far away, with no allies except the Boeotians.


6.4.4
2750
ἔνθα δὴ τῷ Κλεομβρότῳ οἱ μὲν φίλοι προσιόντες ἔλεγον ·
Then his friends went to Cleombrotus and said:


6.4.5
2751
ὦ Κλεόμβροτε , εἰ ἀφήσεις τοὺς Θηβαίους ἄνευ μάχης , κινδυνεύσεις ὑπὸ τῆς πόλεως τὰ ἔσχατα παθεῖν .
Cleombrotus, if you let the Thebans escape without a battle, you will be in danger of suffering the uttermost penalty at the hands of your state.


6.4.5
2752
ἀναμνησθήσονται γάρ σου καὶ ὅτε εἰς Κυνὸς κεφαλὰς ἀφικόμενος οὐδὲν τῆς χώρας τῶν Θηβαίων ἐδῄωσας , καὶ ὅτε ὕστερον στρατεύων ἀπεκρούσθης τῆς ἐμβολῆς , Ἀγησιλάου ἀεὶ ἐμβάλλοντος διὰ τοῦ Κιθαιρῶνος .
For they will remember against you not only the time when you reached Cynoscephalae and laid waste no part of the country of the Thebans, but also the time when, on your later expedition, you were beaten back from effecting your entrance, although Agesilaus always made his entrance by way of Cithaeron.


6.4.5
2753
εἴπερ οὖν ἢ σαυτοῦ κήδῃ ἢ τῆς πατρίδος ἐπιθυμεῖς , ἀκτέον ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας .
Therefore if you really have a care for yourself or a desire to see your fatherland again, you must lead against these men.


6.4.5
2754
οἱ μὲν φίλοι τοιαῦτα ἔλεγον ·
Such were the words of his friends;


6.4.5
2755
οἱ δ’ ἐναντίοι ·
but his opponents said:


6.4.5
2756
νῦν δή , ἔφασαν , δηλώσει ὁ ἀνὴρ εἰ τῷ ὄντι κήδεται τῶν Θηβαίων , ὥσπερ λέγεται .
Now is the time when the man will make it clear whether he is in truth partial to the Thebans, as rumour has it.


6.4.6
2757
ὁ μὲν δὴ Κλεόμβροτος ταῦτα ἀκούων παρωξύνετο πρὸς τὸ μάχην συνάπτειν .
Cleombrotus, then, as he heard these things was spurred on to join battle.


6.4.6
2758
τῶν δ’ αὖ Θηβαίων οἱ προεστῶτες ἐλογίζοντο ὡς εἰ μὴ μαχοῖντο , ἀποστήσοιντο μὲν αἱ περιοικίδες αὐτῶν πόλεις , αὐτοὶ δὲ πολιορκήσοιντο ·
The leaders of the Thebans, on the other hand, calculated that if they did not fight, the cities round about would revolt from them and they would themselves be besieged;


6.4.6
2759
εἰ δὲ μὴ ἕξοι ὁ δῆμος ὁ Θηβαίων τ- ἐπιτήδεια , ὅτι κινδυνεύσοι καὶ ἡ πόλις αὐτοῖς ἐναντία γενέσθαι .
further, that if the people of Thebes were thus cut off from provisions, the city itself would be in danger of turning against them.


6.4.6
2760
ἅτε δὲ καὶ πεφευγότες πρόσθεν πολλοὶ αὐτῶν ἐλογίζοντο κρεῖττον εἶναι μαχομένους ἀποθνῄσκειν ἢ πάλιν φεύγειν .
And since many of them had been in exile before, they estimated that it was better to die fighting than to be exiled again.


6.4.7
2761
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις παρεθάρρυνε μέν τι αὐτοὺς καὶ ὁ χρησμὸς ὁ λεγόμενος ὡς δέοι ἐνταῦθα Λακεδαιμονίους ἡττηθῆναι ἔνθα τὸ τῶν παρθένων ἦν μνῆμα , αἳ λέγονται διὰ τὸ βιασθῆναι ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων τινῶν ἀποκτεῖναι ἑαυτάς .
Besides this, they were also somewhat encouraged by the oracle which was reported — that the Lacedaemonians were destined to be defeated at the spot where stood the monument of the virgins, who are said to have killed themselves because they had been violated by certain Lacedaemonians.


6.4.7
2762
καὶ ἐκόσμησαν δὴ τοῦτο τὸ μνῆμα οἱ Θηβαῖοι πρὸ τῆς μάχης .
The Thebans accordingly decorated this monument before the battle.


6.4.7
2763
ἀπηγγέλλετο δὲ καὶ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως αὐτοῖς ὡς οἵ τε νεῲ πάντες αὐτόματοι ἀνεῴγοντο , αἵ τε ἱέρειαι λέγοιεν ὡς νίκην οἱ θεοὶ φαίνοιεν .
Furthermore, reports were brought to them from the city that all the temples were opening of themselves, and that the priestesses said that the gods revealed victory.


6.4.7
2764
ἐκ δὲ τοῦ Ἡρακλείου καὶ τὰ ὅπλα ἔφασαν ἀφανῆ εἶναι , ὡς τοῦ Ἡρακλέους εἰς τὴν μάχην ἐξωρμημένου .
And the messengers reported that from the Heracleium the arms also had disappeared, indicating that Heracles had gone forth to the battle.


6.4.7
2765
οἱ μὲν δή τινες λέγουσιν ὡς ταῦτα πάντα τεχνάσματα ἦν τῶν προεστηκότων .
Some, to be sure, say that all these things were but devices of the leaders.


6.4.8
2766
εἰς δ’ οὖν τὴν μάχην τοῖς μὲν Λακεδαιμονίοις πάντα ἐναντία ἐγίγνετο , τοῖς δὲ πάντα καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς τύχης κατωρθοῦτο .
But in the battle, at any rate, everything turned out adversely for the Lacedaemonians, while for the other side everything went prosperously, even to the gifts of fortune.


6.4.8
2767
ἦν μὲν γὰρ μετ’ ἄριστον τῷ Κλεομβρότῳ ἡ τελευταία βουλὴ περὶ τῆς μάχης ·
For it was after the morning meal that Cleombrotus held his last council over the battle,


6.4.8
2768
ἐν δὲ τῇ μεσημβρίᾳ ὑποπινόντων καὶ τὸν οἶνον παροξῦναί τι αὐτοὺς ἔλεγον .
and drinking a little, as they did, at the middle of the day, it was said that the wine helped somewhat to excite them.


6.4.9
2769
ἐπεὶ δὲ ὡπλίζοντο ἑκάτεροι καὶ πρόδηλον ἤδη ἦν ὅτι μάχη ἔσοιτο , πρῶτον μὲν ἀπιέναι ὡρμημένων ἐκ τοῦ Βοιωτίου στρατεύματος τῶν τὴν ἀγορὰν παρεσκευακότων καὶ σκευοφόρων τινῶν καὶ τῶν οὐ βουλομένων μάχεσθαι , περιιόντες κύκλῳ οἵ τε μετὰ τοῦ Ἱέρωνος μισθοφόροι καὶ οἱ τῶν Φωκέων πελτασταὶ καὶ τῶν ἱππέων Ἡρακλεῶται καὶ Φλειάσιοι ἐπιθέμενοι τοῖς ἀπιοῦσιν ἐπέστρεψάν τε αὐτοὺς καὶ κατεδίωξαν πρὸς τὸ στρατόπεδον τὸ τῶν Βοιωτῶν ·
Again, when both sides were arming themselves and it was already evident that there would be a battle, in the first place, after those who had provided the market and some baggage-carriers and such as did not wish to fight had set out to withdraw from the Boeotian army, the Lacedaemonian mercenaries under Hieron, the peltasts of the Phocians, and, among the horsemen, the Heracleots and Phliasians made a circuit and fell upon these people as they were departing, and not only turned them about but chased them back to the camp of the Boeotians.


6.4.9
2770
ὥστε πολὺ μὲν ἐποίησαν μεῖζόν τε καὶ ἁθροώτερον ἢ πρόσθεν τὸ τῶν Βοιωτῶν στράτευμα .
Thereby they made the Boeotian army much larger and more densely massed than it had been before.


6.4.10
2771
ἔπειτα δέ , ἅτε καὶ πεδίου ὄντος τοῦ μεταξύ , προετάξαντο μὲν τῆς ἑαυτῶν φάλαγγος οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τοὺς ἱππέας , ἀντετάξαντο δ’ αὐτοῖς καὶ οἱ Θηβαῖοι τοὺς ἑαυτῶν .
In the second place, since the space between the armies was a plain, the Lacedaemonians posted their horsemen in front of their phalanx, and the Thebans in like manner posted theirs over against them.


6.4.10
2772
ἦν δὲ τὸ μὲν τῶν Θηβαίων ἱππικὸν μεμελετηκὸς διά τε τὸν πρὸς Ὀρχομενίους πόλεμον καὶ διὰ τὸν πρὸς Θεσπιᾶς , τοῖς δὲ Λακεδαιμονίοις κατ’ ἐκεῖνον τὸν χρόνον πονηρότατον ἦν τὸ ἱππικόν .
Now the cavalry of the Thebans was in good training as a result of the war with the Orchomenians and the war with the Thespians, while the cavalry of the Lacedaemonians was exceedingly poor at that time.


6.4.11
2773
ἔτρεφον μὲν γὰρ τοὺς ἵππους οἱ πλουσιώτατοι ·
For the richest men kept the horses,


6.4.11
2774
ἐπεὶ δὲ φρουρὰ φανθείη , τότε ἧκεν ὁ συντεταγμένος ·
and it was only when the ban was called out that the appointed trooper presented himself;


6.4.11
2775
λαβὼν δ’ ἂν τὸν ἵππον καὶ ὅπλα ὁποῖα δοθείη αὐτῷ ἐκ τοῦ παραχρῆμα ἂν ἐστρατεύετο ·
then he would get his horse and such arms as were given him, and take the field on the moment’s notice.


6.4.11
2776
τῶν δ’ αὖ στρατιωτῶν οἱ τοῖς σώμασιν ἀδυνατώτατοι καὶ ἥκιστα φιλότιμοι ἐπὶ τῶν ἵππων ἦσαν .
As for the men, on the other hand, it was those who were least strong of body and least ambitious who were mounted on the horses.


6.4.12
2777
τοιοῦτον μὲν οὖν τὸ ἱππικὸν ἑκατέρων ἦν .
Such, then, was the cavalry on either side.


6.4.12
2778
τῆς δὲ φάλαγγος τοὺς μὲν Λακεδαιμονίους ἔφασαν εἰς τρεῖς τὴν ἐνωμοτίαν ἄγειν ·
Coming now to the infantry, it was said that the Lacedaemonians led each half-company three files abreast,


6.4.12
2779
τοῦτο δὲ συμβαίνειν αὐτοῖς οὐ πλέον ἢ εἰς δώδεκα τὸ βάθος .
and that this resulted in the phalanx being not more than twelve men deep.


6.4.12
2780
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι οὐκ ἔλαττον ἢ ἐπὶ πεντήκοντα ἀσπίδων συνεστραμμένοι ἦσαν , λογιζόμενοι ὡς εἰ νικήσειαν τὸ περὶ τὸν βασιλέα , τὸ ἄλλο πᾶν εὐχείρωτον ἔσοιτο .
The Thebans, however, were massed not less than fifty shields deep, calculating that if they conquered that part of the army which was around the king, all the rest of it would be easy to overcome.


6.4.13
2781
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἤρξατο ἄγειν ὁ Κλεόμβροτος πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους , πρῶτον μὲν πρὶν καὶ αἰσθέσθαι τὸ μετ’ αὐτοῦ στράτευμα ὅτι ἡγοῖτο , καὶ δὴ καὶ οἱ ἱππεῖς συνεβεβλήκεσαν καὶ ταχὺ ἥττηντο οἱ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ·
Now when Cleombrotus began to lead his army against the enemy, in the first place, before the troops under him so much as perceived that he was advancing, the horsemen had already joined battle and those of the Lacedaemonians had speedily been worsted;


6.4.13
2782
φεύγοντες δὲ ἐνεπεπτώκεσαν τοῖς ἑαυτῶν ὁπλίταις , ἔτι δὲ ἐνέβαλλον οἱ τῶν Θηβαίων λόχοι .
then in their flight they had fallen foul of their own hoplites, and, besides, the companies of the Thebans were now charging upon them.


6.4.13
2783
ὅμως δὲ ὡς οἱ μὲν περὶ τὸν Κλεόμβροτον τὸ πρῶτον ἐκράτουν τῇ μάχῃ σαφεῖ τούτῳ τεκμηρίῳ γνοίη τις ἄν ·
Nevertheless, the fact that Cleombrotus and his men were at first victorious in the battle may be known from this clear indication:


6.4.13
2784
οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἐδύναντο αὐτὸν ἀνελέσθαι καὶ ζῶντα ἀπενεγκεῖν , εἰ μὴ οἱ πρὸ αὐτοῦ μαχόμενοι ἐπεκράτουν ἐν ἐκείνῳ τῷ χρόνῳ .
they would not have been able to take him up and carry him off still living, had not those who were fighting in front of him been holding the advantage at that time.


6.4.14
2785
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἀπέθανε Δείνων τε ὁ πολέμαρχος καὶ Σφοδρίας τῶν περὶ δαμοσίαν καὶ Κλεώνυμος ὁ υἱὸς αὐτοῦ , καὶ οἱ μὲν ἵπποι καὶ οἱ συμφορεῖς τοῦ πολεμάρχου καλούμενοι οἵ τε ἄλλοι ὑπὸ τοῦ ὄχλου ὠθούμενοι ἀνεχώρουν , οἱ δὲ τοῦ εὐωνύμου ὄντες τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ὡς ἑώρων τὸ δεξιὸν ὠθούμενον , ἐνέκλιναν ·
But when Deinon, the polemarch, Sphodrias, one of the king’s tent-companions, and Cleonymus, the son of Sphodrias, had been killed, then the royal bodyguard, the so-called aides of the polemarch, and the others fell back under the pressure of the Theban mass, while those who were on the left wing of the Lacedaemonians, when they saw that the right wing was being pushed back, gave way.


6.4.14
2786
ὅμως δὲ πολλῶν τεθνεώτων καὶ ἡττημένοι ἐπεὶ διέβησαν τὴν τάφρον ἣ πρὸ τοῦ στρατοπέδου ἔτυχεν οὖσα αὐτοῖς , ἔθεντο τὰ ὅπλα κατὰ χώραν ἔνθεν ὥρμηντο .
Yet despite the fact that many had fallen and that they were defeated, after they had crossed the trench which chanced to be in front of their camp they grounded their arms at the spot from which they had set forth.


6.4.14
2787
ἦν μέντοι οὐ πάνυ ἐν ἐπιπέδῳ , ἀλλὰ πρὸς ὀρθίῳ μᾶλλόν τι τὸ στρατόπεδον .
The camp, to be sure, was not on ground which was altogether level, but rather on the slope of a hill.


6.4.14
2788
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἦσαν μέν τινες τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων οἳ ἀφόρητον τὴν συμφορὰν ἡγούμενοι τό τε τροπαῖον ἔφασαν χρῆναι κωλύειν ἱστάναι τοὺς πολεμίους , τούς τε νεκροὺς μὴ ὑποσπόνδους , ἀλλὰ διὰ μάχης πειρᾶσθαι ἀναιρεῖσθαι .
After the disaster some of the Lacedaemonians, thinking it unendurable, said that they ought to prevent the enemy from setting up their trophy and to try to recover the bodies of the dead, not by means of a truce, but by fighting.


6.4.15
2789
οἱ δὲ πολέμαρχοι , ὁρῶντες μὲν τῶν συμπάντων Λακεδαιμονίων τεθνεῶτας ἐγγὺς χιλίους , ὁρῶντες δ’ αὐτῶν Σπαρτιατῶν , ὄντων τῶν ἐκεῖ ὡς ἑπτακοσίων , τεθνηκότας περὶ τετρακοσίους , αἰσθανόμενοι δὲ τοὺς συμμάχους πάντας μὲν ἀθύμως ἔχοντας πρὸς τὸ μάχεσθαι , ἔστι δὲ οὓς αὐτῶν οὐδὲ ἀχθομένους τῷ γεγενημένῳ , συλλέξαντες τοὺς ἐπικαιριωτάτους ἐβουλεύοντο τί χρὴ ποιεῖν .
The polemarchs, however, seeing that of the whole number of the Lacedaemonians almost a thousand had been killed; seeing, further, that among the Spartiatae themselves, of whom there were some seven hundred there, about four hundred had fallen; and perceiving that the allies were one and all without heart for fighting, while some of them were not even displeased at what had taken place, gathered together the most important personages and deliberated about what they should do.


6.4.15
2790
ἐπεὶ δὲ πᾶσιν ἐδόκει ὑποσπόνδους τοὺς νεκροὺς ἀναιρεῖσθαι , οὕτω δὴ ἔπεμψαν κήρυκα περὶ σπονδῶν .
And as all thought it best to recover the bodies of the dead by a truce, they finally sent a herald to ask for a truce.


6.4.15
2791
οἱ μέντοι Θηβαῖοι μετὰ ταῦτα καὶ τροπαῖον ἐστήσαντο καὶ τοὺς νεκροὺς ὑποσπόνδους ἀπέδοσαν .
After this, then, the Thebans set up a trophy and gave back the bodies under a truce.


6.4.16
2792
γενομένων δὲ τούτων , ὁ μὲν εἰς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα ἀγγελῶν τὸ πάθος ἀφικνεῖται γυμνοπαιδιῶν τε οὔσης τῆς τελευταίας καὶ τοῦ ἀνδρικοῦ χοροῦ ἔνδον ὄντος ·
After these things had happened, the messenger who was sent to carry the news of the calamity to Lacedaemon arrived there on the last day of the festival of the Gymnopaediae, when the chorus of men was in the theatre.


6.4.16
2793
οἱ δὲ ἔφοροι ἐπεὶ ἤκουσαν τὸ πάθος , ἐλυποῦντο μέν , ὥσπερ , οἶμαι , ἀνάγκη ·
And when the ephors heard of the disaster, they were indeed distressed, as, I conceive, was inevitable;


6.4.16
2794
τὸν μέντοι χορὸν οὐκ ἐξήγαγον , ἀλλὰ διαγωνίσασθαι εἴων .
yet they did not withdraw the chorus, but suffered it to finish its performance.


6.4.16
2795
καὶ τὰ μὲν ὀνόματα πρὸς τοὺς οἰκείους ἑκάστου τῶν τεθνεώτων ἀπέδοσαν ·
Further, although they duly gave the names of the dead to their several kinsmen, they gave orders to the women not to make any outcry, but to bear the calamity in silence.


6.4.16
2796
προεῖπαν δὲ ταῖς γυναιξὶ μὴ ποιεῖν κραυγήν , ἀλλὰ σιγῇ τὸ πάθος φέρειν .
And on the following day one could see those whose relatives had been killed going about in public with bright and cheerful faces,


6.4.16
2797
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἦν ὁρᾶν , ὧν μὲν ἐτέθνασαν οἱ προσήκοντες , λιπαροὺς καὶ φαιδροὺς ἐν τῷ φανερῷ ἀναστρεφομένους , ὧν δὲ ζῶντες ἠγγελμένοι ἦσαν , ὀλίγους ἂν εἶδες , τούτους δὲ σκυθρωποὺς καὶ ταπεινοὺς περιιόντας .
while of those whose relatives had been reported as living you would have seen but few, and these few walking about gloomy and downcast.


6.4.17
2798
ἐκ δὲ τούτου φρουρὰν μὲν ἔφαινον οἱ ἔφοροι ταῖν ὑπολοίποιν μόραιν μέχρι τῶν τετταράκοντα ἀφ’ ἥβης ·
After this the ephors called out the ban of the two remaining regiments, going up as far as those who were forty years beyond the minimum military age;


6.4.17
2799
ἐξέπεμπον δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν ἔξω μορῶν μέχρι τῆς αὐτῆς ἡλικίας ·
they also sent out all up to the same age who belonged to the regiments abroad;


6.4.17
2800
τὸ γὰρ πρόσθεν εἰς τοὺς Φωκέας μέχρι τῶν πέντε καὶ τριάκοντα ἀφ’ ἥβης ἐστρατεύοντο ·
for in the original expedition to Phocis only those men who were not more than thirty-five years beyond the minimum age had served;


6.4.17
2801
καὶ τοὺς ἐπ’ ἀρχαῖς δὲ τότε καταλειφθέντας ἀκολουθεῖν ἐκέλευον .
furthermore, they ordered those who at that time had been left behind in public office to join their regiments.


6.4.18
2802
ὁ μὲν οὖν Ἀγησίλαος ἐκ τῆς ἀσθενείας οὔπω ἴσχυεν ·
Now Agesilaus as a result of his illness was not yet strong;


6.4.18
2803
ἡ δὲ πόλις Ἀρχίδαμον τὸν υἱὸν ἐκέλευεν αὐτοῦ ἡγεῖσθαι .
accordingly the state directed Archidamus, his son, to act as commander.


6.4.18
2804
προθύμως δ’ αὐτῷ συνεστρατεύοντο Τεγεᾶται ·
And the Tegeans served with him zealously;


6.4.18
2805
ἔτι γὰρ ἔζων οἱ περὶ Στάσιππον , λακωνίζοντες καὶ οὐκ ἐλάχιστον δυνάμενοι ἐν τῇ πόλει .
for the followers of Stasippus were still alive, who were favourable to the Lacedaemonians and had no slight power in their own state.


6.4.18
2806
ἐρρωμένως δὲ καὶ οἱ Μαντινεῖς ἐκ τῶν κωμῶν συνεστρατεύοντο ·
Likewise the Mantineans from their villages supported him stoutly;


6.4.18
2807
ἀριστοκρατούμενοι γὰρ ἐτύγχανον .
for they chanced to be under an aristocratic government.


6.4.18
2808
καὶ Κορίνθιοι δὲ καὶ Σικυώνιοι καὶ Φλειάσιοι καὶ Ἀχαιοὶ μάλα προθύμως ἠκολούθουν , καὶ ἄλλαι δὲ πόλεις ἐξέπεμπον στρατιώτας .
Furthermore, the Corinthians, Sicyonians, Phliasians, and Achaeans followed him with all zeal, and other states also sent out soldiers.


6.4.18
2809
ἐπλήρουν δὲ καὶ τριήρεις αὐτοί τε οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ Κορίνθιοι , καὶ ἐδέοντο καὶ Σικυωνίων συμπληροῦν , ἐφ’ ὧν διενοοῦντο τὸ στράτευμα διαβιβάζειν .
Meanwhile the Lacedaemonians themselves and the Corinthians manned triremes and requested the Sicyonians also to help them in so doing, intending to carry the army across the gulf on these ships.


6.4.19
2810
καὶ ὁ μὲν δὴ Ἀρχίδαμος ἐθύετο ἐπὶ τῇ διαβάσει .
And Archidamus accordingly offered his sacrifices at the frontier.


6.4.19
2811
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι εὐθὺς μὲν μετὰ τὴν μάχην ἔπεμψαν εἰς Ἀθήνας ἄγγελον ἐστεφανωμένον , καὶ ἅμα μὲν τῆς νίκης τὸ μέγεθος ἔφραζον , ἅμα δὲ βοηθεῖν ἐκέλευον , λέγοντες ὡς νῦν ἐξείη Λακεδαιμονίους πάντων ὧν ἐπεποιήκεσαν αὐτοὺς τιμωρήσασθαι .
As for the Thebans, immediately after the battle they sent to Athens a garlanded messenger, and while telling of the greatness of their victory, they at the same time urged the Athenians to come to their aid, saying that now it was possible to take vengeance upon the Lacedaemonians for all the harm they had done to them.


6.4.20
2812
τῶν δὲ Ἀθηναίων ἡ βουλὴ ἐτύγχανεν ἐν ἀκροπόλει καθημένη .
Now the Senate of the Athenians chanced to be holding its sitting on the Acropolis.


6.4.20
2813
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἤκουσαν τὸ γεγενημένον , ὅτι μὲν σφόδρα ἠνιάθησαν πᾶσι δῆλον ἐγένετο ·
And when they heard what had taken place, it was made clear to everyone that they were greatly distressed;


6.4.20
2814
οὔτε γὰρ ἐπὶ ξένια τὸν κήρυκα ἐκάλεσαν , περί τε τῆς βοηθείας οὐδὲν ἀπεκρίναντο .
for they did not invite the herald to partake of hospitality and about the matter of aid they gave him no answer.


6.4.20
2815
καὶ Ἀθήνηθεν μὲν οὕτως ἀπῆλθεν ὁ κῆρυξ .
So the herald departed from Athens without having received a reply.


6.4.20
2816
πρὸς μέντοι Ἰάσονα , σύμμαχον ὄντα , ἔπεμπον σπουδῇ οἱ Θηβαῖοι , κελεύοντες βοηθεῖν , διαλογιζόμενοι πῇ τὸ μέλλον ἀποβήσοιτο .
But to Jason, who was their ally, the Thebans sent in haste, urging him to come to their aid; for they were debating among themselves how the future would turn out.


6.4.21
2817
ὁ δ’ εὐθὺς τριήρεις μὲν ἐπλήρου , ὡς βοηθήσων κατὰ θάλατταν , συλλαβὼν δὲ τό τε ξενικὸν καὶ τοὺς περὶ αὑτὸν ἱππέας , καίπερ ἀκηρύκτῳ πολέμῳ τῶν Φωκέων χρωμένων , πεζῇ διεπορεύθη εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν , ἐν πολλαῖς τῶν πόλεων πρότερον ὀφθεὶς ἢ ἀγγελθεὶς ὅτι πορεύοιτο .
And Jason immediately proceeded to man triremes, as though he intended to go to their assistance by sea, but in fact he took his mercenary force and his bodyguard of cavalry and, although the Phocians were engaged in a bitter warfare against him, proceeded by land through their country into Boeotia, appearing in many of their towns before it was reported to them that he was on the march.


6.4.21
2818
πρὶν γοῦν συλλέγεσθαί τι πανταχόθεν ἔφθανε πόρρω γιγνόμενος , δῆλον ποιῶν ὅτι πολλαχοῦ τὸ τάχος μᾶλλον τῆς βίας διαπράττεται τὰ δέοντα .
At any rate, before they could gather troops together from here and there, he was already far on ahead, thus making it clear that in many cases it is speed rather than force which accomplishes the desired results.


6.4.22
2819
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφίκετο εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν , λεγόντων τῶν Θηβαίων ὡς καιρὸς εἴη ἐπιτίθεσθαι τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις , ἄνωθεν μὲν ἐκεῖνον σὺν τῷ ξενικῷ , σφᾶς δὲ ἀντιπροσώπους , ἀπέτρεπεν αὐτοὺς ὁ Ἰάσων , διδάσκων ὡς καλοῦ ἔργου γεγενημένου οὐκ ἄξιον αὐτοῖς εἴη διακινδυνεῦσαι , ὥστε ἢ ἔτι μείζω καταπρᾶξαι ἢ στερηθῆναι καὶ τῆς γεγενημένης νίκης .
But when he arrived in Boeotia and the Thebans said that now was the right moment to attack the Lacedaemonians, he with his mercenaries from the heights above and they by a frontal assault, Jason sought to dissuade them, pointing out that since they had done a good work, it was not worth while for them to venture a decisive engagement in which they would either accomplish yet greater things or would be deprived of the victory already gained.


6.4.23
2820
οὐχ ὁρᾶτε , ἔφη , ὅτι καὶ ὑμεῖς , ἐπεὶ ἐν ἀνάγκῃ ἐγένεσθε , ἐκρατήσατε ;
Do you not see, he said, that in your own case it was when you found yourselves in straits that you won the victory?


6.4.23
2821
οἴεσθαι οὖν χρὴ καὶ Λακεδαιμονίους ἄν , εἰ ἀναγκάζοιντο ἐκγενέσθαι τοῦ ζῆν , ἀπονοηθέντας διαμάχεσθαι .
Therefore one must suppose that the Lacedaemonians also, if they were in like straits, would fight it out regardless of their lives.


6.4.23
2822
καὶ ὁ θεὸς δέ , ὡς ἔοικε , πολλάκις χαίρει τοὺς μὲν μικροὺς μεγάλους ποιῶν , τοὺς δὲ μεγάλους μικρούς .
Besides, it seems that the deity often takes pleasure in making the small great and the great small.


6.4.24
2823
τοὺς μὲν οὖν Θηβαίους τοιαῦτα λέγων ἀπέτρεπε τοῦ διακινδυνεύειν ·
With such words, then, he endeavoured to dissuade the Thebans from making the final venture;


6.4.24
2824
τοὺς δ’ αὖ Λακεδαιμονίους ἐδίδασκεν οἷον μὲν εἴη ἡττημένον στράτευμα , οἷον δὲ νενικηκός .
to the Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, he pointed out what manner of thing a defeated army was, and what an army victorious.


6.4.24
2825
εἰ δ’ ἐπιλαθέσθαι , ἔφη , βούλεσθε τὸ γεγενημένον πάθος , συμβουλεύω ἀναπνεύσαντας καὶ ἀναπαυσαμένους καὶ μείζους γεγενημένους τοῖς ἀηττήτοις οὕτως εἰς μάχην ἰέναι .
And if you wish, he said, to forget the disaster which has befallen you, I advise you first to recover your breath and rest yourselves, and then, after you have become stronger, go into battle against men who are unconquered.


6.4.24
2826
νῦν δέ , ἔφη , εὖ ἴστε ὅτι καὶ τῶν συμμάχων ὑμῖν εἰσὶν οἳ διαλέγονται περὶ φιλίας τοῖς πολεμίοις ·
But now, he said, be well assured that even among your allies there are those who are holding converse with the enemy about a treaty of friendship with them;


6.4.24
2827
ἀλλὰ ἐκ παντὸς τρόπου πειρᾶσθε σπονδὰς λαβεῖν .
by all means, then, try to obtain a truce.


6.4.24
2828
ταῦτα δ’ , ἔφη , ἐγὼ προθυμοῦμαι , σῶσαι ὑμᾶς βουλόμενος διά τε τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς φιλίαν πρὸς ὑμᾶς καὶ διὰ τὸ προξενεῖν ὑμῶν .
And I am myself eager for this, he said, out of a desire to save you, both because of my father’s friendship with you and because I am your diplomatic agent.


6.4.25
2829
ἔλεγε μὲν οὖν τοιαῦτα , ἔπραττε δ’ ἴσως ὅπως διάφοροι καὶ οὗτοι ἀλλήλοις ὄντες ἀμφότεροι ἐκείνου δέοιντο .
Such, then, were the arguments he urged, but he was acting perhaps with the purpose that these two parties, at variance as they were with one another, might both alike be in need of him.


6.4.25
2830
οἱ μέντοι Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ἀκούσαντες αὐτοῦ , πράττειν περὶ τῶν σπονδῶν ἐκέλευον ·
The Lacedaemonians, however, after hearing his words bade him negotiate for the truce;


6.4.25
2831
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἀπηγγέλθη ὅτι εἴησαν αἱ σπονδαί , παρήγγειλαν οἱ πολέμαρχοι δειπνήσαντας συνεσκευάσθαι πάντας , ὡς τῆς νυκτὸς πορευσομένους , ὅπως ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ πρὸς τὸν Κιθαιρῶνα ἀναβαίνοιεν .
and when the report came that the truce had been made, the polemarchs gave orders that after dining all should have their baggage packed and ready with the purpose of setting out during the night, in order that at daybreak they might be climbing Cithaeron.


6.4.25
2832
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐδείπνησαν , πρὶν καθεύδειν παραγγείλαντες ἀκολουθεῖν , ἡγοῦντο εὐθὺς ἀφ’ ἑσπέρας τὴν διὰ Κρεύσιος , τῷ λαθεῖν πιστεύοντες μᾶλλον ἢ ταῖς σπονδαῖς .
But when the men had dined and before they went to rest, the polemarchs gave the order to follow, and led the way immediately upon the fall of evening by the road through Creusis, trusting to secrecy more than to the truce.


6.4.26
2833
μάλα δὲ χαλεπῶς πορευόμενοι , οἷα δὴ ἐν νυκτί τε καὶ ἐν φόβῳ ἀπιόντες καὶ χαλεπὴν ὁδόν , εἰς Αἰγόσθενα τῆς Μεγαρικῆς ἀφικνοῦνται .
And proceeding with very great difficulty, since they were withdrawing at night and in fear and by a hard road, they arrived at Aegosthena in the territory of Megara.


6.4.26
2834
ἐκεῖ δὲ περιτυγχάνουσι τῷ μετὰ Ἀρχιδάμου στρατεύματι .
There they fell in with the army under Archidamus.


6.4.26
2835
ἔνθα δὴ ἀναμείνας , ἕως καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι πάντες παρεγένοντο , ἀπῆγε πᾶν ὁμοῦ τὸ στράτευμα μέχρι Κορίνθου ·
And after waiting there until all the allies had joined him, Archidamus led back the whole army together as far as Corinth;


6.4.26
2836
ἐκεῖθεν δὲ τοὺς μὲν συμμάχους ἀφῆκε , τοὺς δὲ πολίτας οἴκαδε ἀπήγαγεν .
from there he dismissed the allies and led the citizen troops back home.


6.4.27
2837
ὁ μέντοι Ἰάσων ἀπιὼν διὰ τῆς Φωκίδος Ὑαμπολιτῶν μὲν τό τε προάστιον εἷλε καὶ τὴν χώραν ἐπόρθησε καὶ ἀπέκτεινε πολλούς ·
As for Jason, on his way back through Phocis he captured the outer city of the Hyampolitans, laid waste their land, and killed many of them,


6.4.27
2838
τὴν δ’ ἄλλην Φωκίδα διῆλθεν ἀπραγμόνως .
but he passed through the rest of Phocis without any hostile act.


6.4.27
2839
ἀφικόμενος δὲ εἰς Ἡράκλειαν κατέβαλε τὸ Ἡρακλεωτῶν τεῖχος , δῆλον ὅτι οὐ τοῦτο φοβούμενος , μή τινες ἀναπεπταμένης ταύτης τῆς παρόδου πορεύσοιντο ἐπὶ τὴν ἐκείνου δύναμιν , ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ἐνθυμούμενος μή τινες τὴν Ἡράκλειαν ἐπὶ στενῷ οὖσαν καταλαβόντες εἴργοιεν αὐτόν , εἴ ποι βούλοιτο τῆς Ἑλλάδος πορεύεσθαι .
Upon arriving at Heracleia, however, he destroyed the walled city of the Heracleots, manifestly having no fear that when this passage-way had been thus thrown open anyone would march against his own dominion, but rather making provision that none should seize Heracleia, situated as it was at a narrow pass, and block his way if he wanted to march to any place in Greece.


6.4.28
2840
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπῆλθε πάλιν εἰς τὴν Θετταλίαν , μέγας μὲν ἦν καὶ διὰ τὸ τῷ νόμῳ Θετταλῶν ταγὸς καθεστάναι καὶ διὰ τὸ μισθοφόρους πολλοὺς τρέφειν περὶ αὑτὸν καὶ πεζοὺς καὶ ἱππέας , καὶ τούτους ἐκπεπονημένους ὡς ἂν κράτιστοι εἶεν ·
And when he had come back again to Thessaly, he was in great repute both because he had legally been made Tagus of the Thessalians and because he maintained about him many mercenaries, both foot-soldiers and horsemen, these moreover being troops which had been trained to the highest efficiency;


6.4.28
2841
ἔτι δὲ μείζων καὶ διὰ τὸ συμμάχους πολλοὺς τοὺς μὲν ἤδη εἶναι αὐτῷ , τοὺς δὲ καὶ ἔτι βούλεσθαι γίγνεσθαι .
his repute was yet greater by reason of his many allies, including, in addition to those whom he already had, also those who were desirous of becoming such.


6.4.28
2842
μέγιστος δ’ ἦν τῶν καθ’ αὑτὸν τῷ μηδ’ ὑφ’ ἑνὸς εὐκαταφρόνητος εἶναι .
And he was the greatest of the men of his time in that he was not lightly to be despised by anyone soever.


6.4.29
2843
ἐπιόντων δὲ Πυθίων παρήγγειλε μὲν ταῖς πόλεσι βοῦς καὶ οἶς καὶ αἶγας καὶ ὗς παρασκευάζεσθαι ὡς εἰς τὴν θυσίαν ·
Now when the Pythian festival was approaching, Jason sent orders to his cities to make ready cattle, sheep, goats, and swine for the sacrifice.


6.4.29
2844
καὶ ἔφασαν πάνυ μετρίως ἑκάστῃ πόλει ἐπαγγελλομένῳ γενέσθαι βοῦς μὲν οὐκ ἐλάττους χιλίων , τὰ δὲ ἄλλα βοσκήματα πλείω ἢ μύρια .
And it was said that although he laid upon each city a very moderate demand, there were contributed no fewer than a thousand cattle and more than ten thousand of the other animals.


6.4.29
2845
ἐκήρυξε δὲ καὶ νικητήριον χρυσοῦν στέφανον ἔσεσθαι , ἥτις τῶν πόλεων βοῦν ἡγεμόνα κάλλιστον τῷ θεῷ θρέψειε .
He also made proclamation that a golden crown would be the prize of victory to the city which should rear the finest bull to lead the herd in honour of the god.


6.4.30
2846
παρήγγειλε δὲ καὶ ὡς στρατευσομένοις εἰς τὸν περὶ τὰ Πύθια χρόνον Θετταλοῖς παρασκευάζεσθαι ·
Furthermore, he gave orders to the Thessalians to make preparations for taking the field at the time of the Pythian festival;


6.4.30
2847
διενοεῖτο γάρ , ὡς ἔφασαν , καὶ τὴν πανήγυριν τῷ θεῷ καὶ τοὺς ἀγῶνας αὐτὸς διατιθέναι .
for he was intending, it was said, to be himself the director both of the festal assembly in honour of the god and of the games.


6.4.30
2848
περὶ μέντοι τῶν ἱερῶν χρημάτων ὅπως μὲν διενοεῖτο ἔτι καὶ νῦν ἄδηλον ·
What he intended, however, in regard to the sacred treasures, is even to this day uncertain;


6.4.30
2849
λέγεται δὲ ἐπερομένων τῶν Δελφῶν τί χρὴ ποιεῖν , ἐὰν λαμβάνῃ τῶν τοῦ θεοῦ χρημάτων , ἀποκρίνασθαι τὸν θεὸν ὅτι αὐτῷ μελήσει .
but it is said that when the Delphians asked the god what they should do if he tried to take any of his treasures, Apollo replied that he would himself take care of the matter.


6.4.31
2850
ὁ δ’ οὖν ἀνὴρ τηλικοῦτος ὢν καὶ τοσαῦτα καὶ τοιαῦτα διανοούμενος , ἐξέτασιν πεποιηκὼς καὶ δοκιμασίαν τοῦ Φεραίων ἱππικοῦ , καὶ ἤδη καθήμενος καὶ ἀποκρινόμενος , εἴ τις δεόμενός του προσίοι , ὑπὸ νεανίσκων ἑπτὰ προσελθόντων ὡς διαφερομένων τι ἀλλήλοις ἀποσφάττεται καὶ κατακόπτεται .
At any rate this man, great as he was and purposing deeds so great and of such a kind, after he had held a review and inspection of the cavalry of the Pheraeans, and was now in his seat and making answer if anyone came to him with any request, was struck down and killed by seven young men who came up to him as though they had some quarrel with one another.


6.4.32
2851
βοηθησάντων δὲ ἐρρωμένως τῶν παραγενομένων δορυφόρων εἷς μὲν ἔτι τύπτων τὸν Ἰάσονα λόγχῃ πληγεὶς ἀποθνῄσκει ·
And when the guardsmen who attended him rushed stoutly to his aid, one of the young men, while still in the act of striking Jason, was pierced with a lance and killed;


6.4.32
2852
ἕτερος δὲ ἀναβαίνων ἐφ’ ἵππον ἐγκαταληφθεὶς καὶ πολλὰ τραύματα λαβὼν ἀπέθανεν ·
a second was caught while mounting his horse, suffered many wounds, and so was killed;


6.4.32
2853
οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι ἀναπηδήσαντες ἐπὶ τοὺς παρεσκευασμένους ἵππους ἀπέφυγον ·
but the rest leaped upon the horses which they had in readiness and escaped,


6.4.32
2854
ὅποι δὲ ἀφίκοιντο τῶν Ἑλληνίδων πόλεων , ἐν ταῖς πλείσταις ἐτιμῶντο .
and in most of the Greek cities to which they came they were honoured.


6.4.32
2855
ᾧ καὶ δῆλον ἐγένετο ὅτι ἰσχυρῶς ἔδεισαν οἱ Ἕλληνες αὐτὸν μὴ τύραννος γένοιτο .
This fact, indeed, made it plain that the Greeks had conceived a very great fear lest Jason should become tyrant.


6.4.33
2856
ἀποθανόντος μέντοι ἐκείνου Πολύδωρος ἀδελφὸς αὐτοῦ καὶ Πολύφρων ταγοὶ κατέστησαν .
When he had thus been slain, Polydorus, his brother, and Polyphron succeeded to the office of Tagus.


6.4.33
2857
καὶ ὁ μὲν Πολύδωρος , πορευομένων ἀμφοτέρων εἰς Λάρισαν , νύκτωρ καθεύδων ἀποθνῄσκει ὑπὸ Πολύφρονος τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ , ὡς ἐδόκει ·
Now Polydorus, while the two were on their way to Larisa, was killed at night in his sleep by Polyphron, his brother, as people thought;


6.4.33
2858
ὁ γὰρ θάνατος αὐτοῦ ἐξαπιναῖός τε καὶ οὐκ ἔχων φανερὰν πρόφασιν ἐγένετο .
for his death was sudden and without manifest cause.


6.4.34
2859
ὁ δ’ αὖ Πολύφρων ἦρξε μὲν ἐνιαυτόν , κατεσκευάσατο δὲ τὴν ταγείαν τυραννίδι ὁμοίαν .
Then Polyphron, in his turn, held sway for a year, and made the office of Tagus like the rule of a tyrant.


6.4.34
2860
ἔν τε γὰρ Φαρσάλῳ τὸν Πολυδάμαντα καὶ ἄλλους τῶν πολιτῶν ὀκτὼ τοὺς κρατίστους ἀπέκτεινεν , ἔκ τε Λαρίσης πολλοὺς φυγάδας ἐποίησε .
For in Pharsalus he put to death Polydamas and eight more of the best among the citizens, and from Larisa he drove many into exile.


6.4.35
2861
ταῦτα δὲ ποιῶν καὶ οὗτος ἀποθνῄσκει ὑπ’ Ἀλεξάνδρου , ὡς τιμωροῦντος τῷ Πολυδώρῳ καὶ τὴν τυραννίδα καταλύοντος .
While thus engaged he, also, was slain by Alexander, who posed as avenger of Polydorus and destroyer of the tyranny.


6.4.35
2862
ἐπεὶ δ’ αὐτὸς παρέλαβε τὴν ἀρχήν , χαλεπὸς μὲν Θετταλοῖς ταγὸς ἐγένετο , χαλεπὸς δὲ Θηβαίοις καὶ Ἀθηναίοις πολέμιος , ἄδικος δὲ λῃστὴς καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν .
But when Alexander had himself succeeded to the position of ruler, he proved a cruel Tagus to the Thessalians, a cruel enemy to the Thebans and Athenians, and an unjust robber both by land and by sea.


6.4.35
2863
τοιοῦτος δ’ ὢν καὶ αὐτὸς αὖ ἀποθνῄσκει , αὐτοχειρίᾳ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν τῆς γυναικὸς ἀδελφῶν , βουλῇ δὲ ὑπ’ αὐτῆς ἐκείνης .
Being such a man, he likewise was slain in his turn, the actual deed being done by his wife’s brothers, though the plan was conceived by the woman herself.


6.4.36
2864
τοῖς τε γὰρ ἀδελφοῖς ἐξήγγειλεν ὡς ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπιβουλεύοι αὐτοῖς καὶ ἔκρυψεν αὐτοὺς ἔνδον ὄντας ὅλην τὴν ἡμέραν , καὶ δεξαμένη μεθύοντα τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἐπεὶ κατεκοίμισεν , ὁ μὲν λύχνος ἐκάετο , τὸ δὲ ξίφος αὐτοῦ ἐξήνεγκεν .
For she reported to her brothers that Alexander was plotting against them, and concealed them within the house for the entire day. Then after she had received Alexander home in a drunken state and had put him to bed, while the light was left burning she carried his sword out of the chamber.


6.4.36
2865
ὡς δ’ ᾔσθετο ὀκνοῦντας εἰσιέναι ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον τοὺς ἀδελφούς , εἶπεν ὡς εἰ μὴ ἤδη πράξοιεν , ἐξεγερεῖ αὐτόν .
And when she perceived that her brothers were hesitating to go in and attack Alexander, she said that if they did not act at once she would wake him.


6.4.36
2866
ὡς δ’ εἰσῆλθον , ἐπισπάσασα τὴν θύραν εἴχετο τοῦ ῥόπτρου , ἕως ἀπέθανεν ὁ ἀνήρ .
Then, as soon as they had gone in, she closed the door and held fast to the knocker until her husband had been killed.


6.4.37
2867
ἡ δὲ ἔχθρα λέγεται αὐτῇ πρὸς τὸν ἄνδρα γενέσθαι ὑπὸ μέν τινων ὡς ἐπεὶ ἔδησε τὰ ἑαυτοῦ παιδικὰ ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος , νεανίσκον ὄντα καλόν , δεηθείσης αὐτῆς λῦσαι ἐξαγαγὼν αὐτὸν ἀπέσφαξεν ·
Now her hatred toward her husband is said by some people to have been caused by the fact that when Alexander had imprisoned his own favourite, who was a beautiful youth, and she begged him to release him, he took him out and slew him;


6.4.37
2868
οἱ δέ τινες ὡς ἐπεὶ παῖδες αὐτῷ οὐκ ἐγίγνοντο ἐκ ταύτης , ὅτι πέμπων εἰς Θήβας ἐμνήστευε τὴν Ἰάσονος γυναῖκα ἀναλαβεῖν .
others, however, say that inasmuch as no children were being born to him of this woman, Alexander was sending to Thebes and trying to win as his wife the widow of Jason.


6.4.37
2869
τὰ μὲν οὖν αἴτια τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς ὑπὸ τῆς γυναικὸς οὕτω λέγεται ·
The reasons, then, for the plot on the part of his wife are thus stated;


6.4.37
2870
τῶν δὲ ταῦτα πραξάντων ἄχρι οὗ ὅδε ὁ λόγος ἐγράφετο Τισίφονος πρεσβύτατος ὢν τῶν ἀδελφῶν τὴν ἀρχὴν εἶχε .
but as for those who executed this deed, Tisiphonus, who was the eldest of the brothers, held the position of ruler up to the time when this narrative was written.


6.5.1
2871
καὶ τὰ μὲν Θετταλικά , ὅσα περὶ Ἰάσονα ἐπράχθη καὶ μετὰ τὸν ἐκείνου θάνατον μέχρι τῆς Τισιφόνου ἀρχῆς , δεδήλωται ·
All the events, then, which took place in Thessaly in connection with Jason, and, after his death, down to the rule of Tisiphonus, have thus been described;


6.5.1
2872
νῦν δ’ ἐπάνειμι ἔνθεν ἐπὶ ταῦτα ἐξέβην .
now I return to the point from which I digressed to discuss these matters.


6.5.1
2873
ἐπεὶ γὰρ Ἀρχίδαμος ἐκ τῆς ἐπὶ Λεῦκτρα βοηθείας ἀπήγαγε τὸ στράτευμα , ἐνθυμηθέντες οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ὅτι οἱ Πελοποννήσιοι ἔτι οἴονται χρῆναι ἀκολουθεῖν καὶ οὔπω διακέοιντο οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὥσπερ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους διέθεσαν , μεταπέμπονται τὰς πόλεις ὅσαι βούλοιντο τῆς εἰρήνης μετέχειν ἣν βασιλεὺς κατέπεμψεν .
When, namely, Archidamus had led back his army from the relief expedition to Leuctra, the Athenians, taking thought of the fact that the Peloponnesians still counted themselves bound to follow the Lacedaemonians, and that the latter were not yet in the same situation to which they had brought the Athenians, invited to Athens all the cities which wished to participate in the peace which the King had sent down.


6.5.2
2874
ἐπεὶ δὲ συνῆλθον , δόγμα ἐποιήσαντο μετὰ τῶν κοινωνεῖν βουλομένων ὀμόσαι τόνδε τὸν ὅρκον .
And when they had come together, they passed a resolution to take the following oath, in company with such as desired to share in the peace:


6.5.2
2875
ἐμμενῶ ταῖς σπονδαῖς ἃς βασιλεὺς κατέπεμψε καὶ τοῖς ψηφίσμασι τοῖς Ἀθηναίων καὶ τῶν συμμάχων .
I will abide by the treaty which the King sent down, and by the decrees of the Athenians and their allies.


6.5.2
2876
ἐὰν δέ τις στρατεύῃ ἐπί τινα πόλιν τῶν ὀμοσασῶν τόνδε τὸν ὅρκον , βοηθήσω παντὶ σθένει .
And if anybody takes the field against any one of the cities which have sworn this oath, I will come to her aid with all my strength.


6.5.2
2877
οἱ μὲν οὖν ἄλλοι πάντες ἔχαιρον τῷ ὅρκῳ ·
Now all the others were pleased with the oath;


6.5.2
2878
Ἠλεῖοι δὲ ἀντέλεγον ὡς οὐ δέοι αὐτονόμους ποιεῖν οὔτε Μαργανέας οὔτε Σκιλλουντίους οὔτε Τριφυλίους ·
the Eleans only opposed it, saying that it was not right to make either the Marganians, Scilluntians, or Triphylians independent,


6.5.2
2879
σφετέρας γὰρ εἶναι ταύτας τὰς πόλεις .
for these cities were theirs.


6.5.3
2880
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι ψηφισάμενοι , ὥσπερ βασιλεὺς ἔγραψεν , αὐτονόμους εἶναι ὁμοίως καὶ μικρὰς καὶ μεγάλας πόλεις , ἐξέπεμψαν τοὺς ὁρκωτάς , καὶ ἐκέλευσαν τὰ μέγιστα τέλη ἐν ἑκάστῃ πόλει ὁρκῶσαι .
But the Athenians and the others, after voting that both small and great cities alike should be independent, even as the King wrote, sent out the officers charged with administering the oath and directed them to administer it to the highest authorities in each city.


6.5.3
2881
καὶ ὤμοσαν πάντες πλὴν Ἠλείων .
And all took the oath except the Eleans.


6.5.3
2882
ἐξ ὧν δὴ καὶ οἱ Μαντινεῖς , ὡς ἤδη αὐτόνομοι παντάπασιν ὄντες , συνῆλθόν τε πάντες καὶ ἐψηφίσαντο μίαν πόλιν τὴν Μαντίνειαν ποιεῖν καὶ τειχίζειν τὴν πόλιν .
As a natural result of these proceedings the Mantineans, feeling that they were now entirely independent, all came together and voted to make Mantinea a single city and to put a wall about it.


6.5.4
2883
οἱ δ’ αὖ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἡγοῦντο , εἰ τοῦτο ἄνευ τῆς σφετέρας γνώμης ἔσοιτο , χαλεπὸν ἔσεσθαι .
But the Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, thought that it would be a grievous thing if this were done without their approval.


6.5.4
2884
πέμπουσιν οὖν Ἀγησίλαον πρεσβευτὴν πρὸς τοὺς Μαντινέας , ὅτι ἐδόκει πατρικὸς φίλος αὐτοῖς εἶναι .
They accordingly sent Agesilaus as ambassador to the Mantineans, because he was regarded as an ancestral friend of theirs.


6.5.4
2885
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφίκετο πρὸς αὐτούς , τὸν μὲν δῆμον τῶν Μαντινέων οἱ ἄρχοντες οὐκ ἤθελον συλλέξαι αὐτῷ , πρὸς δὲ σφᾶς ἐκέλευον λέγειν ὅτου δέοιτο .
Now when he had come to them, the officials refused to assemble for him the Mantinean people, but bade him tell them what he desired.


6.5.4
2886
ὁ δὲ ὑπισχνεῖτο αὐτοῖς , ἐὰν νῦν ἐπίσχωσι τῆς τειχίσεως , ποιήσειν ὥστε μετὰ τῆς Λακεδαίμονος γνώμης καὶ μὴ δαπανηρᾶς τειχισθῆναι τὸ τεῖχος .
He then offered them his promise that, if they would desist from their wall-building for the present, he would arrange matters so that the wall should be constructed with the approval of Lacedaemon and without great expense.


6.5.5
2887
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπεκρίναντο ὅτι ἀδύνατον εἴη ἐπισχεῖν , δόγματος γεγενημένου πάσῃ τῇ πόλει ἤδη τειχίζειν , ἐκ τούτου ὁ μὲν Ἀγησίλαος ἀπῄει ὀργιζόμενος ·
And when they replied that it was impossible to desist, since a resolution to build at once had been adopted by the entire city, Agesilaus thereupon departed in anger.


6.5.5
2888
στρατεύειν γε μέντοι ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς οὐ δυνατὸν ἐδόκει εἶναι , ἐπ’ αὐτονομίᾳ τῆς εἰρήνης γεγενημένης .
It did not seem to be possible, however, to make an expedition against them, inasmuch as the peace had been concluded on the basis of independence.


6.5.5
2889
τοῖς δὲ Μαντινεῦσιν ἔπεμπον μὲν καὶ τῶν Ἀρκαδικῶν πόλεών τινες συντειχιοῦντας , οἱ δὲ Ἠλεῖοι καὶ ἀργυρίου τρία τάλαντα συνεβάλοντο αὐτοῖς εἰς τὴν περὶ τὸ τεῖχος δαπάνην .
Meanwhile some of the Arcadian cities sent men to help the Mantineans in their building, and the Eleans made them a contribution of three talents in money toward the expense of the wall.


6.5.5
2890
καὶ οἱ μὲν Μαντινεῖς περὶ ταῦτ’ ἦσαν .
The Mantineans, then, were occupied with this work.


6.5.6
2891
τῶν δὲ Τεγεατῶν οἱ μὲν περὶ τὸν Καλλίβιον καὶ Πρόξενον ἐνῆγον ἐπὶ τὸ συνιέναι τε πᾶν τὸ Ἀρκαδικόν , καὶ ὅ τι νικῴη ἐν τῷ κοινῷ , τοῦτο κύριον εἶναι καὶ τῶν πόλεων ·
Among the Tegeans, on the other hand, the followers of Callibius and Proxenus were making efforts to the end that all the people of Arcadia should unite, and that whatever measure was carried in the common assembly should be binding on the several cities as well;


6.5.6
2892
οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Στάσιππον ἔπραττον ἐᾶν τε κατὰ χώραν τὴν πόλιν καὶ τοῖς πατρίοις νόμοις χρῆσθαι .
but the followers of Stasippus made it their policy to leave their city undisturbed and to live under the laws of their fathers.


6.5.7
2893
ἡττώμενοι δὲ οἱ περὶ τὸν Πρόξενον καὶ Καλλίβιον ἐν τοῖς θεαροῖς , νομίσαντες , εἰ συνέλθοι ὁ δῆμος , πολὺ ἂν τῷ πλήθει κρατῆσαι , ἐκφέρονται τὰ ὅπλα .
Now the followers of Proxenus and Callibius, defeated in the council of the magistrates, and conceiving the thought that if the people came together they would prove far superior in numbers, gathered openly under arms.


6.5.7
2894
ἰδόντες δὲ τοῦτο οἱ περὶ τὸν Στάσιππον , καὶ αὐτοὶ ἀνθωπλίσαντο , καὶ ἀριθμῷ μὲν οὐκ ἐλάττους ἐγένοντο ·
Upon seeing this the followers of Stasippus also armed themselves in their turn, and they did indeed prove fewer in number;


6.5.7
2895
ἐπεὶ μέντοι εἰς μάχην ὥρμησαν , τὸν μὲν Πρόξενον καὶ ἄλλους ὀλίγους μετ’ αὐτοῦ ἀποκτείνουσι , τοὺς δ’ ἄλλους τρεψάμενοι οὐκ ἐδίωκον ·
when, however, they had set forth for battle, they killed Proxenus and a few others along with him, but although they put the rest to flight they did not pursue them;


6.5.7
2896
καὶ γὰρ τοιοῦτος ὁ Στάσιππος ἦν οἷος μὴ βούλεσθαι πολλοὺς ἀποκτεινύναι τῶν πολιτῶν .
for Stasippus was the sort of man not to desire to kill many of his fellow-citizens.


6.5.8
2897
οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Καλλίβιον ἀνακεχωρηκότες ὑπὸ τὸ πρὸς Μαντινείας τεῖχος καὶ τὰς πύλας , ἐπεὶ οὐκέτι αὐτοῖς οἱ ἐναντίοι ἐπεχείρουν , ἡσυχίαν εἶχον ἡθροισμένοι .
Then the followers of Callibius, who had retired to a position under the city wall and the gates on the side toward Mantinea, inasmuch as their adversaries were no longer attacking them, remained quietly gathered there.


6.5.8
2898
καὶ πάλαι μὲν ἐπεπόμφεσαν ἐπὶ τοὺς Μαντινέας βοηθεῖν κελεύοντες ·
They had long before this sent to the Mantineans bidding them come to their aid,


6.5.8
2899
πρὸς δὲ τοὺς περὶ Στάσιππον διελέγοντο περὶ συναλλαγῶν .
but with the followers of Stasippus they were negotiating for a reconciliation.


6.5.8
2900
ἐπεὶ δὲ καταφανεῖς ἦσαν οἱ Μαντινεῖς προσιόντες , οἱ μὲν αὐτῶν ἀναπηδῶντες ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος ἐκέλευον βοηθεῖν τὴν ταχίστην , καὶ βοῶντες σπεύδειν διεκελεύοντο ·
When, however, the Mantineans were to be seen approaching, some of them leaped upon the wall, urged the Mantineans to come on to their assistance with all possible speed, and with shouts exhorted them to hurry;


6.5.8
2901
ἄλλοι δὲ ἀνοίγουσι τὰς πύλας αὐτοῖς .
others meanwhile opened the gates to them.


6.5.9
2902
οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Στάσιππον ὡς ᾔσθοντο τὸ γιγνόμενον , ἐκπίπτουσι κατὰ τὰς ἐπὶ τὸ Παλλάντιον φερούσας πύλας , καὶ φθάνουσι πρὶν καταληφθῆναι ὑπὸ τῶν διωκόντων εἰς τὸν τῆς Ἀρτέμιδος νεὼν καταφυγόντες , καὶ ἐγκλεισάμενοι ἡσυχίαν εἶχον .
Now when the followers of Stasippus perceived what was going on, they rushed out by the gates leading to Pallantium, gained refuge in the temple of Artemis before they could be overtaken by their pursuers, and after shutting themselves in, remained quiet there.


6.5.9
2903
οἱ δὲ μεταδιώξαντες ἐχθροὶ αὐτῶν ἀναβάντες ἐπὶ τὸν νεὼν καὶ τὴν ὀροφὴν διελόντες ἔπαιον ταῖς κεραμίσιν .
But their foes who had followed after them climbed upon the temple, broke through the roof, and pelted them with the tiles.


6.5.9
2904
οἱ δὲ ἐπεὶ ἔγνωσαν τὴν ἀνάγκην , παύεσθαί τε ἐκέλευον καὶ ἐξιέναι ἔφασαν .
And when the people within realized the hopelessness of their situation, they bade them stop and said they would come out.


6.5.9
2905
οἱ δ’ ἐναντίοι ὡς ὑποχειρίους ἔλαβον αὐτούς , δήσαντες καὶ ἀναβαλόντες ἐπὶ τὴν ἁρμάμαξαν ἀπήγαγον εἰς Τεγέαν .
Then their adversaries, as soon as they had got them in their power, bound them, threw them into a wagon, and carried them back to Tegea.


6.5.9
2906
ἐκεῖ δὲ μετὰ τῶν Μαντινέων καταγνόντες ἀπέκτειναν .
There, in company with the Mantineans, they passed sentence upon them and put them to death.


6.5.10
2907
τούτων δὲ γιγνομένων ἔφυγον εἰς Λακεδαίμονα τῶν περὶ Στάσιππον Τεγεατῶν περὶ ὀκτακοσίους .
While these things were going on, about eight hundred of the Tegeans who were partisans of Stasippus fled to Lacedaemon as exiles,


6.5.10
2908
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ἐδόκει βοηθητέον εἶναι κατὰ τοὺς ὅρκους τοῖς τεθνεῶσί τε τῶν Τεγεατῶν καὶ ἐκπεπτωκόσι ·
and subsequently the Lacedaemonians decided that, in accordance with their oaths, they ought to avenge the Tegeans who had been slain and to aid those who had been banished.


6.5.10
2909
καὶ οὕτω στρατεύουσιν ἐπὶ τοὺς Μαντινέας , ὡς παρὰ τοὺς ὅρκους σὺν ὅπλοις ἐληλυθότων αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τοὺς Τεγεάτας .
So they decided to make an expedition against the Mantineans on the ground that, in violation of their oaths, they had proceeded in arms against the Tegeans.


6.5.10
2910
καὶ φρουρὰν μὲν οἱ ἔφοροι ἔφαινον , Ἀγησίλαον δ’ ἐκέλευεν ἡ πόλις ἡγεῖσθαι .
The ephors accordingly called out the ban, and the state directed Agesilaus to act as commander.


6.5.11
2911
οἱ μὲν οὖν ἄλλοι Ἀρκάδες εἰς Ἀσέαν συνελέγοντο .
Now most of the Arcadians were gathering together at Asea.


6.5.11
2912
Ὀρχομενίων δὲ οὐκ ἐθελόντων κοινωνεῖν τοῦ Ἀρκαδικοῦ διὰ τὴν πρὸς Μαντινέας ἔχθραν , ἀλλὰ καὶ δεδεγμένων εἰς τὴν πόλιν τὸ ἐν Κορίνθῳ συνειλεγμένον ξενικόν , οὗ Πολύτροπος ἦρχεν , ἔμενον οἴκοι οἱ Μαντινεῖς τούτων ἐπιμελόμενοι .
But since the Orchomenians refused to be members of the Arcadian League on account of their enmity toward the Mantineans, and had even received into their city the mercenary force, commanded by Polytropus, which had been collected at Corinth, the Mantineans were remaining at home and keeping watch upon them.


6.5.11
2913
Ἡραεῖς δὲ καὶ Λεπρεᾶται συνεστρατεύοντο τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ἐπὶ τοὺς Μαντινέας .
On the other hand, the Heraeans and Lepreans were serving with the Lacedaemonians against the Mantineans.


6.5.12
2914
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος , ἐπεὶ ἐγένετο αὐτῷ τὰ διαβατήρια , εὐθὺς ἐχώρει ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀρκαδίαν .
Agesilaus, then, when his sacrifices at the frontier proved favourable, at once proceeded to march against Arcadia.


6.5.12
2915
καὶ καταλαβὼν πόλιν ὅμορον οὖσαν Εὔταιαν , καὶ εὑρὼν ἐκεῖ τοὺς μὲν πρεσβυτέρους καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας καὶ τοὺς παῖδας οἰκοῦντας ἐν ταῖς οἰκίαις , τοὺς δ’ ἐν τῇ στρατευσίμῳ ἡλικίᾳ οἰχομένους εἰς τὸ Ἀρκαδικόν , ὅμως οὐκ ἠδίκησε τὴν πόλιν , ἀλλ’ εἴα τε αὐτοὺς οἰκεῖν , καὶ ὠνούμενοι ἐλάμβανον ὅσων δέοιντο ·
And having occupied Eutaea, which was a city on the border, and found there the older men, the women, and the children living in their houses, while the men of military age had gone to the Arcadian assembly, he nevertheless did the city no harm, but allowed the people to continue to dwell there, and his troops got everything that they needed by purchase;


6.5.12
2916
εἰ δέ τι καὶ ἡρπάσθη , ὅτε εἰσῄει εἰς τὴν πόλιν , ἐξευρὼν ἀπέδωκε .
and if anything had been taken as booty at the time when he entered the city, he searched it out and gave it back.


6.5.12
2917
καὶ ἐπῳκοδόμει δὲ τὸ τεῖχος αὐτῶν ὅσα ἐδεῖτο , ἕωσπερ αὐτοῦ διέτριβεν ἀναμένων τοὺς μετὰ Πολυτρόπου μισθοφόρους .
He also occupied himself, during the whole time that he spent there awaiting the mercenaries under Polytropus, in repairing all those portions of the city wall which needed it.


6.5.13
2918
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ οἱ Μαντινεῖς στρατεύουσιν ἐπὶ τοὺς Ὀρχομενίους .
Meanwhile the Mantineans made an expedition against the Orchomenians.


6.5.13
2919
καὶ ἀπὸ μὲν τοῦ τείχους μάλα χαλεπῶς ἀπῆλθον , καὶ ἀπέθανόν τινες αὐτῶν ·
And they came off very badly from their attack upon the city wall, and some of them were killed;


6.5.13
2920
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀποχωροῦντες ἐν τῇ Ἐλυμίᾳ ἐγένοντο , καὶ οἱ μὲν Ὀρχομένιοι ὁπλῖται οὐκέτι ἠκολούθουν , οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Πολύτροπον ἐπέκειντο καὶ μάλα θρασέως , ἐνταῦθα γνόντες οἱ Μαντινεῖς ὡς εἰ μὴ ἀποκρούσονται αὐτούς , ὅτι πολλοὶ σφῶν κατακοντισθήσονται , ὑποστρέψαντες ὁμόσε ἐχώρησαν τοῖς ἐπικειμένοις .
but when in their retreat they had reached Elymia and, although the Orchomenian hoplites now desisted from following them, Polytropus and his troops were very boldly pressing upon them, then the Mantineans, realizing that if they did not beat them off many of their own number would be struck down by javelins, turned about and charged their assailants.


6.5.14
2921
καὶ ὁ μὲν Πολύτροπος μαχόμενος αὐτοῦ ἀποθνῄσκει ·
Polytropus fell fighting where he stood;


6.5.14
2922
τῶν δὲ ἄλλων φευγόντων πάμπολλοι ἂν ἀπέθανον , εἰ μὴ οἱ Φλειάσιοι ἱππεῖς παραγενόμενοι καὶ εἰς τὸ ὄπισθεν περιελάσαντες τῶν Μαντινέων ἐπέσχον αὐτοὺς τῆς διώξεως .
the rest fled, and very many of them would have been killed had not the Phliasian horsemen arrived, and by riding around to the rear of the Mantineans made them desist from their pursuit.


6.5.14
2923
καὶ οἱ μὲν Μαντινεῖς ταῦτα πράξαντες οἴκαδε ἀπῆλθον .
The Mantineans, then, after accomplishing these things, went back home.


6.5.15
2924
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος ἀκούσας ταῦτα , καὶ νομίσας οὐκ ἂν ἔτι συμμεῖξαι αὐτῷ τοὺς ἐκ τοῦ Ὀρχομενοῦ μισθοφόρους , οὕτω προῄει .
Agesilaus heard of this affair and came to the conclusion that the mercenaries from Orchomenus could not now join him; under these circumstances, therefore, he continued his advance.


6.5.15
2925
καὶ τῇ μὲν πρώτῃ ἐν τῇ Τεγεάτιδι χώρᾳ ἐδειπνοποιήσατο , τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ διαβαίνει εἰς τὴν Μαντινικήν , καὶ ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο ὑπὸ τοῖς πρὸς ἑσπέραν ὄρεσι τῆς Μαντινείας ·
On the first day he took dinner in the territory of Tegea, and on the following day crossed into the territory of the Mantineans and encamped at the foot of the mountains to the west of Mantinea;


6.5.15
2926
καὶ ἐκεῖ ἅμα ἐδῄου τὴν χώραν καὶ ἐπόρθει τοὺς ἀγρούς .
there at the same time he laid waste the land and plundered the farms.


6.5.15
2927
τῶν δὲ Ἀρκάδων οἱ συλλεγέντες ἐν τῇ Ἀσέᾳ νυκτὸς παρῆλθον εἰς τὴν Τεγέαν .
Meanwhile the Arcadians who had assembled at Asea made their way by night to Tegea.


6.5.16
2928
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ὁ μὲν Ἀγησίλαος ἀπέχων Μαντινείας ὅσον εἴκοσι σταδίους ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο ·
On the next day Agesilaus encamped at a distance of about twenty stadia from Mantinea.


6.5.16
2929
οἱ δ’ ἐκ τῆς Τεγέας Ἀρκάδες , ἐχόμενοι τῶν μεταξὺ Μαντινείας καὶ Τεγέας ὀρῶν , παρῆσαν μάλα πολλοὶ ὁπλῖται , συμμεῖξαι βουλόμενοι τοῖς Μαντινεῦσι ·
But the Arcadians from Tegea, a very large force of hoplites, made their appearance; they were skirting the mountains between Mantinea and Tegea, desiring to effect a junction with the Mantineans,


6.5.16
2930
καὶ γὰρ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι οὐ πανδημεὶ ἠκολούθουν αὐτοῖς ·
for the Argives, who came with them, were not in full force.


6.5.16
2931
καὶ ἦσαν μέν τινες οἳ τὸν Ἀγησίλαον ἔπειθον χωρὶς τούτοις ἐπιθέσθαι ·
And there were some who tried to persuade Agesilaus to attack these troops separately;


6.5.16
2932
ὁ δὲ φοβούμενος μὴ ἐν ὅσῳ πρὸς ἐκείνους πορεύοιτο , ἐκ τῆς πόλεως οἱ Μαντινεῖς ἐξελθόντες κατὰ κέρας τε καὶ ἐκ τοῦ ὄπισθεν ἐπιπέσοιεν αὐτῷ , ἔγνω κράτιστον εἶναι ἐᾶσαι συνελθεῖν αὐτούς , καὶ εἰ βούλοιντο μάχεσθαι , ἐκ τοῦ δικαίου καὶ φανεροῦ τὴν μάχην ποιεῖσθαι .
he, however, fearing that while he was marching against them the Mantineans might issue forth from their city and attack him in flank and rear, judged it best to allow the two hostile forces to come together and, in case they wished to fight, to conduct the battle in regular fashion and in the open.


6.5.16
2933
καὶ οἱ μὲν δὴ Ἀρκάδες ὁμοῦ ἤδη ἐγεγένηντο .
The Arcadians from Tegea had by now effected a junction with the Mantineans.


6.5.17
2934
οἱ δ’ ἐκ τοῦ Ὀρχομενοῦ πελτασταὶ καὶ οἱ τῶν Φλειασίων ἱππεῖς μετ’ αὐτῶν τῆς νυκτὸς διεξελθόντες παρὰ τὴν Μαντίνειαν θυομένῳ τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ πρὸ τοῦ στρατοπέδου ἐπιφαίνονται ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ , καὶ ἐποίησαν τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους εἰς τὰς τάξεις δραμεῖν , Ἀγησίλαον δ’ ἐπαναχωρῆσαι πρὸς τὰ ὅπλα .
On the other hand, the peltasts from Orchomenus, and with them the horsemen of the Phliasians, made their way during the night past Mantinea and appeared as Agesilaus was sacrificing in front of his camp at daybreak;


6.5.17
2935
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐκεῖνοι μὲν ἐγνώσθησαν φίλοι ὄντες , Ἀγησίλαος δὲ ἐκεκαλλιέρητο , ἐξ ἀρίστου προῆγε τὸ στράτευμα .
and they caused the Lacedaemonians to fall hurriedly into line and Agesilaus himself to retire to the camp.


6.5.17
2936
ἑσπέρας δ’ ἐπιγιγνομένης ἔλαθε στρατοπεδευσάμενος εἰς τὸν ὄπισθεν κόλπον τῆς Μαντινικῆς , μάλα σύνεγγυς καὶ κύκλῳ ὄρη ἔχοντα .
But when they had been recognized as friends, and Agesilaus had obtained favorable omens, immediately after breakfast he led his army forward. Later, as evening was coming on, he unwittingly encamped in the valley which lies behind the town of Mantinea; it is surrounded by mountains which are only a short distance away.


6.5.18
2937
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐθύετο μὲν πρὸ τοῦ στρατεύματος ·
On the following day at daybreak he was offering sacrifices in front of the army;


6.5.18
2938
ἰδὼν δὲ συλλεγομένους ἐκ τῆς τῶν Μαντινέων πόλεως ἐπὶ τοῖς ὄρεσι τοῖς ὑπὲρ τῆς οὐρᾶς τοῦ ἑαυτῶν στρατεύματος , ἔγνω ἐξακτέον εἶναι τὴν ταχίστην ἐκ τοῦ κόλπου .
and seeing that troops were gathering from the city of the Mantineans on the mountains which were above the rear of his army, he decided that he must lead his men out of the valley with all possible speed.


6.5.18
2939
εἰ μὲν οὖν αὐτὸς ἀφηγοῖτο , ἐφοβεῖτο μὴ τῇ οὐρᾷ ἐπίθοιντο οἱ πολέμιοι ·
Now he feared that if he led the way himself, the enemy would fall upon his rear;


6.5.18
2940
ἡσυχίαν δὲ ἔχων καὶ τὰ ὅπλα πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους φαίνων , ἀναστρέψαντας ἐκέλευε τοὺς ἀπ’ οὐρᾶς εἰς δόρυ ὄπισθεν τῆς φάλαγγος ἡγεῖσθαι πρὸς αὐτόν ·
accordingly, while keeping quiet and presenting his front toward the enemy, he ordered the men at the rear to face about to the right and march along behind the phalanx toward him.


6.5.18
2941
καὶ οὕτως ἅμα ἔκ τε τοῦ στενοῦ ἐξῆγε καὶ ἰσχυροτέραν ἀεὶ τὴν φάλαγγα ἐποιεῖτο .
And in this manner he was at the same time leading them out of the narrow valley and making the phalanx continually stronger.


6.5.19
2942
ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἐδεδίπλωτο ἡ φάλαγξ , οὕτως ἔχοντι τῷ ὁπλιτικῷ προελθὼν εἰς τὸ πεδίον ἐξέτεινε πάλιν ἐπ’ ἐννέα ἢ δέκα τὸ στράτευμα ἀσπίδων .
When the phalanx had thus been doubled in depth, he proceeded into the plain with the hoplites in this formation, and then extended the army again into a line nine or ten shields deep.


6.5.19
2943
οἱ μέντοι Μαντινεῖς οὐκέτι ἐξῇσαν ·
The Mantineans, however, now desisted from coming forth from their city,


6.5.19
2944
καὶ γὰρ οἱ Ἠλεῖοι συστρατευόμενοι αὐτοῖς ἔπειθον μὴ ποιεῖσθαι μάχην , πρὶν οἱ Θηβαῖοι παραγένοιντο ·
for the Eleans, who were making the campaign with them, urged them not to fight a battle until the Thebans arrived;


6.5.19
2945
εὖ δὲ εἰδέναι ἔφασαν ὅτι παρέσοιντο ·
and they said they were quite sure that the Thebans would come,


6.5.19
2946
καὶ γὰρ δέκα τάλαντα δεδανεῖσθαι αὐτοὺς παρὰ σφῶν εἰς τὴν βοήθειαν .
for they had borrowed ten talents from the Eleans themselves for the expenses of the expedition to aid them.


6.5.20
2947
οἱ μὲν δὴ Ἀρκάδες ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες ἡσυχίαν εἶχον ἐν τῇ Μαντινείᾳ ·
The Arcadians, then, upon hearing this, remained quiet in Mantinea;


6.5.20
2948
ὁ δ’ Ἀγησίλαος καὶ μάλα βουλόμενος ἀπάγειν τὸ στράτευμα , καὶ γὰρ ἦν μέσος χειμών , ὅμως ἐκεῖ κατέμεινε τρεῖς ἡμέρας , οὐ πολὺ ἀπέχων τῆς Μαντινέων πόλεως , ὅπως μὴ δοκοίη φοβούμενος σπεύδειν τὴν ἄφοδον .
and Agesilaus, even though he was exceedingly desirous of leading back his army — for it was mid-winter — nevertheless remained there for three days, not far away from the city of the Mantineans, that he might not be thought to be hurrying his departure out of fear.


6.5.20
2949
τῇ δὲ τετάρτῃ πρῲ ἀριστοποιησάμενος ἀπῆγεν ὡς στρατοπεδευσόμενος ἔνθαπερ τὸ πρῶτον ἀπὸ τῆς Εὐταίας ἐξώρμητο .
On the fourth day, however, after breakfasting early he began his homeward march, intending to encamp at the place where he had originally made camp on his departure from Eutaea.


6.5.21
2950
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐδεὶς ἐφαίνετο τῶν Ἀρκάδων , ἦγε τὴν ταχίστην εἰς τὴν Εὔταιαν , καίπερ μάλα ὀψίζων , βουλόμενος ἀπαγαγεῖν τοὺς ὁπλίτας πρὶν καὶ τὰ πυρὰ τῶν πολεμίων ἰδεῖν , ἵνα μή τις εἴποι ὡς φεύγων ἀπαγάγοι .
But since none of the Arcadians appeared, he continued his march as rapidly as possible to Eutaea, even though it was very late, with the desire of getting his hoplites away before they even saw the enemy’s fires, so that no one could say that he had withdrawn in flight.


6.5.21
2951
ἐκ γὰρ τῆς πρόσθεν ἀθυμίας ἐδόκει τι ἀνειληφέναι τὴν πόλιν , ὅτι καὶ ἐνεβεβλήκει εἰς τὴν Ἀρκαδίαν καὶ δῃοῦντι τὴν χώραν οὐδεὶς ἠθελήκει μάχεσθαι .
For he seemed to have brought the state some relief from its former despondency, inasmuch as he had invaded Arcadia and, though he laid waste the land, none had been willing to fight with him.


6.5.21
2952
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐν τῇ Λακωνικῇ ἐγένετο , τοὺς μὲν Σπαρτιάτας ἀπέλυσεν οἴκαδε , τοὺς δὲ περιοίκους ἀφῆκεν ἐπὶ τὰς ἑαυτῶν πόλεις .
And after he had arrived in Laconia, he let the Spartiatae go home and dismissed the Perioeci to their several cities.


6.5.22
2953
οἱ δὲ Ἀρκάδες , ἐπεὶ ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ἀπεληλύθει καὶ ᾔσθοντο διαλελυμένον αὐτῷ τὸ στράτευμα , αὐτοὶ δὲ ἡθροισμένοι ἐτύγχανον , στρατεύουσιν ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἡραιᾶς , ὅτι τε οὐκ ἤθελον τοῦ Ἀρκαδικοῦ μετέχειν καὶ ὅτι συνεισεβεβλήκεσαν εἰς τὴν Ἀρκαδίαν μετὰ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων .
As for the Arcadians, since Agesilaus had departed and they learned that his army had been disbanded, while they themselves were still gathered together, they made an expedition against the Heraeans, not only because they refused to be members of the Arcadian League, but also because they had joined with the Lacedaemonians in invading Arcadia.


6.5.22
2954
ἐμβαλόντες δ’ ἐνεπίμπρων τε τὰς οἰκίας καὶ ἔκοπτον τὰ δένδρα .
And after entering the territory of Heraea they proceeded to burn the houses and cut down the trees.


6.5.22
2955
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ Θηβαῖοι βεβοηθηκότες παρεῖναι ἐλέγοντο εἰς τὴν Μαντίνειαν , οὕτως ἀπαλλάττονται ἐκ τῆς Ἡραίας καὶ συμμιγνύουσι τοῖς Θηβαίοις .
It was not until the Thebans with their supporting force were reported to have arrived in Mantinea that the Arcadians departed from Heraea and united with the Thebans.


6.5.23
2956
ὡς δὲ ὁμοῦ ἐγένοντο , οἱ μὲν Θηβαῖοι καλῶς σφίσιν ᾤοντο ἔχειν , ἐπεὶ ἐβεβοηθήκεσαν μέν , πολέμιον δὲ οὐδένα ἔτι ἑώρων ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ , καὶ ἀπιέναι παρεσκευάζοντο ·
When they had joined forces, the Thebans thought that matters stood well with them, inasmuch as they had come to bring aid and there was no longer an enemy to be seen in the land;


6.5.23
2957
οἱ δὲ Ἀρκάδες καὶ Ἀργεῖοι καὶ Ἠλεῖοι ἔπειθον αὐτοὺς ἡγεῖσθαι ὡς τάχιστα εἰς τὴν Λακωνικήν , ἐπιδεικνύοντες μὲν τὸ ἑαυτῶν πλῆθος , ὑπερεπαινοῦντες δὲ τὸ τῶν Θηβαίων στράτευμα .
they accordingly made their preparations for going back. But the Arcadians, Argives, and Eleans urged them to lead the way with all speed into Laconia, pointing out the number of their own troops and praising beyond measure the army of the Thebans.


6.5.23
2958
καὶ γὰρ οἱ μὲν Βοιωτοὶ ἐγυμνάζοντο πάντες περὶ τὰ ὅπλα , ἀγαλλόμενοι τῇ ἐν Λεύκτροις νίκῃ ·
For all the Boeotians were now training themselves in the craft of arms, glorying in their victory at Leuctra;


6.5.23
2959
ἠκολούθουν δ’ αὐτοῖς καὶ Φωκεῖς ὑπήκοοι γεγενημένοι καὶ Εὐβοεῖς ἀπὸ πασῶν τῶν πόλεων καὶ Λοκροὶ ἀμφότεροι καὶ Ἀκαρνᾶνες καὶ Ἡρακλεῶται καὶ Μηλιεῖς ·
and they were reinforced by the Phocians, who had become their subjects, the Euboeans from all their cities, both the Locrian peoples, the Acarnanians, the Heracleots, and the Malians;


6.5.23
2960
ἠκολούθουν δ’ αὐτοῖς καὶ ἐκ Θετταλίας ἱππεῖς τε καὶ πελτασταί .
they were also reinforced by horsemen and peltasts from Thessaly.


6.5.23
2961
ταῦτα δὴ συνιδόμενοι καὶ τὴν ἐν Λακεδαίμονι ἐρημίαν λέγοντες ἱκέτευον μηδαμῶς ἀποτρέπεσθαι , πρὶν ἐμβαλεῖν εἰς τὴν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων χώραν .
The Arcadians, then, seeing all this and describing the dearth of men in Lacedaemon, begged them by no means to turn back before invading the country of the Lacedaemonians.


6.5.24
2962
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ἤκουον μὲν ταῦτα , ἀντελογίζοντο δὲ ὅτι δυσεμβολωτάτη μὲν ἡ Λακωνικὴ ἐλέγετο εἶναι , φρουρὰς δὲ καθεστάναι ἐνόμιζον ἐπὶ τοῖς εὐπροσοδωτάτοις .
But while the Thebans listened to this request, they took into account, on the other hand, the fact that Laconia was said to be exceedingly difficult to enter, and that they believed garrisons were posted at the points of easiest access.


6.5.24
2963
καὶ γὰρ ἦν Ἰσχόλαος μὲν ἐν Οἰῷ τῆς Σκιρίτιδος , ἔχων νεοδαμώδεις τε φρουροὺς καὶ τῶν Τεγεατῶν φυγάδων τοὺς νεωτάτους περὶ τετρακοσίους ·
For Ischolaus was at Oeum, in Sciritis, commanding a garrison composed of emancipated Helots and about four hundred of the youngest of the Tegean exiles;


6.5.24
2964
ἦν δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ Λεύκτρῳ ὑπὲρ τῆς Μαλεάτιδος ἄλλη φρουρά .
and there was another garrison also at Leuctrum, above Maleatis.


6.5.24
2965
ἐλογίζοντο δὲ καὶ τοῦτο οἱ Θηβαῖοι , ὡς καὶ συνελθοῦσαν ἂν ταχέως τὴν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων δύναμιν καὶ μάχεσθαι ἂν αὐτοὺς οὐδαμοῦ ἄμεινον ἢ ἐν τῇ ἑαυτῶν .
The Thebans likewise weighed this consideration, that the force of the Lacedaemonians would gather quickly and that they would fight nowhere better than in their own country.


6.5.24
2966
ἃ δὴ πάντα λογιζόμενοι οὐ πάνυ προπετεῖς ἦσαν εἰς τὸ ἰέναι εἰς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα .
Therefore, taking into account all these things, they were by no means eager to proceed into Lacedaemon.


6.5.25
2967
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἧκον ἔκ τε Καρυῶν λέγοντες τὴν ἐρημίαν καὶ ὑπισχνούμενοι αὐτοὶ ἡγήσεσθαι , καὶ κελεύοντες , ἄν τι ἐξαπατῶντες φαίνωνται , ἀποσφάττειν σφᾶς , παρῆσαν δέ τινες καὶ τῶν περιοίκων ἐπικαλούμενοι καὶ φάσκοντες ἀποστήσεσθαι , εἰ μόνον φανείησαν εἰς τὴν χώραν , ἔλεγον δὲ ὡς καὶ νῦν καλούμενοι οἱ περίοικοι ὑπὸ τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν οὐκ ἐθέλοιεν βοηθεῖν ·
But when people had come from Caryae telling of the dearth of men, promising that they would themselves act as guides, and bidding the Thebans slay them if they were found to be practising any deception,


6.5.25
2968
πάντα οὖν ταῦτα ἀκούοντες καὶ παρὰ πάντων οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἐπείσθησαν , καὶ αὐτοὶ μὲν κατὰ Καρύας ἐνέβαλον , οἱ δὲ Ἀρκάδες κατὰ Οἰὸν τῆς Σκιρίτιδος .
and when, further, some of the Perioeci appeared, asking the Thebans to come to their aid, engaging to revolt if only they would show themselves in the land, and saying also that even now the Perioeci when summoned by the Spartiatae were refusing to go and help them — as a result, then, of hearing all these reports, in which all agreed, the Thebans were won over, and pushed in with their own forces by way of Caryae, while the Arcadians went by way of Oeum, in Sciritis.


6.5.26
2969
καὶ εἰ μὲν ἐπὶ τὰ δύσβατα προελθὼν ὁ Ἰσχόλαος ὑφίστατο , οὐδένα ἂν ταύτῃ γ’ ἔφασαν ἀναβῆναι ·
Now if Ischolaus had advanced to the difficult part of the pass and had made his stand there, no one, by all accounts, could have accomplished the ascent by that route at least;


6.5.26
2970
νῦν δὲ βουλόμενος τοῖς Οἰάταις συμμάχοις χρῆσθαι , ἔμεινεν ἐν τῇ κώμῃ ·
but in fact, since he wished to employ the Oeans as allies, he remained in the village, and the Arcadians ascended the pass in very great numbers.


6.5.26
2971
οἱ δὲ ἀνέβησαν παμπλήθεις Ἀρκάδες .
There, in the face-to-face fighting, the troops with Ischolaus were victorious;


6.5.26
2972
ἐνταῦθα δὴ ἀντιπρόσωποι μὲν μαχόμενοι οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἰσχόλαον ἐπεκράτουν ·
but when the enemy showered blows and missiles upon them from the rear, on the flank, and from the houses upon which they mounted,


6.5.26
2973
ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ ὄπισθεν καὶ ἐκ πλαγίου καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν οἰκιῶν ἀναβαίνοντες ἔπαιον καὶ ἔβαλλον αὐτούς , ἐνταῦθα ὅ τε Ἰσχόλαος ἀποθνῄσκει καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι πάντες , εἰ μή τις ἀμφιγνοηθεὶς διέφυγε .
then Ischolaus was killed and all the rest as well, unless one or another slipped through unrecognized.


6.5.27
2974
διαπραξάμενοι δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Ἀρκάδες ἐπορεύοντο πρὸς τοὺς Θηβαίους ἐπὶ τὰς Καρύας .
After achieving this deed the Arcadians marched to join the Thebans at Caryae;


6.5.27
2975
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ἐπεὶ ᾔσθοντο τὰ πεπραγμένα ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀρκάδων , πολὺ δὴ θρασύτερον κατέβαινον .
and when the Thebans heard what had been accomplished by the Arcadians, they proceeded to make the descent with far greater boldness.


6.5.27
2976
καὶ τὴν μὲν Σελλασίαν εὐθὺς ἔκαον καὶ ἐπόρθουν ·
Coming to Sellasia, they at once burned and pillaged it;


6.5.27
2977
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ ἐγένοντο ἐν τῷ τεμένει τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος , ἐνταῦθα ἐστρατοπεδεύσαντο ·
but when they arrived in the plain, they encamped there, in the sacred precinct of Apollo.


6.5.27
2978
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐπορεύοντο .
The next day they marched on.


6.5.27
2979
καὶ διὰ μὲν τῆς γεφύρας οὐδ’ ἐπεχείρουν διαβαίνειν ἐπὶ τὴν πόλιν ·
Now they did not even make the attempt to cross over by the bridge against Sparta,


6.5.27
2980
καὶ γὰρ ἐν τῷ τῆς Ἀλέας ἱερῷ ἐφαίνοντο ἐναντίοι οἱ ὁπλῖται ·
for in the sanctuary of Athena Alea the hoplites were to be seen, ready to oppose them;


6.5.27
2981
ἐν δεξιᾷ δ’ ἔχοντες τὸν Εὐρώταν παρῇσαν κάοντες καὶ πορθοῦντες πολλῶν κ- ἀγαθῶν μεστὰς οἰκίας .
but keeping the Eurotas on their right they passed along, burning and plundering houses full of many valuable things.


6.5.28
2982
τῶν δ’ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως αἱ μὲν γυναῖκες οὐδὲ τὸν καπνὸν ὁρῶσαι ἠνείχοντο , ἅτε οὐδέποτε ἰδοῦσαι πολεμίους ·
As for the people in the city, the women could not even endure the sight of the smoke, since they had never seen an enemy;


6.5.28
2983
οἱ δὲ Σπαρτιᾶται ἀτείχιστον ἔχοντες τὴν πόλιν , ἄλλος ἄλλῃ διαταχθείς , μάλα ὀλίγοι καὶ ὄντες καὶ φαινόμενοι ἐφύλαττον .
but the Spartiatae, their city being without walls, were posted at intervals, one here, another there, and so kept guard, though they were, and were seen to be, very few in number.


6.5.28
2984
ἔδοξε δὲ τοῖς τέλεσι καὶ προειπεῖν τοῖς Εἵλωσιν , εἴ τις βούλοιτο ὅπλα λαμβάνειν καὶ εἰς τάξιν τίθεσθαι , τὰ πιστὰ λαμβάνειν ὡς ἐλευθέρους ἐσομένους ὅσοι συμπολεμήσαιεν .
It was also determined by the authorities to make proclamation to the Helots that if any wished to take up arms and be assigned to a place in the ranks, they should be given a promise that all should be free who took part in the war.


6.5.29
2985
καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἔφασαν ἀπογράψασθαι πλέον ἢ ἑξακισχιλίους , ὥστε φόβον αὖ οὗτοι παρεῖχον συντεταγμένοι καὶ λίαν ἐδόκουν πολλοὶ εἶναι ·
And it was said that at first more than six thousand enrolled themselves, so that they in their turn occasioned fear when they were marshalled together, and were thought to be all too numerous;


6.5.29
2986
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἔμενον μὲν οἱ ἐξ Ὀρχομενοῦ μισθοφόροι , ἐβοήθησαν δὲ τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις Φλειάσιοί τε καὶ Κορίνθιοι καὶ Ἐπιδαύριοι καὶ Πελληνεῖς καὶ ἄλλαι δέ τινες τῶν πόλεων , ἤδη καὶ τοὺς ἀπογεγραμμένους ἧττον ὠρρώδουν .
but when the mercenaries from Orchomenus remained true, and the Lacedaemonians received aid from the Phliasians, Corinthians, Epidaurians, Pelleneans, and likewise some of the other states, then the Spartiatae were less fearful of those who had been enrolled.


6.5.30
2987
ὡς δὲ προϊὸν τὸ στράτευμα ἐγένετο κατ’ Ἀμύκλας , ταύτῃ διέβαινον τὸν Εὐρώταν .
Now when, in its onward march, the army of the enemy came opposite Amyclae, at this point they crossed the Eurotas.


6.5.30
2988
καὶ οἱ μὲν Θηβαῖοι , ὅπου στρατοπεδεύοιντο , εὐθὺς ὧν ἔκοπτον δένδρων κατέβαλλον πρὸ τῶν τάξεων ὡς ἐδύναντο πλεῖστα , καὶ οὕτως ἐφυλάττοντο ·
And wherever the Thebans encamped they at once threw down in front of their lines the greatest possible quantity of the trees which they cut down, and in this way guarded themselves;


6.5.30
2989
οἱ δὲ Ἀρκάδες τούτων τε οὐδὲν ἐποίουν , καταλείποντες δὲ τὰ ὅπλα εἰς ἁρπαγὴν ἐπὶ τὰς οἰκίας ἐτρέποντο .
the Arcadians, however, did nothing of this sort, but left their camp behind them and turned their attention to plundering the houses.


6.5.30
2990
ἐκ τούτου δὴ ἡμέρᾳ τρίτῃ ἢ τετάρτῃ προῆλθον οἱ ἱππεῖς εἰς τὸν ἱππόδρομον εἰς Γαιαόχου κατὰ τάξεις , οἵ τε Θηβαῖοι πάντες καὶ οἱ Ἠλεῖοι καὶ ὅσοι Φωκέων ἢ Θετταλῶν ἢ Λοκρῶν ἱππεῖς παρῆσαν .
After this, on the third or fourth day of the invasion, the horsemen advanced to the race-course in the sanctuary of Poseidon Gaeaochus by divisions, the Thebans in full force, the Eleans, and all the horsemen who were there of the Phocians, Thessalians, or Locrians.


6.5.31
2991
οἱ δὲ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἱππεῖς , μάλα ὀλίγοι φαινόμενοι , ἀντιτεταγμένοι αὐτοῖς ἦσαν .
And the horsemen of the Lacedaemonians, seemingly very few in number, were formed in line against them.


6.5.31
2992
ἐνέδραν δὲ ποιήσαντες ὁπλιτῶν τῶν νεωτέρων ὅσον τριακοσίων ἐν τῇ τῶν Τυνδαριδῶν , ἅμα οὗτοι μὲν ἐξέθεον , οἱ δ’ ἱππεῖς ἤλαυνον .
Meanwhile the Lacedaemonians had set an ambush of the younger hoplites, about three hundred in number, in the house of the Tyndaridae, and at the same moment these men rushed forth and their horsemen charged.


6.5.31
2993
οἱ δὲ πολέμιοι οὐκ ἐδέξαντο , ἀλλ’ ἐνέκλιναν .
The enemy, however, did not await their attack, but gave way.


6.5.31
2994
ἰδόντες δὲ ταῦτα πολλοὶ καὶ τῶν πεζῶν εἰς φυγὴν ὥρμησαν .
And on seeing this, many of the foot-soldiers also took to flight.


6.5.31
2995
ἐπεὶ μέντοι οἵ τε διώκοντες ἐπαύσαντο καὶ τὸ τῶν Θηβαίων στράτευμα ἔμενε , πάλιν δὴ κατεστρατοπεδεύσαντο .
But when the pursuers stopped and the army of the Thebans stood firm, the enemy encamped again.


6.5.32
2996
καὶ τὸ μὲν μὴ πρὸς τὴν πόλιν προσβαλεῖν ἂν ἔτι αὐτοὺς ἤδη τι ἐδόκει θαρραλεώτερον εἶναι ·
It now seemed somewhat more certain that they would make no further attempt upon the city;


6.5.32
2997
ἐκεῖθεν μέντοι ἀπᾶραν τὸ στράτευμα ἐπορεύετο τὴν ἐφ’ Ἕλος καὶ Γύθειον .
and in fact their army departed thence and took the road toward Helos and Gytheium.


6.5.32
2998
καὶ τὰς μὲν ἀτειχίστους τῶν πόλεων ἐνεπίμπρασαν , Γυθείῳ δέ , ἔνθα τὰ νεώρια τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις ἦν , καὶ προσέβαλλον τρεῖς ἡμέρας .
And they burned such of the towns as were unwalled and made a three days’ attack upon Gytheium, where the Lacedaemonians had their dockyards.


6.5.32
2999
ἦσαν δέ τινες τῶν περιοίκων οἳ καὶ ἐπέθεντο καὶ συνεστρατεύοντο τοῖς μετὰ Θηβαίων .
There were some of the Perioeci also who not only joined in this attack, but did regular service with the troops that followed the Thebans.


6.5.33
3000
ἀκούοντες δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐν φροντίδι ἦσαν ὅτι χρὴ ποιεῖν περὶ Λακεδαιμονίων , καὶ ἐκκλησίαν ἐποίησαν κατὰ δόγμα βουλῆς .
When the Athenians heard of all these things, they were in a state of concern as to what they should do in regard to the Lacedaemonians, and by resolution of the Senate they called a meeting of the Assembly.


6.5.33
3001
ἔτυχον δὲ παρόντες πρέσβεις Λακεδαιμονίων τε καὶ τῶν ἔτι ὑπολοίπων συμμάχων αὐτοῖς .
Now it chanced that there were present ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians and of the allies who still remained to them.


6.5.33
3002
ὅθεν δὴ οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι Ἄρακος καὶ Ὤκυλλος καὶ Φάραξ καὶ Ἐτυμοκλῆς καὶ Ὀλονθεὺς σχεδὸν πάντες παραπλήσια ἔλεγον .
Wherefore the Lacedaemonians spoke — Aracus, Ocyllus, Pharax, Etymocles, and Olontheus — almost all of them saying much the same things.


6.5.33
3003
ἀνεμίμνῃσκόν τε γὰρ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ὡς ἀεί ποτε ἀλλήλοις ἐν τοῖς μεγίστοις καιροῖς παρίσταντο ἐπ’ ἀγαθοῖς ·
They reminded the Athenians that from all time the two peoples had stood by one another in the most important crises for good ends;


6.5.33
3004
αὐτοί τε γὰρ ἔφασαν τοὺς τυράννους συνεκβαλεῖν Ἀθήνηθεν , καὶ Ἀθηναίους , ὅτε αὐτοὶ ἐπολιορκοῦντο ὑπὸ Μεσσηνίων , προθύμως βοηθεῖν .
for they on their side, they said, had aided in expelling the tyrants from Athens, while the Athenians, on the other hand, gave them zealous assistance at the time when they were hard pressed by the Messenians.


6.5.34
3005
ἔλεγον δὲ καὶ ὅσ’ ἀγαθὰ εἴη , ὅτε κοινῶς ἀμφότεροι ἔπραττον , ὑπομιμνῄσκοντες μὲν ὡς τὸν βάρβαρον κοινῇ ἀπεμαχέσαντο , ἀναμιμνῄσκοντες δὲ ὡς Ἀθηναῖοί τε ὑπὸ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ᾑρέθησαν ἡγεμόνες τοῦ ναυτικοῦ καὶ τῶν κοινῶν χρημάτων φύλακες , τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ταῦτα συμβουλομένων , αὐτοί τε κατὰ γῆν ὁμολογουμένως ὑφ’ ἁπάντων τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡγεμόνες προκριθείησαν , συμβουλομένων αὖ ταῦτα τῶν Ἀθηναίων .
They also described all the blessings which were enjoyed at the time when both peoples were acting in union, recalling how they had together driven the barbarian back, recalling likewise how the Athenians had been chosen by the Greeks as leaders of the fleet and custodians of the common funds, the Lacedaemonians supporting this choice, while they had themselves been selected by the common consent of all the Greeks as leaders by land, the Athenians in their turn supporting this selection.


6.5.35
3006
εἷς δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ ὧδέ πως εἶπεν ·
And one of them even said something like this:


6.5.35
3007
ἐὰν δὲ ὑμεῖς καὶ ἡμεῖς , ὦ ἄνδρες , ὁμονοήσωμεν , νῦν ἐλπὶς τὸ πάλαι λεγόμενον δεκατευθῆναι Θηβαίους .
But if you and we, gentlemen, come to agreement, there is hope now that the Thebans will be decimated, as the old saying has it.


6.5.35
3008
οἱ μέντοι Ἀθηναῖοι οὐ πάνυ ἐδέξαντο , ἀλλὰ θροῦς τις τοιοῦτος διῆλθεν ὡς νῦν ταῦτα λέγοιεν , ὅτε δὲ εὖ ἔπραττον , ἐπέκειντο ἡμῖν .
The Athenians, however, were not very much inclined to accept all this, and a murmur went round to the effect that this is what they say now, but in the time when they were prosperous they were hostile to us.


6.5.35
3009
μέγιστον δὲ τῶν λεχθέντων παρὰ Λακεδαιμονίων ἐδόκει εἶναι ὅτι ἡνίκα κατεπολέμησαν αὐτούς , Θηβαίων βουλομένων ἀναστάτους ποιῆσαι τὰς Ἀθήνας , σφίσιν ἐμποδὼν γένοιντο .
The weightiest of the arguments urged by the Lacedaemonians seemed to their hearers to be, that at the time when they subdued the Athenians, though the Thebans wanted to destroy Athens utterly, it was they who had prevented it.


6.5.36
3010
ὁ δὲ πλεῖστος ἦν λόγος ὡς κατὰ τοὺς ὅρκους βοηθεῖν δέοι ·
Most stress was laid, however, upon the consideration that the Athenians were required by their oaths to come to their assistance;


6.5.36
3011
οὐ γὰρ ἀδικησάντων σφῶν ἐπιστρατεύοιεν οἱ Ἀρκάδες καὶ οἱ μετ’ αὐτῶν τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις , ἀλλὰ βοηθησάντων τοῖς Τεγεάταις , ὅτι οἱ Μαντινεῖς παρὰ τοὺς ὅρκους ἐπεστράτευσαν αὐτοῖς .
for it was not because the Lacedaemonians had done wrong that the Arcadians and those with them were making an expedition against them, but rather because they had gone to the aid of the Tegeans for the reason that the Mantineans, in violation of their oaths, had taken the field against them.


6.5.36
3012
διέθει οὖν καὶ κατὰ τούτους τοὺς λόγους θόρυβος ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ ·
At these words an uproar again ran through the Assembly;


6.5.36
3013
οἱ μὲν γὰρ δικαίως τοὺς Μαντινέας ἔφασαν βοηθῆσαι τοῖς περὶ Πρόξενον ἀποθανοῦσιν ὑπὸ τῶν περὶ τὸν Στάσιππον , οἱ δὲ ἀδικεῖν , ὅτι ὅπλα ἐπήνεγκαν Τεγεάταις .
for some said that the Mantineans had done right in avenging the followers of Proxenus who had been slain by the followers of Stasippus, while others said that they were in the wrong because they had taken up arms against the Tegeans.


6.5.37
3014
τούτων δὲ διοριζομένων ὑπ’ αὐτῆς τῆς ἐκκλησίας , ἀνέστη Κλειτέλης Κορίνθιος καὶ εἶπε τάδε ·
While the Assembly itself was trying to determine these matters, Cleiteles, a Corinthian, arose and spoke as follows:


6.5.37
3015
ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μέν , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , ἴσως ἀντιλέγεται , τίνες ἦσαν οἱ ἄρξαντες ἀδικεῖν ·
Men of Athens, it is perhaps a disputed point who began the wrong-doing;


6.5.37
3016
ἡμῶν δέ , ἐπεὶ εἰρήνη ἐγένετο , ἔχει τις κατηγορῆσαι ἢ ὡς ἐπὶ πόλιν τινὰ ἐστρατεύσαμεν ἢ ὡς χρήματά τινων ἐλάβομεν ἢ ὡς γῆν ἀλλοτρίαν ἐδῃώσαμεν ;
but as for us, can anyone accuse us of having, at any time since peace was concluded, either made a campaign against any city, or taken anyone’s property, or laid waste another’s land?


6.5.37
3017
ἀλλ’ ὅμως οἱ Θηβαῖοι εἰς τὴν χώραν ἡμῶν ἐλθόντες καὶ δένδρα ἐκκεκόφασι καὶ οἰκίας κατακεκαύκασι καὶ χρήματα καὶ πρόβατα διηρπάκασι .
Yet, nevertheless, the Thebans have come into our country, and have cut down trees, and burned down houses, and seized property and cattle.


6.5.37
3018
πῶς οὖν , ἐὰν μὴ βοηθῆτε οὕτω περιφανῶς ἡμῖν ἀδικουμένοις , οὐ παρὰ τοὺς ὅρκους ποιήσετε ;
If, therefore, you do not aid us, who are so manifestly wronged, will you not surely be acting in violation of your oaths?


6.5.37
3019
καὶ ταῦτα ὧν αὐτοὶ ἐπεμελήθητε ὅρκων ὅπως πᾶσιν ὑμῖν πάντες ἡμεῖς ὀμόσαιμεν ;
They were the same oaths, you remember, that you yourselves took care to have all of us swear to all of you.


6.5.37
3020
ἐνταῦθα μέντοι οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐπεθορύβησαν ὡς ὀρθῶς τε καὶ δίκαια εἰρηκότος τοῦ Κλειτέλους .
Thereupon the Athenians shouted their approval, saying that Cleiteles had spoken to the point and fairly.


6.5.38
3021
ἐπὶ δὲ τούτῳ ἀνέστη Προκλῆς Φλειάσιος καὶ εἶπεν ·
Then Procles, a Phliasian, arose after Cleiteles and said:


6.5.38
3022
ὅτι μέν , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , εἰ ἐκποδὼν γένοιντο Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ἐπὶ πρώτους ἂν ὑμᾶς στρατεύσαιεν οἱ Θηβαῖοι , πᾶσιν οἶμαι τοῦτο δῆλον εἶναι ·
Men of Athens, it is clear to everyone, I imagine, that you are the first against whom the Thebans would march if the Lacedaemonians were got out of the way;


6.5.38
3023
τῶν γὰρ ἄλλων μόνους ἂν ὑμᾶς οἴονται ἐμποδὼν γενέσθαι τοῦ ἄρξαι αὐτοὺς τῶν Ἑλλήνων .
for they think that you are the only people in Greece who would stand in the way of their becoming rulers of the Greeks.


6.5.39
3024
εἰ δ’ οὕτως ἔχει , ἐγὼ μὲν οὐδὲν μᾶλλον Λακεδαιμονίοις ἂν ὑμᾶς ἡγοῦμαι στρατεύσαντας βοηθῆσαι ἢ καὶ ὑμῖν αὐτοῖς .
If this is so, I, for my part, believe that if you undertake a campaign, you would not be giving aid to the Lacedaemonians so much as to your own selves.


6.5.39
3025
τὸ γὰρ δυσμενεῖς ὄντας ὑμῖν Θηβαίους καὶ ὁμόρους οἰκοῦντας ἡγεμόνας γενέσθαι τῶν Ἑλλήνων πολὺ οἶμαι χαλεπώτερον ἂν ὑμῖν φανῆναι ἢ ὁπότε πόρρω τοὺς ἀντιπάλους εἴχετε .
For to have the Thebans, who are unfriendly to you and dwell on your borders, become leaders of the Greeks, would prove much more grievous to you, I think, than when you had your antagonists far away.


6.5.39
3026
συμφορώτερόν γε μεντ- ἂν ὑμῖν αὐτοῖς βοηθήσαιτε ἐν ᾧ ἔτι εἰσὶν οἳ συμμαχοῖεν ἂν ἢ εἰ ἀπολομένων αὐτῶν μόνοι ἀναγκάζοισθε διαμάχεσθαι πρὸς τοὺς Θηβαίους .
Furthermore, you would aid yourselves with more profit if you should do so while there are still people who would fight on your side, than if they should perish first and you should then be compelled to enter by yourselves upon a decisive struggle with the Thebans.


6.5.40
3027
εἰ δέ τινες φοβοῦνται μὴ ἐὰν νῦν ἀναφύγωσιν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι , ἔτι ποτὲ πράγματα παρέχωσιν ὑμῖν , ἐνθυμήθητε ὅτι οὐχ οὓς ἂν εὖ ἀλλ’ οὓς ἂν κακῶς τις ποιῇ φοβεῖσθαι δεῖ μή ποτε μέγα δυνασθῶσιν .
Now if any are fearful that in case the Lacedaemonians escape this time, they may again in the future cause you trouble, take thought of this, that it is not those whom one benefits, but those whom one injures, of whom one has to fear that they may some day attain great power.


6.5.40
3028
ἐνθυμεῖσθαι δὲ καὶ τάδε χρή , ὅτι κτᾶσθαι μέν τι ἀγαθὸν καὶ ἰδιώταις καὶ πόλεσι προσήκει , ὅταν ἐρρωμενέστατοι ὦσιν , ἵνα ἔχωσιν , ἐάν ποτ’ ἀδύνατοι γένωνται , ἐπικουρίαν τῶν προπεπονημένων .
And you should bear in mind this likewise, that it is meet both for individuals and for states to acquire a goodly store in the days when they are strongest, in order that, if some day they become powerless, they may draw upon their previous labours for succour.


6.5.41
3029
ὑμῖν δὲ νῦν ἐκ θεῶν τινος καιρὸς παραγεγένηται , ἐὰν δεομένοις βοηθήσητε Λακεδαιμονίοις , κτήσασθαι τούτους εἰς τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον φίλους ἀπροφασίστους .
So to you has now been offered by some god an opportunity, in case you aid the Lacedaemonians in their need, of acquiring them for all time as friends who will plead no excuses.


6.5.41
3030
καὶ γὰρ δὴ οὐκ ἐπ’ ὀλίγων μοι δοκοῦσι μαρτύρων νῦν ἂν εὖ παθεῖν ὑφ’ ὑμῶν ·
For it is not in the presence of only a few witnesses, as it seems to me, that they would now receive benefit at your hands,


6.5.41
3031
ἀλλ’ εἴσονται μὲν ταῦτα θεοὶ οἱ πάντα ὁρῶντες καὶ νῦν καὶ εἰς ἀεί , συνεπίστανται δὲ τὰ γιγνόμενα οἵ τε σύμμαχοι καὶ οἱ πολέμιοι , πρὸς δὲ τούτοις καὶ ἅπαντες Ἕλληνές τε καὶ βάρβαροι ·
but the gods will know of this, who see all things both now and for ever, and both your allies and your enemies know also what is taking place, and the whole world of Greeks and barbarians besides.


6.5.41
3032
οὐδενὶ γὰρ τούτων ἀμελές .
For to none of them all is it a matter of indifference.


6.5.42
3033
ὥστε εἰ κακοὶ φανείησαν περὶ ὑμᾶς , τίς ἄν ποτε ἔτι πρόθυμος εἰς αὐτοὺς γένοιτο ;
Therefore, if the Lacedaemonians should show themselves base in their dealings with you, who would ever again become devoted to them?


6.5.42
3034
ἐλπίζειν δὲ χρὴ ὡς ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς μᾶλλον ἢ κακοὺς αὐτοὺς γενήσεσθαι ·
But it is fair to expect that they will prove good rather than base men,


6.5.42
3035
εἰ γάρ τινες ἄλλοι , καὶ οὗτοι δοκοῦσι διατετελεκέναι ἐπαίνου μὲν ὀρεγόμενοι , αἰσχρῶν δὲ ἔργων ἀπεχόμενοι .
for if any people in the world seem consistently to have striven for commendation and to have abstained from deeds of shame, it is truly they.


6.5.43
3036
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ἐνθυμήθητε καὶ τάδε .
Besides all this, take thought of the following considerations likewise.


6.5.43
3037
εἴ ποτε πάλιν ἔλθοι τῇ Ἑλλάδι κίνδυνος ὑπὸ βαρβάρων , τίσιν ἂν μᾶλλον πιστεύσαιτε ἢ Λακεδαιμονίοις ;
If ever again danger should come to Greece from barbarians, whom would you trust more than the Lacedaemonians?


6.5.43
3038
τίνας δὲ ἂν παραστάτας ἥδιον τούτων ποιήσαισθε , ὧν γε καὶ οἱ ταχθέντες ἐν Θερμοπύλαις ἅπαντες εἵλοντο μαχόμενοι ἀποθανεῖν μᾶλλον ἢ ζῶντες ἐπεισφρέσθαι τὸν βάρβαρον τῇ Ἑλλάδι ;
Whom would you more gladly make your comrades in the ranks than these, whose countrymen, posted at Thermopylae, chose every man to die fighting rather than to live and admit the barbarian to Greece?


6.5.43
3039
πῶς οὖν οὐ δίκαιον ὧν τε ἕνεκα ἐγένοντο ἄνδρες ἀγαθοὶ μεθ’ ὑμῶν καὶ ὧν ἐλπὶς καὶ αὖθις γενέσθαι πᾶσαν προθυμίαν εἰς αὐτοὺς καὶ ὑμᾶς καὶ ἡμᾶς παρέχεσθαι ;
Therefore, both because they proved themselves brave men along with you, and because there is hope that they will so prove themselves again, is it not surely right that you and we alike should show all good-will toward them?


6.5.44
3040
ἄξιον δὲ καὶ τῶν παρόντων συμμάχων αὐτοῖς ἕνεκα προθυμίαν ἐνδείξασθαι .
It is also worth while to show the Lacedaemonians good-will for the sake of the allies who are present with them.


6.5.44
3041
εὖ γὰρ ἴστε ὅτι οἵπερ τούτοις πιστοὶ διαμένουσιν ἐν ταῖς συμφοραῖς , οὗτοι καὶ ὑμῖν αἰσχύνοιντ’ ἂν μὴ ἀποδιδόντες χάριτας .
For be well assured that those who remain faithful to them in their misfortunes are the very men who would be ashamed if they did not make do requital to you.


6.5.44
3042
εἰ δὲ μικραὶ δοκοῦμεν πόλεις εἶναι αἱ τοῦ κινδύνου μετέχειν αὐτοῖς ἐθέλουσαι , ἐνθυμήθητε ὅτι ἐὰν ἡ ὑμετέρα πόλις προσγένηται , οὐκέτι μικραὶ πόλεις ἐσόμεθα αἱ βοηθοῦσαι αὐτοῖς .
And if we who are willing to share the peril with them seem to be small states, reflect that if your state is added to our number, we who aid them shall no longer be small states.


6.5.45
3043
ἐγὼ δέ , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , πρόσθεν μὲν ἀκούων ἐζήλουν τήνδε τὴν πόλιν ὅτι πάντας καὶ τοὺς ἀδικουμένους καὶ τοὺς φοβουμένους ἐνθάδε καταφεύγοντας ἐπικουρίας ἤκουον τυγχάνειν ·
In former days, men of Athens, I used from hearsay to admire this state of yours, for I heard that all who were wronged and all who were fearful fled hither for refuge, and here found assistance;


6.5.45
3044
νῦν δ’ οὐκέτ’ ἀκούω , ἀλλ’ αὐτὸς ἤδη παρὼν ὁρῶ Λακεδαιμονίους τε τοὺς ὀνομαστοτάτους καὶ μετ’ αὐτῶν τοὺς πιστοτάτους φίλους αὐτῶν πρὸς ὑμᾶς τε ἥκοντας καὶ δεομένους αὖ ὑμῶν ἐπικουρῆσαι .
now I no longer hear, but with my own eyes at this moment see the Lacedaemonians, those most famous men, and their most loyal friends appearing in your state and in their turn requesting you to assist them.


6.5.46
3045
ὁρῶ δὲ καὶ Θηβαίους , οἳ τότε οὐκ ἔπεισαν Λακεδαιμονίους ἐξανδραποδίσασθαι ὑμᾶς , νῦν δεομένους ὑμῶν μὴ περιιδεῖν ἀπολομένους τοὺς σώσαντας ὑμᾶς .
I see also the Thebans, who then did not succeed in persuading the Lacedaemonians to enslave you, now requesting you to allow those who saved you to perish.


6.5.46
3046
τῶν μὲν οὖν ὑμετέρων προγόνων καλὸν λέγεται , ὅτε τοὺς Ἀργείων τελευτήσαντας ἐπὶ τῇ Καδμείᾳ οὐκ εἴασαν ἀτάφους γενέσθαι ·
It is truly a noble deed that is told of your ancestors, when they did not suffer those Argives who died at the Cadmea to go unburied;


6.5.46
3047
ὑμῖν δὲ πολὺ κάλλιον ἂν γένοιτο , εἰ τοὺς ἔτι ζῶντας Λακεδαιμονίων μήτε ὑβρισθῆναι μήτε ἀπολέσθαι ἐάσαιτε .
but you would achieve a far nobler deed if you did not suffer those Lacedaemonians who still live either to incur insult or to perish.


6.5.47
3048
καλοῦ γε μὴν κ- ἐκείνου ὄντος , ὅτε σχόντες τὴν Εὐρυσθέως ὕβριν διεσώσατε τοὺς Ἡρακλέους παῖδας , πῶς οὐ καὶ ἐκείνου τόδε κάλλιον , εἰ μὴ μόνον τοὺς ἀρχηγέτας , ἀλλὰ καὶ ὅλην τὴν πόλιν περισώσαιτε ;
And while that other deed was also noble, when you checked the insolence of Eurystheus and preserved the sons of Heracles, would it not surely be an even nobler one if you saved from perishing, not merely the founders, but the whole state as well?


6.5.47
3049
πάντων δὲ κάλλιστον , εἰ ψήφῳ ἀκινδύνῳ σωσάντων ὑμᾶς τότε τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων , νῦν ὑμεῖς σὺν ὅπλοις τε καὶ διὰ κινδύνων ἐπικουρήσετε αὐτοῖς .
And noblest of all deeds if, after the Lacedaemonians saved you then by a vote, void of danger, you shall aid them now with arms and at the risk of your lives.


6.5.48
3050
ὁπότε δὲ καὶ ἡμεῖς ἀγαλλόμεθα οἱ συναγορεύοντες βοηθῆσαι ἀνδράσιν ἀγαθοῖς , ἦ που ὑμῖν γε τοῖς ἔργῳ δυναμένοις βοηθῆσαι γενναῖα ἂν ταῦτα φανείη , εἰ πολλάκις καὶ φίλοι καὶ πολέμιοι γενόμενοι Λακεδαιμονίοις μὴ ὧν ἐβλάβητε μᾶλλον ἢ ὧν εὖ ἐπάθετε μνησθείητε καὶ χάριν ἀποδοίητε αὐτοῖς μὴ ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν αὐτῶν μόνον , ἀλλὰ καὶ ὑπὲρ πάσης τῆς Ἑλλάδος , ὅτι ἄνδρες ἀγαθοὶ ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς ἐγένοντο .
Again, when even we, who by word urge you to aid brave men, are proud of doing so, it would manifestly be generous of you, who are able to aid by act, if, after being many times both friends and enemies of the Lacedaemonians, you should recall, not the harm you have suffered at their hands, but rather the favours which you have, received, and should render them requital, not in behalf of yourselves alone, but also in behalf of all Greece, because in her behalf they proved themselves brave men.


6.5.49
3051
μετὰ ταῦτα ἐβουλεύοντο οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , καὶ τῶν μὲν ἀντιλεγόντων οὐκ ἠνείχοντο ἀκούοντες , ἐψηφίσαντο δὲ βοηθεῖν πανδημεί , καὶ Ἰφικράτην στρατηγὸν εἵλοντο .
After this the Athenians deliberated, and they would not endure to listen to those who spoke on the other side, but voted to go to the aid of the Lacedaemonians in full force, and chose Iphicrates as general.


6.5.49
3052
ἐπεὶ δὲ τὰ ἱερὰ ἐγένετο καὶ παρήγγειλεν ἐν Ἀκαδημείᾳ δειπνοποιεῖσθαι , πολλοὺς ἔφασαν προτέρους αὐτοῦ Ἰφικράτους ἐξελθεῖν .
And when his sacrifices had proved favourable and he had issued orders to his men to dine in the Academy, many, it is said, went thither ahead of Iphicrates himself.


6.5.49
3053
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἡγεῖτο μὲν ὁ Ἰφικράτης , οἱ δ’ ἠκολούθουν , νομίζοντες ἐπὶ καλόν τι ἔργον ἡγήσεσθαι .
After this Iphicrates led the way and they followed, believing that he would lead them to some noble achievement.


6.5.49
3054
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφικόμενος εἰς Κόρινθον διέτριβέ τινας ἡμέρας , εὐθὺς μὲν ἐπὶ ταύτῃ τῇ διατριβῇ πρῶτον ἔψεγον αὐτόν ·
And when, after arriving in Corinth, he delayed there for some days, they at once began to censure him, for the first time, for this delay;


6.5.49
3055
ὡς δ’ ἐξήγαγέ ποτε , προθύμως μὲν ἠκολούθουν ὅποι ἡγοῖτο , προθύμως δ’ , εἰ πρὸς τεῖχος προσάγοι , προσέβαλλον .
then when he at length marched them forth, they eagerly followed wherever he led the way, and eagerly attacked any stronghold against which he brought them.


6.5.50
3056
τῶν δ’ ἐν τῇ Λακεδαίμονι πολεμίων Ἀρκάδες μὲν καὶ Ἀργεῖοι καὶ Ἠλεῖοι πολλοὶ ἀπεληλύθεσαν , ἅτε ὅμοροι οἰκοῦντες , οἱ μὲν ἄγοντες οἱ δὲ φέροντες ὅ τι ἡρπάκεσαν .
As for the enemy in Lacedaemon, many Arcadians, Argives, and Eleans had already departed, inasmuch as they lived just across the border, some of them leading and others carrying what they had taken as plunder.


6.5.50
3057
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι τὰ μὲν καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἀπιέναι ἐβούλοντο ἐκ τῆς χώρας , ὅτι ἑώρων ἐλάττονα τὴν στρατιὰν καθ’ ἡμέραν γιγνομένην , τὰ δέ , ὅτι σπανιώτερα τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἦν ·
On the other hand, the Thebans and the rest were desirous of departing from the country, partly for the very reason that they saw their army growing daily smaller,


6.5.50
3058
τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἀνήλωτο , τὰ δὲ διήρπαστο , τὰ δὲ ἐξεκέχυτο , τὰ δὲ κατεκέκαυτο ·
and partly because provisions were scantier, the supply having been in part used up or stolen away, in part wasted or burned up;


6.5.50
3059
πρὸς δ’ ἔτι καὶ χειμὼν ἦν , ὥστ’ ἤδη πάντες ἀπιέναι ἐβούλοντο .
besides, it was winter, so that by this time all alike wanted to withdraw.


6.5.51
3060
ὡς δ’ ἐκεῖνοι ἀπεχώρουν ἐκ τῆς Λακεδαίμονος , οὕτω δὴ καὶ ὁ Ἰφικράτης τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ἀπῆγεν ἐκ τῆς Ἀρκαδίας εἰς Κόρινθον .
When, accordingly, they proceeded to retire from Lacedaemon, then, of course, Iphicrates likewise proceeded to lead back the Athenians from Arcadia to Corinth.


6.5.51
3061
εἰ μὲν οὖν ἄλλο τι καλῶς ἐστρατήγησεν , οὐ ψέγω ·
Now I have no fault to find with any good generalship he may have shown on any other occasion;


6.5.51
3062
ἐκεῖνα μέντοι ἃ ἐν τῷ χρόνῳ ἐκείνῳ ἔπραξε , πάντα εὑρίσκω τὰ μὲν μάτην , τὰ δὲ καὶ ἀσυμφόρως πεπραγμένα αὐτῷ .
but as regards all his actions at that time, I find them to have been either futile or inexpedient.


6.5.51
3063
ἐπιχειρήσας μὲν γὰρ φυλάττειν ἐπὶ τῷ Ὀνείῳ , ὅπως μὴ δύναιντο οἱ Βοιωτοὶ ἀπελθεῖν οἴκαδε , παρέλιπεν ἀφύλακτον τὴν καλλίστην παρὰ Κεγχρειὰς πάροδον .
For while he undertook to keep guard at Oneum so that the Thebans should not be able to get back home, he left unguarded the best pass, which led past Cenchreae.


6.5.52
3064
μαθεῖν δὲ βουλόμενος εἰ παρεληλυθότες εἶεν οἱ Θηβαῖοι τὸ Ὄνειον ἔπεμψε σκοποὺς τούς τε Ἀθηναίων ἱππέας καὶ τοὺς Κορινθίων ἅπαντας .
And when he wanted to find out whether the Thebans had passed Oneum, he sent as scouts all the horsemen both of the Athenians and of the Corinthians.


6.5.52
3065
καίτοι ἰδεῖν μὲν οὐδὲν ἧττον ὀλίγοι τῶν πολλῶν ἱκανοί ·
And yet a few men would have been quite as efficient for seeing as the many;


6.5.52
3066
εἰ δὲ δέοι ἀποχωρεῖν , πολὺ ῥᾷον τοῖς ὀλίγοις ἢ τοῖς πολλοῖς καὶ ὁδοῦ εὐπόρου τυχεῖν καὶ καθ’ ἡσυχίαν ἀποχωρῆσαι .
while if it were necessary to retire, it would be much easier for the few than for the many both to find an easy route and to retire at their leisure.


6.5.52
3067
τὸ δὲ πολλούς τε προσάγειν καὶ ἥττονας τῶν ἐναντίων πῶς οὐ πολλὴ ἀφροσύνη ;
But to employ a force that was numerous and still inferior to the enemy — was this not surely the height of folly?


6.5.52
3068
καὶ γὰρ δὴ ἅτε ἐπὶ πολὺ παραταξάμενοι χωρίον οἱ ἱππεῖς διὰ τὸ πολλοὶ εἶναι , ἐπεὶ ἔδει ἀποχωρεῖν , πολλῶν καὶ χαλεπῶν χωρίων ἐπελάβοντο ·
For inasmuch as the horsemen extended their line over a large space because they were a large force, when it was necessary to retire they encountered a large number of difficult places,


6.5.52
3069
ὥστε οὐκ ἐλάττους ἀπώλοντο εἴκοσιν ἱππέων .
so that no fewer than twenty horsemen lost their lives.


6.5.52
3070
καὶ τότε μὲν οἱ Θηβαῖοι ὅπως ἐβούλοντο ἀπῆλθον .
At that time, then, the Thebans returned home as they pleased.




7.1.1
3071
τῷ δ’ ὑστέρῳ ἔτει Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ τῶν συμμάχων πρέσβεις ἦλθον αὐτοκράτορες Ἀθήναζε , βουλευσόμενοι καθ’ ὅ τι ἡ συμμαχία Λακεδαιμονίοις καὶ Ἀθηναίοις ἔσοιτο .
In the following year ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians and their allies, with full powers, came to Athens to take counsel as to what should be the terms of the alliance between the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians.


7.1.1
3072
λεγόντων δὲ πολλῶν μὲν ξένων , πολλῶν δὲ Ἀθηναίων , ὡς δέοι ἐπὶ τοῖς ἴσοις καὶ ὁμοίοις τὴν συμμαχίαν εἶναι , Προκλῆς Φλειάσιος εἶπε τόνδε τὸν λόγον .
And while many foreigners and many Athenians said that the alliance ought to be on terms of full equality, Procles the Phliasian made the following speech:


7.1.2
3073
ἐπείπερ , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , ἀγαθὸν ὑμῖν ἔδοξεν εἶναι Λακεδαιμονίους φίλους ποιεῖσθαι , δοκεῖ μοι χρῆναι τοῦτο σκοπεῖν , ὅπως ἡ φιλία ὅτι πλεῖστον χρόνον συμμενεῖ .
Men of Athens, since you have decided that it is a good thing to make the Lacedaemonians your friends, it seems to me that you ought to consider this point, how the friendship is to endure for the longest possible time.


7.1.2
3074
ἐὰν οὖν ᾗ ἑκατέροις μάλιστα συνοίσει , ταύτῃ καὶ τὰς συνθήκας ποιησώμεθα , οὕτω κατά γε τὸ εἰκὸς μάλιστα συμμένοιμεν ἄν .
Now it is only by making the compact on such terms as will be most advantageous to each party that we can expect it to be, in all probability, most enduring.


7.1.2
3075
τὰ μὲν οὖν ἄλλα σχεδόν τι συνωμολόγηται , περὶ δὲ τῆς ἡγεμονίας νῦν ἡ σκέψις .
The other points, then, have been pretty well agreed upon, but the question of the leadership is at present under discussion.


7.1.2
3076
τῇ μὲν οὖν βουλῇ προβεβούλευται ὑμετέραν μὲν εἶναι τὴν κατὰ θάλατταν , Λακεδαιμονίων δὲ τὴν κατὰ γῆν ·
Now it has been proposed by your Senate that the leadership by sea shall belong to you, and the leadership by land to the Lacedaemonians.


7.1.2
3077
ἐμοὶ δὲ καὶ αὐτῷ δοκεῖ ταῦτα οὐκ ἀνθρωπίνῃ μᾶλλον ἢ θείᾳ φύσει τε καὶ τύχῃ διωρίσθαι .
And I, too, think that this distinction is based, not so much upon human judgment as upon divine arrangement and ordering.


7.1.3
3078
πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ τόπον ἔχετε κάλλιστα πεφυκότα πρὸς τοῦτο ·
In the first place, you have a position most excellently adapted by nature for supremacy by sea.


7.1.3
3079
πλεῖσται γὰρ πόλεις τῶν δεομένων τῆς θαλάττης περὶ τὴν ὑμετέραν πόλιν οἰκοῦσι , καὶ αὗται πᾶσαι ἀσθενέστεραι τῆς ὑμετέρας .
For most of the states which are dependent upon the sea are situated round about your state, and they are all weaker than yours.


7.1.3
3080
πρὸς τούτοις δὲ λιμένας ἔχετε , ὧν ἄνευ οὐχ οἷόν τε ναυτικῇ δυνάμει χρῆσθαι .
In addition to this, you have harbours, without which it is not possible to enjoy naval power.


7.1.3
3081
ἔτι δὲ τριήρεις κέκτησθε πολλάς , καὶ πάτριον ὑμῖν ἐστι ναυτικὸν ἐπικτᾶσθαι .
Furthermore, you already possess many triremes, and it is a traditional policy of yours to keep adding ships.


7.1.4
3082
ἀλλὰ μὴν τάς γε τέχνας τὰς περὶ ταῦτα πάσας οἰκείας ἔχετε .
You likewise possess as peculiarly your own all the arts and crafts which have to do with ships.


7.1.4
3083
καὶ μὴν ἐμπειρίᾳ γε πολὺ προέχετε τῶν ἄλλων περὶ τὰ ναυτικά ·
Again, you are far superior to other men in experience of nautical affairs,


7.1.4
3084
ὁ γὰρ βίος τοῖς πλείστοις ὑμῶν ἀπὸ τῆς θαλάττης ·
for most of you get your livelihood from the sea;


7.1.4
3085
ὥστε τῶν ἰδίων ἐπιμελόμενοι ἅμα καὶ τῶν κατὰ θάλατταν ἀγώνων ἔμπειροι γίγνεσθε .
hence, while attending to your private concerns, you are also at the same time gaining experience for encounters by sea.


7.1.4
3086
ἔτι δὲ καὶ τόδε ·
Here is another point also:


7.1.4
3087
οὐδαμόθεν ἂν τριήρεις πλείους ἁθρόαι ἐκπλεύσειαν ἢ παρ’ ὑμῶν .
there is no port from which more triremes can sail forth at one time than from your city.


7.1.4
3088
ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο οὐκ ἐλάχιστον πρὸς ἡγεμονίαν ·
And this is a matter of no slight importance with reference to leadership,


7.1.4
3089
πρὸς γὰρ τὸ πρῶτον ἰσχυρὸν γενόμενον ἥδιστα πάντες συλλέγονται .
for all men love best to join forces with the power which is first to show itself strong.


7.1.5
3090
ἔτι δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν θεῶν δέδοται ὑμῖν εὐτυχεῖν ἐν τούτῳ ·
Furthermore, it has also been granted you by the gods to be successful in this pursuit.


7.1.5
3091
πλείστους γὰρ καὶ μεγίστους ἀγῶνας ἠγωνισμένοι κατὰ θάλατταν ἐλάχιστα μὲν ἀποτετυχήκατε , πλεῖστα δὲ κατωρθώκατε .
For while you have engaged in very many and very great combats by sea, you have met with an exceedingly small number of misfortunes and have achieved an exceedingly large number of successes.


7.1.5
3092
εἰκὸς οὖν καὶ τοὺς συμμάχους μεθ’ ὑμῶν ἂν ἥδιστα τούτου τοῦ κινδύνου μετέχειν .
Therefore it is likely that the allies would like best to share in such perils if they were under your leadership.


7.1.6
3093
ὡς δὲ δὴ καὶ ἀναγκαία καὶ προσήκουσα ὑμῖν αὕτη ἡ ἐπιμέλεια ἐκ τῶνδε ἐνθυμήθητε .
And that this devotion to the sea is indeed both necessary and proper for you, you must conclude from the following fact:


7.1.6
3094
Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὑμῖν ἐπολέμουν ποτὲ πολλὰ ἔτη , καὶ κρατοῦντες τῆς χώρας οὐδὲν προύκοπτον εἰς τὸ ἀπολέσαι ὑμᾶς .
the Lacedaemonians once made war upon you for many years, and though masters of your land could make no progress toward destroying you.


7.1.6
3095
ἐπεὶ δ’ ὁ θεὸς ἔδωκέ ποτε αὐτοῖς κατὰ θάλατταν ἐπικρατῆσαι , εὐθὺς ὑπ’ ἐκείνοις παντελῶς ἐγένεσθε .
But when at length the deity granted them to win the mastery by sea, straightway you fell completely under their power.


7.1.6
3096
οὐκοῦν εὔδηλον ἐν τούτοις ἐστὶν ὅτι ἐκ τῆς θαλάττης ἅπασα ὑμῖν ἤρτηται σωτηρία .
In these circumstances, therefore, it is plain to be seen that all your safety depends upon the sea.


7.1.7
3097
οὕτως οὖν πεφυκότων πῶς ἂν ἔχοι καλῶς ὑμῖν Λακεδαιμονίοις ἐπιτρέψαι κατὰ θάλατταν ἡγεῖσθαι , οἳ πρῶτον μὲν καὶ αὐτοὶ ὁμολογοῦσιν ἀπειρότεροι ὑμῶν τούτου τοῦ ἔργου εἶναι , ἔπειτα δ’ οὐ περὶ τῶν ἴσων ὁ κίνδυνός ἐστιν ἐν τοῖς κατὰ θάλατταν ἀγῶσιν , ἀλλ’ ἐκείνοις μὲν περὶ τῶν ἐν ταῖς τριήρεσι μόνον ἀνθρώπων , ὑμῖν δὲ καὶ περὶ παίδων καὶ γυναικῶν καὶ ὅλης τῆς πόλεως ;
Such, then, being the situation ordained by nature, how could you be content to allow the Lacedaemonians to be leaders by sea, when, in the first place, they themselves admit that they are less experienced than you are in this work, and when, in the second place, they do not risk as much as you do in contests by sea, but merely the people on board the triremes, whereas you risk wives and children and the entire state.


7.1.8
3098
τὰ μὲν δὴ ὑμέτερα οὕτως ἔχει ·
This is the situation on your side;


7.1.8
3099
τὰ δὲ δὴ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἐπισκέψασθε .
consider now that of the Lacedaemonians.


7.1.8
3100
πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ οἰκοῦσιν ἐν μεσογαίᾳ ·
Firstly, they dwell in the interior;


7.1.8
3101
ὥστε τῆς γῆς κρατοῦντες καὶ εἰ θαλάττης εἴργοιντο , δύναιντ’ ἂν καλῶς διαζῆν .
hence, so long as they are masters of the land, they can lead a comfortable existence even if they are shut off from the sea.


7.1.8
3102
ἐγνωκότες οὖν καὶ οὗτοι ταῦτα εὐθὺς ἐκ παίδων πρὸς τὸν κατὰ γῆν πόλεμον τὴν ἄσκησιν ποιοῦνται .
Therefore, realizing this fact themselves, they carry on their training from their very boyhood with a view to war by land.


7.1.8
3103
καὶ τὸ πλείστου δὲ ἄξιον , τὸ πείθεσθαι τοῖς ἄρχουσιν , οὗτοι μὲν κράτιστοι κατὰ γῆν , ὑμεῖς δὲ κατὰ θάλατταν .
Furthermore, in that which is of the greatest importance, obedience to their commanders, they are best by land, as you are by sea.


7.1.9
3104
ἔπειτα δὲ ὥσπερ ὑμεῖς ναυτικῷ , οὕτως αὖ ἐκεῖνοι κατὰ γῆν πλεῖστοι καὶ τάχιστ’ ἂν ἐξέλθοιεν ·
Again, they on their side can set forth by land, as you can with a fleet, in greatest numbers and with greatest speed;


7.1.9
3105
ὥστε πρὸς τούτους αὖ εἰκὸς τοὺς συμμάχους εὐθαρσεστάτους προσιέναι .
therefore it is to them in turn that the armies of the allies would be likely to attach themselves with greatest confidence.


7.1.9
3106
ἔτι δὲ καὶ ὁ θεὸς αὐτοῖς δέδωκεν , ὥσπερ ὑμῖν κατὰ θάλατταν εὐτυχεῖν , οὕτως ἐκείνοις κατὰ γῆν ·
Besides, the deity has granted, as to you success by sea, so to them success by land;


7.1.9
3107
πλείστους γὰρ αὖ οὗτοι ἀγῶνας ἐν τῇ γῇ ἠγωνισμένοι ἐλάχιστα μὲν ἐσφαλμένοι εἰσί , πλεῖστα δὲ κατωρθωκότες .
for while they on their side have engaged in very many combats on the land, they have incurred an exceedingly small number of defeats, and have won an exceedingly large number of victories.


7.1.10
3108
ὡς δὲ καὶ ἀναγκαία οὐδὲν ἧττον τούτοις ἡ κατὰ γῆν ἐπιμέλεια ἢ ὑμῖν ἡ κατὰ θάλατταν ἐκ τῶν ἔργων ἔξεστι γιγνώσκειν .
And that this devotion to the land is no less necessary for them than devotion to the sea for you, one may judge from the results.


7.1.10
3109
ὑμεῖς γὰρ τούτοις πολλὰ ἔτη πολεμοῦντες καὶ πολλάκις καταναυμαχοῦντες οὐδὲν προύργου ἐποιεῖτε πρὸς τὸ τούτους καταπολεμῆσαι .
For you made war upon them for many years, and though you defeated them many times by sea, could make no progress toward subduing them.


7.1.10
3110
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἅπαξ ἡττήθησαν ἐν τῇ γῇ , εὐθὺς καὶ περὶ παίδων καὶ περὶ γυναικῶν καὶ περὶ ὅλης τῆς πόλεως κίνδυνος αὐτοῖς ἐγένετο .
But so soon as they incurred one defeat on the land, immediately their wives and children and their entire state were at stake.


7.1.11
3111
πῶς οὖν οὐ τούτοις αὖ δεινὸν ἄλλοις μὲν ἐπιτρέπειν κατὰ γῆν ἡγεῖσθαι , αὐτοὺς δὲ ἄριστα τῶν κατὰ γῆν ἐπιμελεῖσθαι ;
Hence for them, on their side, it would surely be a dreadful thing to allow others to be leaders by land, when they themselves are best at the administration of affairs by land.


7.1.11
3112
ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν , ὥσπερ τῇ βουλῇ προβεβούλευται , ταῦτα εἴρηκά τε καὶ συμφορώτατα ἡγοῦμαι ἀμφοῖν εἶναι ·
As for myself, therefore, the course which has been proposed by your Senate is that which I have urged, and which I believe to be most advantageous to both parties;


7.1.11
3113
ὑμεῖς δὲ εὐτυχοῖτε τὰ κράτιστα πᾶσιν ἡμῖν βουλευσάμενοι .
and may you, for your part, be fortunate in reaching the conclusion that is best for us all.


7.1.12
3114
ὁ μὲν ταῦτ’ εἶπεν .
Thus he spoke,


7.1.12
3115
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοί τε καὶ οἱ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων παρόντες ἐπῄνεσαν ἀμφότεροι ἰσχυρῶς τὸν λόγον αὐτοῦ .
and both the Athenians and those Lacedaemonians who were present applauded his speech vigorously.


7.1.12
3116
Κηφισόδοτος δὲ παρελθών ·
But Cephisodotus came forward and said:


7.1.12
3117
ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , ἔφη , οὐκ αἰσθάνεσθε ἐξαπατώμενοι ;
Men of Athens, you do not observe that you are being deceived;


7.1.12
3118
ἀλλ’ ἐὰν ἀκούσητέ μου , ἐγὼ ὑμῖν αὐτίκα μάλα ἐπιδείξω .
but if you will listen to me, I will prove it to you very speedily.


7.1.12
3119
ἤδη γὰρ ἡγήσεσθε κατὰ θάλατταν ·
As the matter now stands, you are to be leaders by sea.


7.1.12
3120
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ ὑμῖν ἐὰν συμμαχῶσι , δῆλον ὅτι πέμψουσι τοὺς μὲν τριηράρχους Λακεδαιμονίους καὶ ἴσως τοὺς ἐπιβάτας , οἱ δὲ ναῦται δῆλον ὅτι ἔσονται ἢ Εἵλωτες ἢ μισθοφόροι .
And if the Lacedaemonians are your allies, it is clear that the captains, and perhaps the marines whom they send out, will be Lacedaemonians, but it is also clear that the sailors will be either Helots or mercenaries.


7.1.13
3121
οὐκοῦν ὑμεῖς μὲν τούτων ἡγήσεσθε .
You, therefore, will be leaders of these people.


7.1.13
3122
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὅταν παραγγείλωσιν ὑμῖν κατὰ γῆν στρατείαν , δῆλον ὅτι πέμψετε τοὺς ὁπλίτας καὶ τοὺς ἱππέας .
When, however, the Lacedaemonians give you the order for a campaign by land, it is clear that you will send your hoplites and your horsemen.


7.1.13
3123
οὐκοῦν οὕτως ἐκεῖνοι μὲν ὑμῶν αὐτῶν γίγνονται ἡγεμόνες , ὑμεῖς δὲ τῶν ἐκείνων δούλων καὶ ἐλαχίστου ἀξίων .
By this plan, therefore, they become leaders of your own selves, while you become leaders merely of their slaves and their men of least account.


7.1.13
3124
ἀπόκριναι δέ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Λακεδαιμόνιε Τιμόκρατες , οὐκ ἄρτι ἔλεγες ὡς ἐπὶ τοῖς ἴσοις καὶ ὁμοίοις ἥκοις τὴν συμμαχίαν ποιούμενος ;
Answer me, he said, Timocrates of Lacedaemon, did you not say a moment ago that you had come with intent to make the alliance on terms of full equality?


7.1.13
3125
εἶπον ταῦτα .
I did say that.


7.1.14
3126
ἔστιν οὖν , ἔφη ὁ Κηφισόδοτος , ἰσαίτερον ἢ ἐν μέρει μὲν ἑκατέρους ἡγεῖσθαι τοῦ ναυτικοῦ , ἐν μέρει δὲ τοῦ πεζοῦ , καὶ ὑμᾶς τε , εἴ τι ἀγαθόν ἐστιν ἐν τῇ κατὰ θάλατταν ἀρχῇ , τούτων μετέχειν , καὶ ἡμᾶς ἐν τῇ κατὰ γῆν ;
Then, said Cephisodotus, is there anything more equal than that each party in turn should be leader of the fleet, and each in turn leader of the army, and that you, if there is any advantage in the leadership by sea, should share therein, and we likewise in the matter of leadership by land?


7.1.14
3127
ἀκούσαντες ταῦτα οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι μετεπείσθησαν , καὶ ἐψηφίσαντο κατὰ πενθήμερον ἑκατέρους ἡγεῖσθαι .
Upon hearing this the Athenians were led to change their minds, and they voted that each party should hold the leadership in turn for periods of five days.


7.1.15
3128
στρατευομένων δ’ ἀμφοτέρων αὐτῶν καὶ τῶν συμμάχων εἰς Κόρινθον ἔδοξε κοινῇ φυλάττειν τὸ Ὄνειον .
Now when both peoples and their allies had proceeded to Corinth, it was determined that they should together guard Oneum.


7.1.15
3129
καὶ ἐπεὶ ἐπορεύοντο οἱ Θηβαῖοι καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι , παραταξάμενοι ἐφύλαττον ἄλλος ἄλλοθεν τοῦ Ὀνείου , Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ καὶ Πελληνεῖς κατὰ τὸ ἐπιμαχώτατον .
Accordingly, while the Thebans and their allies were on the march, they formed their lines and proceeded to keep guard at one point and another of Oneum, but the Lacedaemonians and the Pelleneans at the most assailable point.


7.1.15
3130
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι ἐπεὶ ἀπεῖχον τῶν φυλαττόντων τριάκοντα στάδια , κατεστρατοπεδεύσαντο ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ .
And the Thebans and their allies, when they were distant thirty stadia from the troops on guard, encamped in the plain.


7.1.15
3131
συντεκμηράμενοι δὲ ἡνίκ’ ἂν ᾤοντο ὁρμηθέντες καθανύσαι ἅμα κνέφᾳ , πρὸς τὴν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων φυλακὴν ἐπορεύοντο .
Then, after calculating the time at which they thought they should start in order to finish their journey at dawn, they marched upon the garrison of the Lacedaemonians.


7.1.16
3132
καὶ μέντοι οὐκ ἐψεύσθησαν τῆς ὥρας , ἀλλ’ ἐπιπίπτουσι τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις καὶ τοῖς Πελληνεῦσιν ἡνίκα αἱ μὲν νυκτεριναὶ φυλακαὶ ἤδη ἔληγον , ἐκ δὲ τῶν στιβάδων ἀνίσταντο ὅποι ἐδεῖτο ἕκαστος .
And in fact they did not prove mistaken in the hour, but fell upon the Lacedaemonians and the Pelleneans at the time when the night watches were just coming to an end, and the men were rising from their camp-beds and going wherever each one had to go.


7.1.16
3133
ἐνταῦθα οἱ Θηβαῖοι προσπεσόντες ἔπαιον παρεσκευασμένοι ἀπαρασκευάστους καὶ συντεταγμένοι ἀσυντάκτους .
Thereupon the Thebans made their attack and laid on their blows — men prepared attacking those unprepared, and men in good order against those in disorder.


7.1.17
3134
ὡς δὲ οἱ σωθέντες ἐκ τοῦ πράγματος ἀπέφυγον ἐπὶ τὸν ἐγγύτατα λόφον , ἐξὸν τῷ Λακεδαιμονίων πολεμάρχῳ λαβόντι ὁπόσους μὲν ἐβούλετο τῶν συμμάχων ὁπλίτας , ὁπόσους δὲ πελταστάς , κατέχειν τὸ χωρίον , καὶ γὰρ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἐξῆν ἀσφαλῶς ἐκ Κεγχρειῶν κομίζεσθαι , οὐκ ἐποίησε ταῦτα , ἀλλὰ μάλα ἀπορούντων τῶν Θηβαίων πῶς χρὴ ἐκ τοῦ πρὸς Σικυῶνα βλέποντος καταβῆναι ἢ πάλιν ἀπελθεῖν , σπονδὰς ποιησάμενος , ὡς τοῖς πλείστοις ἐδόκει , πρὸς Θηβαίων μᾶλλον ἢ πρὸς ἑαυτῶν , οὕτως ἀπῆλθε καὶ τοὺς μεθ’ αὑτοῦ ἀπήγαγεν .
And when such as came out of the affair with their lives had made their escape to the nearest hill, although the polemarch of the Lacedaemonians might have got as many hoplites and as many peltasts as he pleased from the forces of the allies and might have held his position  —  for supplies might have been brought in safety from Cenchreae  —  he did not do this, but while the Thebans were in great perplexity as to how they were to descend on the side looking toward Sicyon, failing which they would have to go back again, he concluded a truce which, as most people thought, was more to the advantage of the Thebans than to that of his own side, and under these circumstances departed and led away the troops under his command.


7.1.18
3135
οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ἀσφαλῶς καταβάντες καὶ συμμείξαντες τοῖς ἑαυτῶν συμμάχοις , Ἀρκάσι τε καὶ Ἀργείοις καὶ Ἠλείοις , εὐθὺς μὲν προσέβαλον πρὸς Σικυῶνα καὶ Πελλήνην ·
The Thebans, then, after descending in safety and effecting a junction with their allies, the Arcadians, Argives, and Eleans, immediately attacked Sicyon and Pellene;


7.1.18
3136
στρατευσάμενοι δὲ εἰς Ἐπίδαυρον ἐδῄωσαν αὐτῶν πᾶσαν τὴν χώραν .
they also made an expedition to Epidaurus, and laid waste the whole territory of the Epidaurians.


7.1.18
3137
ἀναχωροῦντες δὲ ἐκεῖθεν μάλα πάντων ὑπεροπτικῶς τῶν ἐναντίων , ὡς ἐγένοντο ἐγγὺς τοῦ Κορινθίων ἄστεως , δρόμῳ ἐφέροντο πρὸς τὰς πύλας τὰς ἐπὶ Φλειοῦντα ἰόντι , ὡς εἰ ἀνεῳγμέναι τύχοιεν , εἰσπεσούμενοι .
Returning from there in a manner which showed great disdain for all their adversaries, as soon as they came near the city of the Corinthians they rushed at the double toward the gates through which one passes in going to Phlius, with the intention of bursting in if they chanced to be open.


7.1.19
3138
ἐκβοηθήσαντες δέ τινες ψιλοὶ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἀπαντῶσι τῶν Θηβαίων τοῖς ἐπιλέκτοις οὐδὲ τέτταρα πλέθρα ἀπέχουσι τοῦ τείχους ·
But some light troops sallied forth from the city against them and met the picked men of the Thebans at a distance of not so much as four plethra from the city walls;


7.1.19
3139
καὶ ἀναβάντες ἐπὶ τὰ μνήματα καὶ τὰ ὑπερέχοντα χωρία , βάλλοντες καὶ ἀκοντίζοντες ἀποκτείνουσι τῶν πρώτων καὶ μάλα συχνούς , καὶ τρεψάμενοι ἐδίωκον ὡς τρία ἢ τέτταρα στάδια .
then they climbed up on burial monuments and elevated spots, killed a very considerable number of the troops in the front ranks by hurling javelins and other missiles, and after putting the rest to flight, pursued them about three or four stadia.


7.1.19
3140
τούτου δὲ γενομένου οἱ Κορίνθιοι τοὺς νεκροὺς πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος ἑλκύσαντες καὶ ὑποσπόνδους ἀποδόντες τροπαῖον ἔστησαν .
When this had taken place the Corinthians dragged the bodies to the wall, and after they had given them back under a truce, set up a trophy.


7.1.19
3141
καὶ ταύτῃ μὲν ἀνεψύχθησαν οἱ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων σύμμαχοι .
In this way the allies of the Lacedaemonians were renewed in their spirits.


7.1.20
3142
ἅμα τε δὴ πεπραγμένων τούτων καταπλεῖ Λακεδαιμονίοις ἡ παρὰ Διονυσίου βοήθεια , τριήρεις πλέον ἢ εἴκοσιν ·
Just after these events had happened, the expedition sent by Dionysius to aid the Lacedaemonians sailed in, numbering more than twenty triremes.


7.1.20
3143
ἦγον δὲ Κελτούς τε καὶ Ἴβηρας καὶ ἱππέας ὡς πεντήκοντα .
And they brought Celts, Iberians, and about fifty horsemen.


7.1.20
3144
τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ οἱ Θηβαῖοί τε καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι αὐτῶν σύμμαχοι διαταξάμενοι καὶ ἐμπλήσαντες τὸ πεδίον μέχρι τῆς θαλάττης καὶ μέχρι τῶν ἐχομένων τῆς πόλεως γηλόφων ἔφθειρον εἴ τι χρήσιμον ἦν ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ .
On the following day the Thebans and the rest, their allies, after forming themselves in detached bodies and filling the plain as far as the sea and as far as the hills adjoining the city, destroyed whatever of value there was in the plain.


7.1.20
3145
καὶ οἱ μὲν τῶν Ἀθηναίων καὶ οἱ τῶν Κορινθίων ἱππεῖς οὐ μάλα ἐπλησίαζον τῷ στρατεύματι , ὁρῶντες ἰσχυρὰ καὶ πολλὰ τ- ἀντίπαλα ·
And the horsemen of the Athenians and of the Corinthians did not approach very near their army, seeing that the enemy were strong and numerous.


7.1.21
3146
οἱ δὲ παρὰ τοῦ Διονυσίου ἱππεῖς , ὅσοιπερ ἦσαν , οὗτοι διεσκεδασμένοι ἄλλος ἄλλῃ παραθέοντες ἠκόντιζόν τε προσελαύνοντες , καὶ ἐπεὶ ὥρμων ἐπ’ αὐτούς , ἀνεχώρουν , καὶ πάλιν ἀναστρέφοντες ἠκόντιζον .
But the horsemen sent by Dionysius, few though they were, scattering themselves here and there, would ride along the enemy’s line, charge upon them and throw javelins at them, and when the enemy began to move forth against them, would retreat, and then turn round and throw their javelins again.


7.1.21
3147
καὶ ταῦτα ἅμα ποιοῦντες κατέβαινον ἀπὸ τῶν ἵππων καὶ ἀνεπαύοντο .
And while pursuing these tactics they would dismount from their horses and rest.


7.1.21
3148
εἰ δὲ καταβεβηκόσιν ἐπελαύνοιέν τινες , εὐπετῶς ἀναπηδῶντες ἀνεχώρουν .
But if anyone charged upon them while they were dismounted, they would leap easily upon their horses and retreat.


7.1.21
3149
εἰ δ’ αὖ τινες διώξειαν αὐτοὺς πολὺ ἀπὸ τοῦ στρατεύματος , τούτους , ὁπότε ἀποχωροῖεν , ἐπικείμενοι καὶ ἀκοντίζοντες δεινὰ εἰργάζοντο , καὶ πᾶν τὸ στράτευμα ἠνάγκαζον ἑαυτῶν ἕνεκα καὶ προϊέναι καὶ ἀναχωρεῖν .
On the other hand, if any pursued them far from the Theban army, they would press upon these men when they were retiring, and by throwing javelins work havoc with them, and thus they compelled the entire army, according to their own will, either to advance or to fall back.


7.1.22
3150
μετὰ ταῦτα μέντοι οἱ Θηβαῖοι μείναντες οὐ πολλὰς ἡμέρας ἀπῆλθον οἴκαδε , καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι δὲ ἕκαστος οἴκαδε .
After this, however, the Thebans remained but a few days and then returned home, and the others likewise to their several homes.


7.1.22
3151
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἐμβάλλουσιν οἱ παρὰ Διονυσίου εἰς Σικυῶνα , καὶ μάχῃ μὲν νικῶσι τοὺς Σικυωνίους ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ , καὶ ἀπέκτειναν περὶ ἑβδομήκοντα ·
Then the troops sent by Dionysius invaded the territory of Sicyon, and they not only defeated the Sicyonians in battle on the plain and killed about seventy of them,


7.1.22
3152
δέρας δὲ τεῖχος κατὰ κράτος αἱροῦσι .
but captured by storm the stronghold of Deras.


7.1.22
3153
καὶ ἡ μὲν παρὰ Διονυσίου πρώτη βοήθεια ταῦτα πράξασα ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Συρακούσας .
After these exploits the first supporting force sent out by Dionysius sailed back to Syracuse.


7.1.22
3154
Θηβαῖοι δὲ καὶ πάντες οἱ ἀποστάντες ἀπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων μέχρι μὲν τούτου τοῦ χρόνου ὁμοθυμαδὸν καὶ ἔπραττον καὶ ἐστρατεύοντο ἡγουμένων Θηβαίων .
Up to this time the Thebans and all who had revolted from the Lacedaemonians had been acting and carrying on their campaigns in full accord, under the leadership of the Thebans.


7.1.23
3155
ἐγγενόμενος δέ τις Λυκομήδης Μαντινεύς , γένει τε οὐδενὸς ἐνδεὴς χρήμασί τε προήκων καὶ ἄλλως φιλότιμος , οὗτος ἐνέπλησε φρονήματος τοὺς Ἀρκάδας , λέγων ὡς μόνοις μὲν αὐτοῖς πατρὶς Πελοπόννησος εἴη , μόνοι γὰρ αὐτόχθονες ἐν αὐτῇ οἰκοῖεν , πλεῖστον δὲ τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν φύλων τὸ Ἀρκαδικὸν εἴη καὶ σώματα ἐγκρατέστατα ἔχοι .
Now, however, there appeared a certain Lycomedes of Mantinea, a man inferior to none in birth, foremost in wealth, and ambitious besides, and filled the Arcadians with self-confidence, saying that it was to them alone that Peloponnesus was a fatherland, since they were the only autochthonous stock that dwelt therein, and that the Arcadian people was the most numerous of all the Greek peoples and had the strongest bodies.


7.1.23
3156
καὶ ἀλκιμωτάτους δὲ αὐτοὺς ἀπεδείκνυε , τεκμήρια παρεχόμενος ὡς ἐπικούρων ὁπότε δεηθεῖέν τινες , οὐδένας ᾑροῦντο ἀντ’ Ἀρκάδων .
He also declared that they were the bravest, offering as evidence the fact that whenever men needed mercenaries, there were none whom they chose in preference to Arcadians.


7.1.23
3157
ἔτι δὲ οὔτε Λακεδαιμονίους πώποτε ἄνευ σφῶν ἐμβαλεῖν εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας οὔτε νῦν Θηβαίους ἐλθεῖν ἄνευ Ἀρκάδων εἰς Λακεδαίμονα .
Furthermore, the Lacedaemonians had never, he said, invaded the territory of Athens without their help, nor had the Thebans at present come to Lacedaemon without the help of the Arcadians.


7.1.24
3158
ἐὰν οὖν σωφρονῆτε , τοῦ ἀκολουθεῖν ὅποι ἄν τις παρακαλῇ φείσεσθε ·
If you are wise, therefore, you will leave off following wherever anyone summons you;


7.1.24
3159
ὡς πρότερόν τε Λακεδαιμονίοις ἀκολουθοῦντες ἐκείνους ηὐξήσατε , νῦν δὲ ἂν Θηβαίοις εἰκῇ ἀκολουθῆτε καὶ μὴ κατὰ μέρος ἡγεῖσθαι ἀξιῶτε , ἴσως τάχα τούτους ἄλλους Λακεδαιμονίους εὑρήσετε .
for in former days, by following the Lacedaemonians, you made them great, and now, if you follow the Thebans heedlessly and do not make the claim to enjoy the leadership by turns with them, it may be that you will soon find in them another set of Lacedaemonians.


7.1.24
3160
οἱ μὲν δὴ Ἀρκάδες ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες ἀνεφυσῶντό τε καὶ ὑπερεφίλουν τὸν Λυκομήδην καὶ μόνον ἄνδρα ἡγοῦντο ·
Upon hearing these words the Arcadians were puffed up, and loved Lycomedes beyond measure, and thought that he alone was a man;


7.1.24
3161
ὥστε ἄρχοντας ἔταττον οὕστινας ἐκεῖνος κελεύοι .
so that they appointed as their leaders whomsoever he directed them to appoint.


7.1.24
3162
καὶ ἐκ τῶν συμβαινόντων δὲ ἔργων ἐμεγαλύνοντο οἱ Ἀρκάδες ·
But the Arcadians were exalted as a result also of the actual achievements which fell to their lot;


7.1.25
3163
ἐμβαλόντων μὲν γὰρ εἰς Ἐπίδαυρον τῶν Ἀργείων , καὶ ἀποκλεισθέντων τῆς ἐξόδου ὑπό τε τῶν μετὰ Χαβρίου ξένων καὶ Ἀθηναίων καὶ Κορινθίων , βοηθήσαντες μάλα πολιορκουμένους ἐξελύσαντο τοὺς Ἀργείους , οὐ μόνον τοῖς ἀνδράσιν , ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς χωρίοις πολεμίοις χρώμενοι ·
for when the Argives had invaded the country of Epidaurus and their way out had been barred by the mercenaries under Chabrias, and by the Athenians, and the Corinthians, they went to the rescue and released the Argives from an absolute blockade, although they had not only the enemy’s troops but also the character of the country to contend with.


7.1.25
3164
στρατευσάμενοι δὲ καὶ εἰς Ἀσίνην τῆς Λακαίνης ἐνίκησάν τε τὴν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων φρουρὰν καὶ τὸν Γεράνορα τὸν Σπαρτιάτην πολέμαρχον γεγενημένον ἀπέκτειναν καὶ τὸ προάστιον τῶν Ἀσιναίων ἐπόρθησαν .
They also made an expedition to Asine in Laconia, defeated the garrison of the Lacedaemonians, slew Geranor, the Spartiate who had become polemarch, and plundered the outer city of the Asinaeans.


7.1.25
3165
ὅπου δὲ βουληθεῖεν ἐξελθεῖν , οὐ νύξ , οὐ χειμών , οὐ μῆκος ὁδοῦ , οὐκ ὄρη δύσβατα ἀπεκώλυεν αὐτούς ·
And whenever they wished wished to take the field, neither night nor storm nor length of journey nor difficult mountains would prevent them;


7.1.25
3166
ὥστε ἔν γε ἐκείνῳ τῷ χρόνῳ πολὺ ᾤοντο κράτιστοι εἶναι .
so that at that time they counted themselves altogether the strongest of the Greeks.


7.1.26
3167
οἱ μὲν δὴ Θηβαῖοι διὰ ταῦτα ὑποφθόνως καὶ οὐκέτι φιλικῶς εἶχον πρὸς τοὺς Ἀρκάδας .
For these reasons the Thebans naturally felt somewhat jealous and no longer friendly toward the Arcadians.


7.1.26
3168
οἵ γε μὴν Ἠλεῖοι ἐπεὶ ἀπαιτοῦντες τὰς πόλεις τοὺς Ἀρκάδας ἃς ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων ἀφῃρέθησαν ἔγνωσαν αὐτοὺς τοὺς μὲν ἑαυτῶν λόγους ἐν οὐδενὶ λόγῳ ποιουμένους , τοὺς δὲ Τριφυλίους καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς ἀπὸ σφῶν ἀποστάντας περὶ παντὸς ποιουμένους , ὅτι Ἀρκάδες ἔφασαν εἶναι , ἐκ τούτων αὖ καὶ οἱ Ἠλεῖοι δυσμενῶς εἶχον πρὸς αὐτούς .
As for the Eleans, when they demanded back again from the Arcadians the cities of which they had been deprived by the Lacedaemonians and found that the Arcadians gave no heed to their words, but paid the highest regard to the Triphylians and the others who had revolted from them, because these people said they were Arcadians, as a result of this the Eleans in their turn felt unfriendly toward them.


7.1.27
3169
οὕτω δ’ ἑκάστων μέγα ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῖς φρονούντων τῶν συμμάχων , ἔρχεται Φιλίσκος Ἀβυδηνὸς παρ’ Ἀριοβαρζάνους χρήματα ἔχων πολλά .
While the several allies were each thus filled with proud confidence in themselves, Philiscus of Abydus came from Ariobarzanes with a large amount of money.


7.1.27
3170
καὶ πρῶτα μὲν εἰς Δελφοὺς συνήγαγε περὶ εἰρήνης Θηβαίους καὶ τοὺς συμμάχους καὶ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους .
And in the first place he brought together at Delphi the Thebans, their allies, and the Lacedaemonians to negotiate in regard to peace.


7.1.27
3171
ἐκεῖ δὲ ἐλθόντες τῷ μὲν θεῷ οὐδὲν ἀνεκοινώσαντο ὅπως ἂν ἡ εἰρήνη γένοιτο , αὐτοὶ δὲ ἐβουλεύοντο .
But when they had arrived there, they did not consult the god at all as to how peace should be brought about, but deliberated for themselves.


7.1.27
3172
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐ συνεχώρουν οἱ Θηβαῖοι Μεσσήνην ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίοις εἶναι , ξενικὸν πολὺ συνέλεγεν ὁ Φιλίσκος , ὅπως πολεμοίη μετὰ Λακεδαιμονίων .
Since, however, the Thebans would not agree that Messene should be subject to the Lacedaemonians, Philiscus set about collecting a large mercenary force in order to make war on the side of the Lacedaemonians.


7.1.28
3173
τούτων δὲ πραττομένων ἀφικνεῖται καὶ ἡ παρὰ Διονυσίου δευτέρα βοήθεια .
While these things were going on the second supporting force sent out by Dionysius arrived.


7.1.28
3174
λεγόντων δὲ Ἀθηναίων μὲν ὡς χρεὼν εἴη αὐτοὺς ἰέναι εἰς Θετταλίαν τ- ἐναντία Θηβαίοις , Λακεδαιμονίων δὲ ὡς εἰς τὴν Λακωνικήν , ταῦτα ἐν τοῖς συμμάχοις ἐνίκησεν .
And when the Athenians said that it ought to go to Thessaly to oppose the Thebans, while the Lacedaemonians urged that it should go to Laconia, the latter plan carried the day among the allies.


7.1.28
3175
ἐπεὶ δὲ περιέπλευσαν οἱ παρὰ Διονυσίου εἰς Λακεδαίμονα , λαβὼν αὐτοὺς Ἀρχίδαμος μετὰ τῶν πολιτικῶν ἐστρατεύετο .
Accordingly, after these troops from Dionysius had sailed round to Lacedaemon, Archidamus took them, along with his citizen soldiers, and set out on an expedition.


7.1.28
3176
καὶ Καρύας μὲν ἐξαιρεῖ κατὰ κράτος , καὶ ὅσους ζῶντας ἔλαβεν , ἀπέσφαξεν ·
He captured Caryae by storm and put to the sword all whom he took prisoners.


7.1.28
3177
ἐκεῖθεν δ’ εὐθὺς στρατευσάμενος εἰς Παρρασίους τῆς Ἀρκαδίας μετ’ αὐτῶν ἐδῄου τὴν χώραν .
From there he marched at once with his united forces against the people of Parrhasia, in Arcadia, and laid waste their land.


7.1.28
3178
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐβοήθησαν οἱ Ἀρκάδες καὶ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι , ἐπαναχωρήσας ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο ἐν τοῖς ὑπὲρ Μηλέας γηλόφοις .
But when the Arcadians and Argives came to their assistance, he retired and encamped in the hills above Melea.


7.1.28
3179
ἐνταῦθα δ’ ὄντος αὐτοῦ Κισσίδας ὁ ἄρχων τῆς παρὰ Διονυσίου βοηθείας ἔλεγεν ὅτι ἐξήκοι αὐτῷ ὁ χρόνος ὃς εἰρημένος ἦν παραμένειν .
While he was there Cissidas, the commander of the supporting force from Dionysius, said that the time for which he had been directed to stay had expired.


7.1.28
3180
καὶ ἅμα ταῦτ’ ἔλεγε καὶ ἀπῄει τὴν ἐπὶ Σπάρτης .
And as soon as he had said this he departed by the road leading to Sparta.


7.1.29
3181
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀποπορευόμενον ὑπετέμνοντο αὐτὸν οἱ Μεσσήνιοι ἐπὶ στενὸν τῆς ὁδοῦ , ἐνταῦθα δὴ ἔπεμπεν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀρχίδαμον καὶ βοηθεῖν ἐκέλευε ·
But when, as he was marching away, the Messenians tried to cut him off at a narrow place on the road, thereupon he sent to Archidamus and bade him come to his aid.


7.1.29
3182
κ- ἐκεῖνος μέντοι ἐβοήθει .
And Archidamus did in fact do so.


7.1.29
3183
ὡς δὲ ἐγένοντο ἐν τῇ ἐπ’ Εὐτρησίους ἐκτροπῇ , οἱ μὲν Ἀρκάδες καὶ Ἀργεῖοι προσέβαινον εἰς τὴν Λάκαιναν , καὶ οὗτοι ὡς ἀποκλείσοντες αὐτὸν τῆς ἐπ’ οἶκον ὁδοῦ .
Then as soon as they all arrived at the branch road leading to the country of the Eutresians, there were the Arcadians and Argives advancing towards Laconia, they also having the intention of shutting off Archidamus from his homeward way.


7.1.29
3184
ὁ δέ , οὗπέρ ἐστι χωρίον ἐπίπεδον ἐν ταῖς συμβολαῖς τῆς τε ἐπ’ Εὐτρησίων καὶ τῆς ἐπὶ Μηλέας ὁδοῦ , ἐνταῦθα ἐκβὰς παρετάξατο ὡς μαχούμενος .
He accordingly, at just the point where there is a level space at the junction of the road leading to the Eutresians and the road to Melea, turned out of his path and formed his troops in line for battle.


7.1.30
3185
ἔφασαν δ’ αὐτὸν καὶ πρὸ τῶν λόχων παριόντα τοιάδε παρακελεύσασθαι ·
It is said that he also went along in front of the battalions and exhorted his men in the following words:


7.1.30
3186
ἄνδρες πολῖται , νῦν ἀγαθοὶ γενόμενοι ἀναβλέψωμεν ὀρθοῖς ὄμμασιν ·
Fellow citizens, let us now prove ourselves brave men and thus be able to look people in the face;


7.1.30
3187
ἀποδῶμεν τοῖς ἐπιγιγνομένοις τὴν πατρίδα οἵανπερ παρὰ τῶν πατέρων παρελάβομεν ·
let us hand on to those who come after us the fatherland as it was when we received it from our fathers;


7.1.30
3188
παυσώμεθα αἰσχυνόμενοι καὶ παῖδας καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ πρεσβυτέρους καὶ ξένους , ἐν οἷς πρόσθεν γε πάντων τῶν Ἑλλήνων περιβλεπτότατοι ἦμεν .
let us cease to feel shame before wives and children and elders and strangers, in whose eyes we used once to be the most highly honoured of all the Greeks.


7.1.31
3189
τούτων δὲ ῥηθέντων ἐξ αἰθρίας ἀστραπάς τε καὶ βροντὰς λέγουσιν αἰσίους αὐτῷ φανῆναι ·
When these words had been spoken, it is said that from a clear sky there came lightnings and thunderings of favourable omen for him;


7.1.31
3190
συνέβη δὲ καὶ πρὸς τῷ δεξιῷ κέρατι τέμενός τε καὶ ἄγαλμα Ἡρακλέους οὗ δὴ καὶ ἀπόγονος λέγεται εἶναι .
and it chanced also that on the right wing was a sanctuary and a statue of Heracles.


7.1.31
3191
τοιγαροῦν ἐκ τούτων πάντων οὕτω πολὺ μένος καὶ θάρρος τοῖς στρατιώταις φασὶν ἐμπεσεῖν ὥστ’ ἔργον εἶναι τοῖς ἡγεμόσιν ἀνείργειν τοὺς στρατιώτας ὠθουμένους εἰς τὸ πρόσθεν .
As a result, therefore, of all these things, it is reported that the soldiers were inspired with so much strength and courage that it was a task for their leaders to restrain them as they pushed forward to the front.


7.1.31
3192
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἡγεῖτο ὁ Ἀρχίδαμος , ὀλίγοι μὲν τῶν πολεμίων δεξάμενοι εἰς δόρυ αὐτοὺς ἀπέθανον ·
And when Archidamus led the advance, only a few of the enemy waited till his men came within spear-thrust;


7.1.31
3193
οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι φεύγοντες ἔπιπτον , πολλοὶ μὲν ὑπὸ ἱππέων , πολλοὶ δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν Κελτῶν .
these were killed, and the rest were cut down as they fled, many by the horsemen and many by the Celts.


7.1.32
3194
ὡς δὲ ληξάσης τῆς μάχης τροπαῖον ἐστήσατο , εὐθὺς ἔπεμψεν οἴκαδε ἀγγελοῦντα Δημοτέλη τὸν κήρυκα τῆς τε νίκης τὸ μέγεθος καὶ ὅτι Λακεδαιμονίων μὲν οὐδὲ εἷς τεθναίη , τῶν δὲ πολεμίων παμπλήθεις .
Then as soon as the battle had ended and he had set up a trophy, he immediately sent home Demoteles, the herald, to report the greatness of his victory and the fact that not so much as one of the Lacedaemonians had been slain, while vast numbers of the enemy had fallen.


7.1.32
3195
τοὺς μέντοι ἐν Σπάρτῃ ἔφασαν ἀκούσαντας ἀρξαμένους ἀπὸ Ἀγησιλάου καὶ τῶν γερόντων καὶ τῶν ἐφόρων πάντας κλαίειν ·
And when the people at Sparta heard this, it is said that all of them wept, beginning with Agesilaus, the senators, and the ephors;


7.1.32
3196
οὕτω κοινόν τι ἄρα χαρᾷ καὶ λύπῃ δάκρυά ἐστιν .
so true it is, indeed, that tears belong to joy and sorrow alike.


7.1.32
3197
ἐπὶ μέντοι τῇ τῶν Ἀρκάδων τύχῃ οὐ πολύ τι ἧττον Λακεδαιμονίων ἥσθησαν Θηβαῖοί τε καὶ Ἠλεῖοι ·
On the other hand, both the Thebans and the Eleans were almost as well pleased as the Lacedaemonians at the misfortune of the Arcadians —


7.1.32
3198
οὕτως ἤδη ἤχθοντο ἐπὶ τῷ φρονήματι αὐτῶν .
so vexed had they become by this time at their presumption.


7.1.33
3199
συνεχῶς δὲ βουλευόμενοι Θηβαῖοι ὅπως ἂν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν λάβοιεν τῆς Ἑλλάδος , ἐνόμισαν , εἰ πέμψειαν πρὸς τὸν Περσῶν βασιλέα , πλεονεκτῆσαι ἄν τι ἐν ἐκείνῳ .
And now the Thebans, who were continually planning how they might obtain the leadership of Greece, hit upon the idea that if they should send to the King of the Persians, they would gain some advantage in him.


7.1.33
3200
καὶ ἐκ τούτου παρακαλέσαντες ἤδη τοὺς συμμάχους ἐπὶ προφάσει ὅτι καὶ Εὐθυκλῆς ὁ Λακεδαιμόνιος εἴη παρὰ βασιλεῖ , ἀναβαίνουσι Θηβαίων μὲν Πελοπίδας , Ἀρκάδων δὲ Ἀντίοχος ὁ παγκρατιαστής , Ἠλείων δὲ Ἀρχίδαμος ·
Thereupon they immediately summoned their allies, on the pretext that Euthycles, the Lacedaemonian, was also at the King’s court; and there went up thither Pelopidas for the Thebans, Antiochus, the pancratiast, for the Arcadians, and Archidamus for the Eleans;


7.1.33
3201
ἠκολούθει δὲ καὶ Ἀργεῖος .
an Argive also went with them.


7.1.33
3202
καὶ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἀκούσαντες ταῦτα ἀνέπεμψαν Τιμαγόραν τε καὶ Λέοντα .
And the Athenians, upon hearing of this, sent up Timagoras and Leon.


7.1.34
3203
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐκεῖ ἐγένοντο , πολὺ ἐπλεονέκτει ὁ Πελοπίδας παρὰ τῷ Πέρσῃ .
When the ambassadors arrived there, Pelopidas enjoyed a great advantage with the Persian.


7.1.34
3204
εἶχε γὰρ λέγειν καὶ ὅτι μόνοι τῶν Ἑλλήνων βασιλεῖ συνεμάχοντο ἐν Πλαταιαῖς , καὶ ὅτι ὕστερον οὐδεπώποτε στρατεύσαιντο ἐπὶ βασιλέα , καὶ ὡς Λακεδαιμόνιοι διὰ τοῦτο πολεμήσειαν αὐτοῖς , ὅτι οὐκ ἐθελήσαιεν μετ’ Ἀγησιλάου ἐλθεῖν ἐπ’ αὐτὸν οὐδὲ θῦσαι ἐάσαιεν αὐτὸν ἐν Αὐλίδι τῇ Ἀρτέμιδι , ἔνθαπερ ὅτε Ἀγαμέμνων εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐξέπλει θύσας εἷλε Τροίαν .
For he was able to say that his people were the only ones among the Greeks who had fought on the side of the King at Plataea, that they had never afterwards undertaken a campaign against the King, and that the Lacedaemonians had made war upon them for precisely the reason that they had declined to go with Agesilaus against him and had refused to permit Agesilaus to sacrifice to Artemis at Aulis, the very spot where Agamemnon, at the time when he was sailing forth to Asia, had sacrificed before he captured Troy.


7.1.35
3205
μέγα δὲ συνεβάλλετο τῷ Πελοπίδᾳ εἰς τὸ τιμᾶσθαι καὶ ὅτι ἐνενικήκεσαν οἱ Θηβαῖοι μάχῃ ἐν Λεύκτροις καὶ ὅτι πεπορθηκότες τὴν χώραν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἐφαίνοντο .
It also contributed greatly toward the winning of honour for Pelopidas that the Thebans had been victorious in battle at Leuctra, and that they had admittedly ravaged the country of the Lacedaemonians.


7.1.35
3206
ἔλεγε δὲ ὁ Πελοπίδας ὅτι οἱ Ἀργεῖοι καὶ οἱ Ἀρκάδες μάχῃ ἡττημένοι εἶεν ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων , ἐπεὶ αὐτοὶ οὐ παρεγένοντο .
Pelopidas also said that the Argives and Arcadians had been defeated by the Lacedaemonians when the Thebans were not present with them.


7.1.35
3207
συνεμαρτύρει δ’ αὐτῷ ταῦτα πάντα ὡς ἀληθῆ λέγοι ὁ Ἀθηναῖος Τιμαγόρας , καὶ ἐτιμᾶτο δεύτερος μετὰ τὸν Πελοπίδαν .
And the Athenian, Timagoras, bore witness in his behalf that all these things which he said were true, and so stood second in honour to Pelopidas.


7.1.36
3208
ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἐρωτώμενος ὑπὸ βασιλέως ὁ Πελοπίδας τί βούλοιτο ἑαυτῷ γραφῆναι εἶπεν ὅτι Μεσσήνην τε αὐτόνομον εἶναι ἀπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ Ἀθηναίους ἀνέλκειν τὰς ναῦς ·
Pelopidas was therefore asked by the King what he desired to have written for him; he replied, that Messene should be independent of the Lacedaemonians and that the Athenians should draw up their ships on the land;


7.1.36
3209
εἰ δὲ ταῦτα μὴ πείθοιντο , στρατεύειν ἐπ’ αὐτούς ·
that if they refused obedience in these points, the contracting parties were to make an expedition against them;


7.1.36
3210
εἴ τις δὲ πόλις μὴ ἐθέλοι ἀκολουθεῖν , ἐπὶ ταύτην πρῶτον ἰέναι .
and that if any city refused to join in such expedition, they were to proceed first of all against that city.


7.1.37
3211
γραφέντων δὲ τούτων καὶ ἀναγνωσθέντων τοῖς πρέσβεσιν , εἶπεν ὁ Λέων ἀκούοντος τοῦ βασιλέως ·
When these things had been written and read to the ambassadors, Leon said in the King’s hearing,


7.1.37
3212
νὴ Δία , ὦ Ἀθηναῖοι , ὥρα γε ὑμῖν , ὡς ἔοικεν , ἄλλον τινὰ φίλον ἀντὶ βασιλέως ζητεῖν .
By Zeus, Athenians, it is time for you, it seems, to be seeking some other friend instead of the King.


7.1.37
3213
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπήγγειλεν ὁ γραμματεὺς ἃ εἶπεν ὁ Ἀθηναῖος , πάλιν ἐξήνεγκε προσγεγραμμένα ·
And when the secretary had interpreted to the King what the Athenian had said, he again brought out a further writing:


7.1.37
3214
εἰ δέ τι δικαιότερον τούτων γιγνώσκουσιν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , ἰόντας πρὸς βασιλέα διδάσκειν .
And if the Athenians are aware of anything juster than these provisions, let them come to the King and inform him.


7.1.38
3215
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφίκοντο οἱ πρέσβεις οἴκαδε ἕκαστοι , τὸν μὲν Τιμαγόραν ἀπέκτειναν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι , κατηγοροῦντος τοῦ Λέοντος ὡς οὔτε συσκηνοῦν ἑαυτῷ ἐθέλοι μετά τε Πελοπίδου πάντα βουλεύοιτο .
Now when the ambassadors had returned to their several homes, Timagoras was put to death by the Athenians on the complaint of Leon that he had refused to share quarters with him and had taken counsel in all matters with Pelopidas.


7.1.38
3216
τῶν δὲ ἄλλων πρέσβεων ὁ μὲν Ἠλεῖος Ἀρχίδαμος , ὅτι προυτίμησε τὴν Ἦλιν πρὸ τῶν Ἀρκάδων , ἐπῄνει τὰ τοῦ βασιλέως , ὁ δὲ Ἀντίοχος , ὅτι ἠλαττοῦτο τὸ Ἀρκαδικόν , οὔτε τὰ δῶρα ἐδέξατο ἀπήγγειλέ τε πρὸς τοὺς μυρίους ὡς βασιλεὺς ἀρτοκόπους μὲν καὶ ὀψοποιοὺς καὶ οἰνοχόους καὶ θυρωροὺς παμπληθεῖς ἔχοι , ἄνδρας δὲ οἳ μάχοιντ’ ἂν Ἕλλησι πάνυ ζητῶν οὐκ ἂν ἔφη δύνασθαι ἰδεῖν .
As for the other ambassadors, Archidamus, the Elean, praised the doings of the King, because he had honoured Elis above the Arcadians; but Antiochus, because the Arcadian League was less regarded, did not accept the royal gifts, and reported back to the Ten Thousand that the King had bakers, and cooks, and wine-pourers, and doorkeepers in vast numbers, but as for men who could fight with Greeks, he said that though he sought diligently he could not see any.


7.1.38
3217
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις καὶ τὸ τῶν χρημάτων πλῆθος ἀλαζονείαν οἷ γε δοκεῖν ἔφη εἶναι , ἐπεὶ καὶ τὴν ὑμνουμένην ἂν χρυσῆν πλάτανον οὐχ ἱκανὴν ἔφη εἶναι τέττιγι σκιὰν παρέχειν .
Besides this, he said that for his part he thought that the King’s wealth of money was also mere pretence, for he said that even the golden plane-tree, that was forever harped upon, was not large enough to afford shade for a grasshopper.


7.1.39
3218
ὡς δὲ οἱ Θηβαῖοι συνεκάλεσαν ἀπὸ τῶν πόλεων ἁπασῶν ἀκουσομένους τῆς παρὰ βασιλέως ἐπιστολῆς , καὶ ὁ Πέρσης ὁ φέρων τὰ γράμματα δείξας τὴν βασιλέως σφραγῖδα ἀνέγνω τὰ γεγραμμένα , οἱ μὲν Θηβαῖοι ὀμνύναι ταῦτα ἐκέλευον βασιλεῖ καὶ ἑαυτοῖς τοὺς βουλομένους φίλους εἶναι , οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν πόλεων ἀπεκρίναντο ὅτι οὐκ ὀμούμενοι ἀλλ’ ἀκουσόμενοι πεμφθείησαν ·
When the Thebans had called together representatives from all the cities to hear the letter from the King, and the Persian who bore the document, having shown the King’s seal, had read what was written therein, although the Thebans directed those who desired to be friends of the King and themselves to swear to these provisions, the representatives from the cities replied that they had not been sent to give their oaths, but to listen;


7.1.39
3219
εἰ δέ τι ὅρκων δέοιντο , πρὸς τὰς πόλεις πέμπειν ἐκέλευον .
and if the Thebans had any desire for oaths, they bade them send to the cities.


7.1.39
3220
ὁ μέντοι Ἀρκὰς Λυκομήδης καὶ τοῦτο ἔλεγεν , ὅτι οὐδὲ τὸν σύλλογον ἐν Θήβαις δέοι εἶναι , ἀλλ’ ἔνθα ἂν ᾖ ὁ πόλεμος .
Indeed the Arcadian, Lycomedes, said this besides, that it was not even proper for the congress to be held in Thebes, but rather at the seat of war, wherever it might be.


7.1.39
3221
χαλεπαινόντων δ’ αὐτῷ τῶν Θηβαίων καὶ λεγόντων ὡς διαφθείροι τὸ συμμαχικόν , οὐδ’ εἰς τὸ συνέδριον ἤθελε καθίζειν , ἀλλ’ ἀπιὼν ᾤχετο , καὶ μετ’ αὐτοῦ πάντες οἱ ἐξ Ἀρκαδίας πρέσβεις .
Then, since the Thebans were angry with him and said that he was destroying the compact of alliance, he refused even to occupy a seat at the congress, but took himself off, and with him went all the ambassadors from Arcadia.


7.1.40
3222
ὡς δ’ ἐν Θήβαις οὐκ ἠθέλησαν οἱ συνελθόντες ὀμόσαι , ἔπεμπον οἱ Θηβαῖοι πρέσβεις ἐπὶ τὰς πόλεις , ὀμνύναι κελεύοντες ποιήσειν κατὰ τὰ βασιλέως γράμματα , νομίζοντες ὀκνήσειν μίαν ἑκάστην τῶν πόλεων ἀπεχθάνεσθαι ἅμα ἑαυτοῖς τε καὶ βασιλεῖ .
Accordingly, inasmuch as those who had come together refused to take the oath at Thebes, the Thebans sent ambassadors to the cities and directed them to swear that they would act in accordance with the King’s letter, believing that each one of the cities taken singly would hesitate to incur the hatred of themselves and the King at the same time.


7.1.40
3223
ἐπεὶ μέντοι εἰς Κόρινθον πρῶτον αὐτῶν ἀφικομένων ὑπέστησαν οἱ Κορίνθιοι , καὶ ἀπεκρίναντο ὅτι οὐδὲν δέοιντο πρὸς βασιλέα κοινῶν ὅρκων , ἐπηκολούθησαν καὶ ἄλλαι πόλεις κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ ἀποκρινόμεναι .
When, however, upon the arrival of the ambassadors at Corinth, their first stopping-place, the Corinthians resisted the proposal, and replied that they had no desire for oaths shared with the King, then other cities also followed suit, giving their answers in the same terms.


7.1.40
3224
καὶ αὕτη μὲν ἡ Πελοπίδου καὶ τῶν Θηβαίων τῆς ἀρχῆς περιβολὴ οὕτω διελύθη .
Thus it was that this attempt on the part of Pelopidas and the Thebans to gain the leadership came to its end.


7.1.41
3225
αὖθις δ’ Ἐπαμεινώνδας , βουληθεὶς τοὺς Ἀχαιοὺς προσαγαγέσθαι , ὅπως μᾶλλον σφίσι καὶ οἱ Ἀρκάδες καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι σύμμαχοι προσέχοιεν τὸν νοῦν , ἔγνω ἐκστρατευτέον εἶναι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀχαΐαν .
Epaminondas, on the other hand, wishing to bring over the Achaeans to the side of the Thebans, in order that the Arcadians and the other allies might be more inclined to give heed to them, decided that he must march forth against Achaea.


7.1.41
3226
Πεισίαν οὖν τὸν Ἀργεῖον στρατηγοῦντα ἐν τῷ Ἄργει πείθει προκαταλαβεῖν τὸ Ὄνειον .
He therefore persuaded Peisias, the Argive, who held the position of general at Argos, to occupy Oneum in advance.


7.1.41
3227
καὶ ὁ Πεισίας μέντοι καταμαθὼν ἀμελουμένην τὴν τοῦ Ὀνείου φυλακὴν ὑπό τε Ναυκλέους , ὃς ἦρχε τοῦ ξενικοῦ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων , καὶ ὑπὸ Τιμομάχου τοῦ Ἀθηναίου , καταλαμβάνει νύκτωρ μετὰ δισχιλίων ὁπλιτῶν τὸν ὑπὲρ Κεγχρειῶν λόφον , ἔχων ἑπτὰ ἡμερῶν τὰ ἐπιτήδεια .
And Peisias, after he had learned that the guard over Oneum was being maintained carelessly by Naucles, who commanded the mercenary troops of the Lacedaemonians, and by Timomachus, the Athenian, did indeed seize the hill above Cenchreae by night with two thousand hoplites, having provisions for seven days.


7.1.42
3228
ἐν δὲ ταύταις ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐλθόντες οἱ Θηβαῖοι ὑπερβαίνουσι τὸ Ὄνειον , καὶ στρατεύουσι πάντες οἱ σύμμαχοι ἐπ’ Ἀχαΐαν , ἡγουμένου Ἐπαμεινώνδου .
Within this number of days the Thebans arrived and crossed over Oneum, and all the allies thereupon marched against Achaea, under the leadership of Epaminondas.


7.1.42
3229
προσπεσόντων δ’ αὐτῷ τῶν βελτίστων ἐκ τῆς Ἀχαΐας , ἐνδυναστεύει ὁ Ἐπαμεινώνδας ὥστε μὴ φυγαδεῦσαι τοὺς κρατίστους μηδὲ πολιτείαν μεταστῆσαι , ἀλλὰ πιστὰ λαβὼν παρὰ τῶν Ἀχαιῶν ἦ μὴν συμμάχους ἔσεσθαι καὶ ἀκολουθήσειν ὅποι ἂν Θηβαῖοι ἡγῶνται , οὕτως ἀπῆλθεν οἴκαδε .
Now upon the urgent entreaty which the aristocrats of Achaea addressed to him, Epaminondas effected through his personal influence an arrangement that their opponents were not to banish the aristocrats or to change the form of government, but after receiving pledges from the Achaeans that in very truth they would be allies and would follow wherever the Thebans led the way, he thereupon returned home.


7.1.43
3230
κατηγορούντων δὲ αὐτοῦ τῶν τε Ἀρκάδων καὶ τῶν ἀντιστασιωτῶν ὡς Λακεδαιμονίοις κατεσκευακὼς τὴν Ἀχαΐαν ἀπέλθοι , ἔδοξε Θηβαίοις πέμψαι ἁρμοστὰς εἰς τὰς Ἀχαΐδας πόλεις .
When, however, the Arcadians and the Achaean opposition brought against him the charge that he had arranged matters in Achaea in the interest of the Lacedaemonians and had then gone away, the Thebans resolved to send governors to the Achaean cities.


7.1.43
3231
οἱ δ’ ἐλθόντες τοὺς μὲν βελτίστους σὺν τῷ πλήθει ἐξέβαλον , δημοκρατίας δὲ ἐν τῇ Ἀχαΐᾳ κατέστησαν .
When they arrived they drove out the aristocrats, with the assistance of the commons, and established democracies in Achaea.


7.1.43
3232
οἱ μέντοι ἐκπεσόντες συστάντες ταχύ , ἐπὶ μίαν ἑκάστην τῶν πόλεων πορευόμενοι , ὄντες οὐκ ὀλίγοι , κατῆλθόν τε καὶ κατέσχον τὰς πόλεις .
But those who had been thus exiled speedily banded themselves together, proceeded against each one of the cities singly, and as they were not few in number, accomplished their restoration and gained possession of the cities.


7.1.43
3233
ἐπεὶ δὲ κατελθόντες οὐκέτι ἐμέσευον , ἀλλὰ προθύμως συνεμάχουν τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις , ἐπιέζοντο οἱ Ἀρκάδες ἔνθεν μὲν ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων , ἔνθεν δὲ ὑπὸ Ἀχαιῶν .
Then, since after their restoration they no longer followed a neutral course, but fought zealously in support of the Lacedaemonians, the Arcadians were hard pressed by the Lacedaemonians on the one side and by the Achaeans on the other.


7.1.44
3234
ἐν δὲ τῷ Σικυῶνι τὸ μὲν μέχρι τούτου κατὰ τοὺς ἀρχαίους νόμους ἡ πολιτεία ἦν .
As for Sicyon, its government up to this time had been in conformity with its ancient laws.


7.1.44
3235
ἐκ δὲ τούτου βουλόμενος ὁ Εὔφρων , ὥσπερ παρὰ τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις μέγιστος ἦν τῶν πολιτῶν , οὕτω καὶ παρὰ τοῖς ἐναντίοις αὐτῶν πρωτεύειν , λέγει πρὸς τοὺς Ἀργείους καὶ πρὸς τοὺς Ἀρκάδας ὡς εἰ μὲν οἱ πλουσιώτατοι ἐγκρατεῖς ἔσοιντο τοῦ Σικυῶνος , σαφῶς , ὅταν τύχῃ , πάλιν λακωνιεῖ ἡ πόλις ·
But now Euphron, who had been the most powerful of the citizens in his influence with the Lacedaemonians and wished in like manner to stand first with their adversaries also, said to the Argives and to the Arcadians that if the richest men should remain in control of Sicyon, it was manifest that whenever an opportunity offered, the city would go over to the Lacedaemonians again,


7.1.44
3236
ἐὰν δὲ δημοκρατία γένηται , εὖ ἴστε , ἔφη , ὅτι διαμενεῖ ὑμῖν ἡ πόλις .
while if a democracy is established, be well assured, he said, that the city will remain true to you.


7.1.44
3237
ἐὰν οὖν μοι παραγένησθε , ἐγὼ ἔσομαι ὁ συγκαλῶν τὸν δῆμον , καὶ ἅμα ἐγὼ ὑμῖν ταύτην πίστιν ἐμαυτοῦ δώσω καὶ τὴν πόλιν βέβαιον ἐν τῇ συμμαχίᾳ παρέξω .
If, therefore, you will be at hand to support me, I will be the one to call the people together, and I will not only give you in this act a pledge of my good faith, but will make the city steadfast in its alliance with you.


7.1.44
3238
ταῦτα δ’ , ἔφη , ἐγὼ πράττω εὖ ἴστε ὅτι πάλαι μὲν χαλεπῶς φέρων , ὥσπερ ὑμεῖς , τὸ φρόνημα τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων , ἄσμενος δ’ ἂν τὴν δουλείαν ἀποφυγών .
This I do, you must understand, he said, because, like yourselves, I have long found the arrogance of the Lacedaemonians hard to endure, and I should be glad to escape from servitude to them.


7.1.45
3239
οἱ οὖν Ἀρκάδες καὶ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι ἡδέως ταῦτ’ ἀκούσαντες παρεγένοντο αὐτῷ .
Accordingly the Arcadians and the Argives, upon hearing these words, gladly presented themselves to support him.


7.1.45
3240
ὁ δ’ εὐθὺς ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ παρόντων τῶν Ἀργείων καὶ τῶν Ἀρκάδων συνεκάλει τὸν δῆμον , ὡς τῆς πολιτείας ἐσομένης ἐπὶ τοῖς ἴσοις καὶ ὁμοίοις .
Then he immediately called the people together in the market-place in the presence of the Argives and the Arcadians, announcing that the government was to be on terms of full equality.


7.1.45
3241
ἐπεὶ δὲ συνῆλθον , στρατηγοὺς ἐκέλευσεν ἑλέσθαι οὕστινας αὐτοῖς δοκοίη ·
When they had come together, he bade them choose whomsoever they saw fit as generals;


7.1.45
3242
οἱ δ’ αἱροῦνται αὐτόν τε τὸν Εὔφρονα καὶ Ἱππόδαμον καὶ Κλέανδρον καὶ Ἀκρίσιον καὶ Λύσανδρον .
and they chose Euphron himself, Hippodamus, Cleander, Acrisius, and Lysander.


7.1.45
3243
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ἐπέπρακτο , καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ ξενικὸν καθίστησιν Ἀδέαν τὸν αὑτοῦ υἱόν , Λυσιμένην τὸν πρόσθεν ἄρχοντα ἀποστήσας .
When this had been done, he also appointed Adeas, his own son, to the command of the mercenary troops, removing Lysimenes, their former commander.


7.1.46
3244
καὶ εὐθὺς μὲν τούτων τῶν ξένων ὁ Εὔφρων πιστούς τινας εὖ ποιῶν ἐποιήσατο , καὶ ἄλλους προσελάμβανεν , οὔτε τῶν δημοσίων οὔτε τῶν ἱερῶν χρημάτων φειδόμενος .
And straightway Euphron made some of these mercenaries faithful to him by treating them generously, and took others into his pay, sparing neither the public nor the sacred funds.


7.1.46
3245
καὶ ὅσους δ’ ἐξέβαλεν ἐπὶ λακωνισμῷ , καὶ τοῖς τούτων χρήμασιν ἐχρῆτο .
He likewise availed himself of the property of all those whom he banished for favouring the Lacedaemonians.


7.1.46
3246
καὶ τῶν συναρχόντων δὲ τοὺς μὲν δόλῳ ἀπέκτεινε , τοὺς δ’ ἐξέβαλεν ·
Furthermore, he treacherously put to death some of his fellow-officials and banished others,


7.1.46
3247
ὥστε πάντα ὑφ’ ἑαυτῷ ἐποιήσατο καὶ σαφῶς τύραννος ἦν .
so that he brought everything under his control and was manifestly a tyrant.


7.1.46
3248
ὅπως δὲ ταῦτα ἐπιτρέποιεν αὐτῷ οἱ σύμμαχοι , τὰ μέν τι καὶ χρήμασι διεπράττετο , τὰ δὲ καί , εἴ που στρατεύοιντο , προθύμως ἔχων τὸ ξενικὸν συνηκολούθει .
And he managed to induce his allies to permit these proceedings of his, partly by the use of money, and partly by following with them zealously at the head of his mercenary force wherever they made an expedition.


7.2.1
3249
οὕτω δὲ τούτων προκεχωρηκότων , καὶ τῶν τε Ἀργείων ἐπιτετειχικότων ἐν τῷ Φλειοῦντι τὸ ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἡραίου Τρικάρανον , καὶ τῶν Σικυωνίων ἐπὶ τοῖς ὁρίοις αὐτῶν τειχιζόντων τὴν Θυαμίαν , μάλα ἐπιέζοντο οἱ Φλειάσιοι καὶ ἐσπάνιζον τῶν ἐπιτηδείων ·
When these matters had progressed to this point and the Argives had fortified Mount Tricaranum, above the Heraeum, as a base of attack upon Phlius, while the Sicyonians were fortifying Thyamia on its borders, the Phliasians were exceedingly hard pressed and suffered from lack of provisions;


7.2.1
3250
ὅμως δὲ διεκαρτέρουν ἐν τῇ συμμαχίᾳ .
nevertheless, they remained steadfast in their alliance.


7.2.1
3251
ἀλλὰ γὰρ τῶν μὲν μεγάλων πόλεων , εἴ τι καλὸν ἔπραξαν , ἅπαντες οἱ συγγραφεῖς μέμνηνται ·
But I will speak further of them;


7.2.1
3252
ἐμοὶ δὲ δοκεῖ , καὶ εἴ τις μικρὰ πόλις οὖσα πολλὰ καὶ καλὰ ἔργα διαπέπρακται , ἔτι μᾶλλον ἄξιον εἶναι ἀποφαίνειν .
for while all the historians make mention of the large states if they have performed any noble achievement, it seems to me that if a state which is small has accomplished many noble deeds, it is even more fitting to set them forth.


7.2.2
3253
Φλειάσιοι τοίνυν φίλοι μὲν ἐγένοντο Λακεδαιμονίοις , ὅτ’ ἐκεῖνοι μέγιστοι ἦσαν ·
Now the Phliasians had become friends of the Lacedaemonians at a time when they were greatest;


7.2.2
3254
σφαλέντων δ’ αὐτῶν ἐν τῇ ἐν Λεύκτροις μάχῃ , καὶ ἀποστάντων μὲν πολλῶν περιοίκων , ἀποστάντων δὲ πάντων τῶν Εἱλώτων , ἔτι δὲ τῶν συμμάχων πλὴν πάνυ ὀλίγων , ἐπιστρατευόντων δ’ αὐτοῖς ὡς εἰπεῖν πάντων τῶν Ἑλλήνων , πιστοὶ διέμειναν , καὶ ἔχοντες πολεμίους τοὺς δυνατωτάτους τῶν ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ Ἀρκάδας καὶ Ἀργείους ὅμως ἐβοήθησαν αὐτοῖς , καὶ διαβαίνειν τελευταῖοι λαχόντες εἰς Πρασιὰς τῶν συμβοηθησάντων , ἦσαν δ’ οὗτοι Κορίνθιοι , Ἐπιδαύριοι , Τροιζήνιοι , Ἑρμιονεῖς , Ἁλιεῖς , Σικυώνιοι καὶ Πελληνεῖς ·
and when they had been defeated in the battle at Leuctra, when many of the Perioeci had revolted from them and all the Helots also had revolted, and likewise their allies with the exception of a very few, and when all the Greeks, one might say, were in the field against them, the Phliasians remained steadfastly faithful, and, though they had as enemies the most powerful of the peoples in Peloponnesus  —  the Arcadians and Argives  —  nevertheless went to their assistance. Furthermore, when it fell to their lot to cross over to Prasiae last of those who joined in the expedition (and these were the Corinthians, Epidaurians, Troezenians, Hermionians, Halians, Sicyonians, and Pelleneans  —


7.2.3
3255
οὐ γάρ πω τότε ἀφέστασαν — ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ἐπεὶ ὁ ξεναγὸς τοὺς προδιαβεβῶτας λαβὼν ἀπολιπὼν αὐτοὺς ᾤχετο , οὐδ’ ὣς ἀπεστράφησαν , ἀλλ’ ἡγεμόνα μισθωσάμενοι ἐκ Πρασιῶν , ὄντων τῶν πολεμίων περὶ Ἀμύκλας , ὅπως ἐδύναντο διαδύντες εἰς Σπάρτην ἀφίκοντο .
for at that time the last mentioned had not yet revolted from the Lacedaemonians), even when the Lacedaemonian leader went off with those who had crossed first and left the Phliasians, even so they did not turn back, but hired a guide from Prasiae, and, although the enemy were in the neighbourhood of Amyclae, slipped through as best they could and reached Sparta.


7.2.3
3256
καὶ μὴν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἄλλως τε ἐτίμων αὐτοὺς καὶ βοῦν ξένια ἔπεμψαν .
And the Lacedaemonians, besides honouring them in other ways, sent them an ox as a gift of hospitality.


7.2.4
3257
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἀναχωρησάντων τῶν πολεμίων ἐκ τῆς Λακεδαίμονος οἱ Ἀργεῖοι ὀργιζόμενοι τῇ τῶν Φλειασίων περὶ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους προθυμίᾳ ἐνέβαλον πανδημεὶ εἰς τὸν Φλειοῦντα καὶ τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν ἐδῄουν , οὐδ’ ὣς ὑφίεντο , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπεὶ ἀπεχώρουν φθείραντες ὅσα ἐδύναντο , ἐπεξελθόντες οἱ τῶν Φλειασίων ἱππεῖς ἐπηκολούθουν αὐτοῖς , καὶ ὀπισθοφυλακούντων τοῖς Ἀργείοις τῶν ἱππέων ἁπάντων καὶ λόχων τῶν μετ’ αὐτοὺς τεταγμένων , ἐπιθέμενοι τούτοις ἑξήκοντα ὄντες ἐτρέψαντο πάντας τοὺς ὀπισθοφύλακας ·
Again, when the enemy had retired from Lacedaemon, and the Argives, in anger at the devotion of the Phliasians toward the Lacedaemonians, had invaded the territory of Phlius in full force and were laying waste their land, even then they did not yield;


7.2.4
3258
καὶ ἀπέκτειναν μὲν ὀλίγους αὐτῶν , τροπαῖον μέντοι ἐστήσαντο ὁρώντων τῶν Ἀργείων οὐδὲν διαφέρον ἢ εἰ πάντας ἀπεκτόνεσαν αὐτούς .
but when the Argives were withdrawing, after having destroyed as much as they could, the horsemen of the Phliasians sallied forth and followed after them, and, although all the Argive horsemen and the companies posted behind them were employed to guard their rear, the Phliasians nevertheless, who were but sixty in number, attacked these troops and turned to flight the entire rearguard; to be sure they killed but few of them, yet they set up a trophy, with the Argives looking on, precisely as if they had killed them all.


7.2.5
3259
αὖθις δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι μὲν καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι ἐφρούρουν τὸ Ὄνειον , Θηβαῖοι δὲ προσῇσαν ὡς ὑπερβησόμενοι .
Once again, the Lacedaemonians and their allies were guarding Oneum, and the Thebans were approaching with the intention of crossing over the mountain.


7.2.5
3260
πορευομένων δὲ διὰ Νεμέας τῶν Ἀρκάδων καὶ Ἠλείων , ὅπως συμμείξαιεν τοῖς Θηβαίοις , προσήνεγκαν μὲν λόγον τῶν Φλειασίων φυγάδες ὡς εἰ ἐθελήσειαν ἐπιφανῆναι μόνον σφίσι , λάβοιεν ἂν Φλειοῦντα ·
At this time, as the Arcadians and Eleans were marching through Nemea in order to effect a junction with the Thebans, exiles of the Phliasians made them an offer that if they would only put in an appearance to help their party, they would capture Phlius;


7.2.5
3261
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταῦτα συνωμολογήθη , τῆς νυκτὸς ὑπεκαθίζοντο ὑπ’ αὐτῷ τῷ τείχει κλίμακας ἔχοντες οἵ τε φυγάδες καὶ ἄλλοι μετ’ αὐτῶν ὡς ἑξακόσιοι .
and when this plan had been agreed upon, during the night the exiles and others with them, about six hundred in number, set themselves in ambush close under the wall with scaling ladders.


7.2.5
3262
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ μὲν σκοποὶ ἐσήμαινον ἀπὸ τοῦ Τρικαράνου ὡς πολεμίων ἐπιόντων , ἡ δὲ πόλις πρὸς τούτους τὸν νοῦν εἶχεν , ἐν δὴ τούτῳ οἱ προδιδόντες ἐσήμαινον τοῖς ὑποκαθημένοις ἀναβαίνειν .
Then as soon as the watchmen signalled from Tricaranum that enemies were approaching, and the city was giving its attention to these last, at this moment those who sought to betray the city signalled to the people in ambush to climb up.


7.2.6
3263
οἱ δ’ ἀναβάντες καὶ λαβόντες τῶν φρουρῶν τὰ ὅπλα ἔρημα , ἐδίωκον τοὺς ἡμεροφύλακας ὄντας δέκα ·
When they had climbed up and found the posts of the guards weakly manned, they pursued the day-guards, who numbered ten


7.2.6
3264
ἀφ’ ἑκάστης δὲ τῆς πεμπάδος εἷς ἡμεροφύλαξ κατελείπετο ·
(for one out of each squad of five was regularly left behind as a day-guard);


7.2.6
3265
καὶ ἕνα μὲν ἔτι καθεύδοντα ἀπέκτειναν , ἄλλον δὲ καταφυγόντα πρὸς τὸ Ἥραιον .
and they killed one while he was still asleep and another after he had fled for refuge to the Heraeum.


7.2.6
3266
φυγῇ δ’ ἐξαλλομένων κατὰ τοῦ τείχους τοῦ εἰς τὸ ἄστυ ὁρῶντος τῶν ἡμεροφυλάκων , ἀναμφισβητήτως εἶχον οἱ ἀναβάντες τὴν ἀκρόπολιν .
And since the other day-guards in their flight leaped down from the wall on the side looking toward the city, the men who had climbed up were in undisputed possession of the Acropolis.


7.2.7
3267
ἐπεὶ δὲ κραυγῆς εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἀφικομένης ἐβοήθουν οἱ πολῖται , τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπεξελθόντες ἐκ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως οἱ πολέμιοι ἐμάχοντο ἐν τῷ πρόσθεν τῶν εἰς τὴν πόλιν φερουσῶν πυλῶν ·
But when an outcry reached the city and the citizens came to the rescue, at first the enemy issued forth from the Acropolis and fought in the space in front of the gates which lead to the city;


7.2.7
3268
ἔπειτα πολιορκούμενοι ὑπὸ τῶν προσβοηθούντων ἐχώρουν πάλιν πρὸς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ·
afterwards, being beset on all sides by those who came against them, they withdrew again to the Acropolis;


7.2.7
3269
οἱ δὲ πολῖται συνεισπίπτουσιν αὐτοῖς .
and the citizens poured in with them.


7.2.7
3270
τὸ μὲν οὖν μέσον τῆς ἀκροπόλεως εὐθὺς ἔρημον ἐγένετο ·
Now the space within the Acropolis was cleared at once,


7.2.7
3271
ἐπὶ δὲ τὸ τεῖχος καὶ τοὺς πύργους ἀναβάντες οἱ πολέμιοι ἔπαιον καὶ ἔβαλλον τοὺς ἔνδον ·
but the enemy mounted upon the wall and the towers and showered blows and missiles upon the people who were within.


7.2.7
3272
οἱ δὲ χαμόθεν ἠμύνοντο καὶ κατὰ τὰς ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος φερούσας κλίμακας προσεμάχοντο .
Meanwhile the latter defended themselves from the ground and attacked the enemy by the steps which led up to the wall.


7.2.8
3273
ἐπεὶ δὲ τῶν ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν πύργων ἐκράτησάν τινων οἱ πολῖται , ὁμόσε δὴ ἐχώρουν ἀπονενοημένως τοῖς ἀναβεβηκόσιν .
When, however, the citizens gained possession of some of the towers on this side and on that, they closed in desperate battle with those who had mounted upon their walls.


7.2.8
3274
οἱ δὲ ὠθούμενοι ὑπ’ αὐτῶν τῇ τόλμῃ τε καὶ μάχῃ εἰς ἔλαττον συνειλοῦντο .
And the enemy, as they were forced back by them  —  by their courage as well as by their fighting  —  were being crowded together into an ever smaller space.


7.2.8
3275
ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τῷ καιρῷ οἱ μὲν Ἀρκάδες καὶ οἱ Ἀργεῖοι περὶ τὴν πόλιν ἐκυκλοῦντο , καὶ κατὰ κεφαλὴν τὸ τεῖχος τῆς ἀκροπόλεως διώρυττον ·
At this critical moment the Arcadians and Argives were circling around the city and beginning to dig through the wall of the Acropolis from its upper side;


7.2.8
3276
τῶν δ’ ἔνδοθεν οἱ μὲν ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος , οἱ δὲ καὶ ἔξωθεν ἔτι ἐπαναβαίνοντας , ἐπὶ ταῖς κλίμαξιν ὄντας , ἔπαιον , οἱ δὲ πρὸς τοὺς ἀναβεβηκότας αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τοὺς πύργους ἐμάχοντο , καὶ πῦρ εὑρόντες ἐν ταῖς σκηναῖς ὑφῆπτον αὐτούς , προσφοροῦντες τῶν δραγμάτων ἃ ἔτυχεν ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς ἀκροπόλεως τεθερισμένα .
and as for the citizens within, some were dealing blows upon the people on the wall, others upon those who were still climbing up from the outside and were on the ladders, and still others were fighting against those among the enemy who had mounted upon the towers; they also found fire in the tents and began to set the towers ablaze from below, bringing up some sheaves which chanced to have been harvested on the Acropolis itself.


7.2.8
3277
ἐνταῦθα δὴ οἱ μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν πύργων τὴν φλόγα φοβούμενοι ἐξήλλοντο , οἱ δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν τειχῶν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνδρῶν παιόμενοι ἐξέπιπτον .
Then the people upon the towers, in fear of the flames, jumped off one after another, while those upon the walls, under the blows of their human adversaries, kept falling off.


7.2.9
3278
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἅπαξ ἤρξαντο ὑπείκειν , ταχὺ δὴ πᾶσα ἡ ἀκρόπολις ἔρημος τῶν πολεμίων ἐγεγένητο .
And when they had once begun to give way, speedily the whole Acropolis had become bare of the enemy.


7.2.9
3279
εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ οἱ ἱππεῖς ἐξήλαυνον ·
Thereupon the horsemen straightway sallied forth from the city;


7.2.9
3280
οἱ δὲ πολέμιοι ἰδόντες αὐτοὺς ἀπεχώρουν , καταλιπόντες τάς τε κλίμακας καὶ τοὺς νεκρούς , ἐνίους δὲ καὶ ζῶντας ἀποκεχωλευμένους .
and the enemy upon seeing them retired, leaving behind their ladders, their dead, and likewise some of the living who had been badly lamed.


7.2.9
3281
ἀπέθανον δὲ τῶν πολεμίων οἵ τε ἔνδον μαχόμενοι καὶ οἱ ἔξω ἁλλόμενοι οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν ὀγδοήκοντα .
And the number of the enemy who were killed, both in the fighting within and by leaping down without, was not less than eighty.


7.2.9
3282
ἔνθα δὴ θεάσασθαι παρῆν ἐπὶ τῆς σωτηρίας τοὺς μὲν ἄνδρας δεξιουμένους ἀλλήλους , τὰς δὲ γυναῖκας πιεῖν τε φερούσας καὶ ἅμα χαρᾷ δακρυούσας ·
Then one might have beheld the men congratulating one another with handclasps on their preservation, and the women bringing them drink and at the same time crying for joy.


7.2.9
3283
πάντας δὲ τοὺς παρόντας τότε γε τῷ ὄντι κλαυσίγελως εἶχεν .
Indeed, laughter mingled with tears did on that occasion really possess all who were present.


7.2.10
3284
ἐνέβαλον δὲ καὶ τῷ ὑστέρῳ ἔτει εἰς τὸν Φλειοῦντα οἵ τε Ἀργεῖοι καὶ οἱ Ἀρκάδες ἅπαντες .
In the following year likewise the Argives and all the Arcadians invaded the territory of Phlius.


7.2.10
3285
αἴτιον δ’ ἦν τοῦ ἐπικεῖσθαι αὐτοὺς ἀεὶ τοῖς Φλειασίοις ὅτι ἅμα μὲν ὠργίζοντο αὐτοῖς , ἅμα δὲ ἐν μέσῳ εἶχον , καὶ ἐν ἐλπίδι ἦσαν ἀεὶ διὰ τὴν ἀπορίαν τῶν ἐπιτηδείων παραστήσεσθαι αὐτούς .
The reason for their continually besetting the Phliasians was partly that they were angry with them, and partly that they had the country of the Phliasians between them, and were always in hope that through want of provisions they would bring them to terms.


7.2.10
3286
οἱ δ’ ἱππεῖς καὶ οἱ ἐπίλεκτοι τῶν Φλειασίων καὶ ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ἐμβολῇ ἐπὶ τῇ διαβάσει τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἐπιτίθενται σὺν τοῖς παροῦσι τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἱππεῦσι ·
But on this invasion also the horsemen and the picked troops of the Phliasians, along with the horsemen of the Athenians who were present, attacked them at the crossing of the river;


7.2.10
3287
καὶ κρατήσαντες ἐποίησαν τοὺς πολεμίους τὸ λοιπὸν τῆς ἡμέρας ὑπὸ τὰς ἀκρωρείας ὑποχωρεῖν , ὥσπερ ἀπὸ φιλίου καρποῦ τοῦ ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ φυλαττομένους μὴ καταπατήσειαν .
and having won the victory, they made the enemy retire under the heights for the rest of the day, just as if they were keeping carefully away from the corn in the plain as the property of friends, so as not to trample it down.


7.2.11
3288
αὖθις δέ ποτε ἐστράτευσεν εἰς τὸν Φλειοῦντα ὁ ἐν τῷ Σικυῶνι ἄρχων Θηβαῖος , ἄγων οὕς τε αὐτὸς εἶχε φρουροὺς καὶ Σικυωνίους καὶ Πελληνέας ·
On another occasion the Theban governor at Sicyon marched upon Phlius at the head of the garrison which he had under his own command, and of the Sicyonians and Pelleneans  —


7.2.11
3289
ἤδη γὰρ τότε ἠκολούθουν τοῖς Θηβαίοις ·
for at that time they were already following the Thebans;


7.2.11
3290
καὶ Εὔφρων δὲ τοὺς αὑτοῦ ἔχων μισθοφόρους περὶ δισχιλίους συνεστρατεύετο .
and Euphron also took part in the expedition with his mercenaries, about two thousand in number.


7.2.11
3291
οἱ μὲν οὖν ἄλλοι αὐτῶν διὰ τοῦ Τρικαράνου κατέβαινον ἐπὶ τὸ Ἥραιον , ὡς τὸ πεδίον φθεροῦντες .
Now the main body of the troops descended along Tricaranum toward the Heraeum with the intention of laying waste the plain;


7.2.11
3292
κατὰ δὲ τὰς εἰς Κόρινθον φερούσας πύλας ἐπὶ τοῦ ἄκρου κατέλιπε Σικυωνίους τε καὶ Πελληνέας , ὅπως μὴ ταύτῃ περιελθόντες οἱ Φλειάσιοι κατὰ κεφαλὴν αὐτῶν γένοιντο ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἡραίου .
but the commander left the Sicyonians and Pelleneans behind upon the height over against the gates leading to Corinth, so that the Phliasians should not go around by that way and get above his men at the Heraeum.


7.2.12
3293
ὡς δ’ ἔγνωσαν οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως τοὺς πολεμίους ἐπὶ τὸ πεδίον ὡρμημένους , ἀντεξελθόντες οἵ τε ἱππεῖς καὶ οἱ ἐπίλεκτοι τῶν Φλειασίων ἐμάχοντο καὶ οὐκ ἀνίεσαν εἰς τὸ πεδίον αὐτούς .
When, however, the people in the city perceived that the enemy had set out for the plain, the horsemen and the picked troops of the Phliasians sallied forth against them, gave battle, and did not allow them to make their way to the plain.


7.2.12
3294
καὶ τὸ μὲν πλεῖστον τῆς ἡμέρας ἐνταῦθα ἀκροβολιζόμενοι διῆγον , οἱ μὲν περὶ τὸν Εὔφρονα ἐπιδιώκοντες μέχρι τοῦ ἱππασίμου , οἱ δὲ ἔνδοθεν μέχρι τοῦ Ἡραίου .
And they spent most of the day there in fighting at long range, the troops of Euphron pursuing up to the point where the country was suited for cavalry, and the men from the city as far as the Heraeum.


7.2.13
3295
ἐπεὶ δὲ καιρὸς ἐδόκει εἶναι , ἀπῇσαν οἱ πολέμιοι κύκλῳ τοῦ Τρικαράνου ·
When, however, it seemed to be the proper time, the enemy retired by a circuitous route over Tricaranum,


7.2.13
3296
ὥστε γὰρ τὴν σύντομον πρὸς τοὺς Πελληνέας ἀφικέσθαι ἡ πρὸ τοῦ τείχους φάραγξ εἶργε .
for the ravine in front of the wall prevented them from reaching the Pelleneans by the direct way.


7.2.13
3297
μικρὸν δ’ αὐτοὺς πρὸς τὸ ὄρθιον προπέμψαντες οἱ Φλειάσιοι ἀποτρεπόμενοι ἵεντο τὴν παρὰ τὸ τεῖχος ἐπὶ τοὺς Πελληνέας καὶ τοὺς μετ’ αὐτῶν .
Then the Phliasians, after following them a little way up the hill, turned back and charged along the road which leads past the wall, against the Pelleneans and those with them.


7.2.14
3298
καὶ οἱ περὶ τὸν Θηβαῖον δὲ αἰσθόμενοι τὴν σπουδὴν τῶν Φλειασίων ἡμιλλῶντο ὅπως φθάσειαν τοῖς Πελληνεῦσι βοηθήσαντες .
And the troops of the Theban general, upon perceiving the haste of the Phliasians, began racing with them in order to reach the Pelleneans first and give them aid.


7.2.14
3299
ἀφικόμενοι δὲ πρότεροι οἱ ἱππεῖς ἐμβάλλουσι τοῖς Πελληνεῦσι .
The horsemen, however, arrived first, and attacked the Pelleneans.


7.2.14
3300
δεξαμένων δὲ τὸ πρῶτον , ἐπαναχωρήσαντες πάλιν σὺν τοῖς παραγεγενημένοις τῶν πεζῶν ἐνέβαλον καὶ ἐκ χειρὸς ἐμάχοντο .
And when at the outset they withstood the attack, the Phliasians fell back, but then attacked again in company with such of the foot-soldiers as had come up, and fought hand-to-hand.


7.2.14
3301
καὶ ἐκ τούτου δὴ ἐγκλίνουσιν οἱ πολέμιοι , καὶ ἀποθνῄσκουσι τῶν τε Σικυωνίων τινὲς καὶ τῶν Πελληνέων μάλα πολλοὶ καὶ ἄνδρες ἀγαθοί .
At this the enemy gave way, and some of the Sicyonians fell and very many of the Pelleneans, and brave men, too.


7.2.15
3302
τούτων δὲ γενομένων οἱ μὲν Φλειάσιοι τροπαῖον ἵσταντο λαμπρὸν παιανίζοντες , ὥσπερ εἰκός ·
When these things had taken place the Phliasians set up a trophy, sounding their paean loudly, as was natural;


7.2.15
3303
οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Θηβαῖον καὶ τὸν Εὔφρονα περιεώρων ταῦτα , ὥσπερ ἐπὶ θέαν περιδεδραμηκότες .
and the troops of the Theban general and Euphron allowed all this to go on, just as if they had made their race to see a spectacle.


7.2.15
3304
τούτων δὲ πραχθέντων , οἱ μὲν ἐπὶ Σικυῶνος ἀπῆλθον , οἱ δ’ εἰς τὸ ἄστυ ἀπεχώρησαν .
Then, after these proceedings were finished, the one party departed for Sicyon and the other returned to the city.


7.2.16
3305
καλὸν δὲ καὶ τοῦτο διεπράξαντο οἱ Φλειάσιοι ·
Another noble deed which the Phliasians performed was this:


7.2.16
3306
τὸν γὰρ Πελληνέα πρόξενον ζῶντα λαβόντες , καίπερ πάντων σπανιζόμενοι , ἀφῆκαν ἄνευ λύτρων .
when they had made a prisoner of Proxenus, the Pellenean, even though they were in want of everything, they let him go without a ransom.


7.2.16
3307
γενναίους μὲν δὴ καὶ ἀλκίμους πῶς οὐκ ἄν τις φαίη εἶναι τοὺς τοιαῦτα διαπραττομένους ;
How could one help saying that men who performed such deeds were noble and valiant?


7.2.17
3308
ὥς γε μὴν καὶ διὰ καρτερίας τὴν πίστιν τοῖς φίλοις διέσῳζον περιφανές ·
Furthermore, that it was only by stout endurance that they maintained their fidelity to their friends is clearly manifest;


7.2.17
3309
οἳ ἐπεὶ εἴργοντο τῶν ἐκ τῆς γῆς καρπῶν , ἔζων τὰ μὲν ἐκ τῆς πολεμίας λαμβάνοντες , τὰ δὲ ἐκ Κορίνθου ὠνούμενοι , διὰ πολλῶν κινδύνων ἐπὶ τὴν ἀγορὰν ἰόντες , χαλεπῶς μὲν τιμὴν πορίζοντες , χαλεπῶς δὲ τοὺς πορίζοντας διαπραττόμενοι , γλίσχρως δ’ ἐγγυητὰς καθιστάντες τῶν ἀξόντων ὑποζυγίων .
for when they were shut off from the products of their land, they lived partly by what they could get from the enemy’s territory, and partly by buying from Corinth; they went to the market through the midst of many dangers, with difficulty provided the price of supplies, with difficulty brought through the enemy’s lines the people who fetched these supplies, and were hard put to it to find men who would guarantee the safety of the beasts of burden which were to convey them.


7.2.18
3310
ἤδη δὲ παντάπασιν ἀποροῦντες Χάρητα διεπράξαντο σφίσι παραπέμψαι τὴν παραπομπήν .
At length, when they were in desperate straits, they arranged that Chares should escort their supply train.


7.2.18
3311
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐν Φλειοῦντι ἐγένοντο , ἐδεήθησαν αὐτοῦ καὶ τοὺς ἀχρείους συνεκπέμψαι εἰς τὴν Πελλήνην .
Upon his arrival at Phlius they begged him to help them also to convoy their non-combatants to Pellene.


7.2.18
3312
κ- ἐκείνους μὲν ἐκεῖ κατέλιπον , ἀγοράσαντες δὲ καὶ ἐπισκευασάμενοι ὁπόσα ἐδύναντο ὑποζύγια νυκτὸς ἀπῇσαν , οὐκ ἀγνοοῦντες ὅτι ἐνεδρεύσοιντο ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων , ἀλλὰ νομίζοντες χαλεπώτερον εἶναι τοῦ μάχεσθαι τὸ μὴ ἔχειν τ- ἐπιτήδεια .
Accordingly they left these people at Pellene, and after making their purchases and packing as many beasts of burden as they could, they set off during the night, not unaware that they would be ambushed by the enemy, but thinking that to be without provisions was a more grievous thing than fighting.


7.2.19
3313
καὶ προῇσαν μὲν οἱ Φλειάσιοι μετὰ Χάρητος ·
Now the Phliasians, together with Chares, went on ahead,


7.2.19
3314
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐνέτυχον τοῖς πολεμίοις , εὐθὺς ἔργου τε εἴχοντο καὶ παρακελευσάμενοι ἀλλήλοις ἐνέκειντο , καὶ ἅμα Χάρητα ἐπιβοηθεῖν ἐβόων .
and when they came upon the enemy they immediately set to work, and, cheering one another on, pressed their attack, while at the same time they shouted to Chares to come to their aid.


7.2.19
3315
νίκης δὲ γενομένης καὶ ἐκβληθέντων ἐκ τῆς ὁδοῦ τῶν πολεμίων , οὕτω δὴ οἴκαδε καὶ ἑαυτοὺς καὶ ἃ ἦγον ἀπέσωσαν .
And when victory had been achieved and the enemy driven out of the road, in this wise they brought home in safety both themselves and the supplies they were conveying.


7.2.19
3316
ὡς δὲ τὴν νύκτα ἠγρύπνησαν , ἐκάθευδον μέχρι πόρρω τῆς ἡμέρας .
Now inasmuch as the Phliasians had passed the night without sleep, they slept until far on in the day.


7.2.20
3317
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀνέστη ὁ Χάρης , προσελθόντες οἵ τε ἱππεῖς καὶ οἱ χρησιμώτατοι τῶν ὁπλιτῶν ἔλεγον ·
But when Chares arose, the horsemen and the best of the hoplites came to him and said:


7.2.20
3318
ὦ Χάρης , ἔξεστί σοι τήμερον κάλλιστον ἔργον διαπράξασθαι .
Chares, it is within your power to-day to accomplish a splendid deed.


7.2.20
3319
χωρίον γὰρ ἐπὶ τοῖς ὅροις ἡμῖν οἱ Σικυώνιοι τειχίζουσιν , οἰκοδόμους μὲν πολλοὺς ἔχοντες , ὁπλίτας δὲ οὐ πάνυ πολλούς .
For the Sicyonians are fortifying a place upon our borders, and they have many builders but not very many hoplites.


7.2.20
3320
ἡγησόμεθα μὲν οὖν ἡμεῖς οἱ ἱππεῖς καὶ τῶν ὁπλιτῶν οἱ ἐρρωμενέστατοι ·
Now therefore we, the horsemen and the stoutest of the hoplites, will lead the way;


7.2.20
3321
σὺ δὲ τὸ ξενικὸν ἔχων ἐὰν ἀκολουθῇς , ἴσως μὲν διαπεπραγμένα σοι καταλήψῃ , ἴσως δὲ ἐπιφανεὶς σὺ τροπήν , ὥσπερ ἐν Πελλήνῃ , ποιήσεις .
and if you will follow us with your mercenary force, perhaps you will find the business already settled for you, and perhaps your appearance will turn the scale, as happened at Pellene.


7.2.20
3322
εἰ δέ τι δυσχερές σοί ἐστιν ὧν λέγομεν , ἀνακοίνωσαι τοῖς θεοῖς θυόμενος ·
But if anything in what we propose is unacceptable to you, consult the gods by sacrifices;


7.2.20
3323
οἰόμεθα γὰρ ἔτι σε μᾶλλον ἡμῶν τοὺς θεοὺς ταῦτα πράττειν κελεύσειν .
for we think that the gods will bid you do this even more urgently than we do.


7.2.20
3324
τοῦτο δὲ χρή , ὦ Χάρης , εὖ εἰδέναι , ὅτι ἐὰν ταῦτα πράξῃς , τοῖς μὲν πολεμίοις ἐπιτετειχικὼς ἔσει , φιλίαν δὲ πόλιν διασεσωκώς , εὐκλεέστατος δὲ ἐν τῇ πατρίδι ἔσει , ὀνομαστότατος δὲ καὶ ἐν τοῖς συμμάχοις καὶ πολεμίοις .
And this, Chares, you should well understand, that if you accomplish these things you will have secured a stronghold as a base of attack upon the enemy and have preserved a friendly city, and you will win the fairest of fame in your fatherland and be most renowned among both allies and enemies.


7.2.21
3325
ὁ μὲν δὴ Χάρης πεισθεὶς ἐθύετο , τῶν δὲ Φλειασίων εὐθὺς οἱ μὲν ἱππεῖς τοὺς θώρακας ἐνεδύοντο καὶ τοὺς ἵππους ἐχαλίνουν , οἱ δὲ ὁπλῖται ὅσα εἰς πεζὸν παρεσκευάζοντο .
Chares accordingly was persuaded and offered sacrifice, while on the Phliasian side the horsemen straightway put on their breastplates and bridled their horses, and the hoplites made all the preparations necessary for infantry.


7.2.21
3326
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀναλαβόντες τὰ ὅπλα ἐπορεύοντο ἔνθα ἐθύετο , ἀπήντα αὐτοῖς ὁ Χάρης καὶ ὁ μάντις , καὶ ἔλεγον ὅτι καλὰ τὰ ἱερά .
When they had taken up their arms and were proceeding to the place where he was sacrificing, Chares and the seer met them and said that the sacrifices were favourable.


7.2.21
3327
ἀλλὰ περιμένετε , ἔφασαν ·
Wait for us, they said;


7.2.21
3328
ἤδη γὰρ καὶ ἡμεῖς ἔξιμεν .
for we, too, will set forth at once.


7.2.21
3329
ὡς δὲ τάχιστα ἐκηρύχθη , θείᾳ τινὶ προθυμίᾳ καὶ οἱ μισθοφόροι ταχὺ ἐξέδραμον .
And as soon as word had been given by the herald, Chares’ mercenaries also speedily rushed out with a kind of heaven-sent eagerness.


7.2.22
3330
ἐπεὶ δὲ Χάρης ἤρξατο πορεύεσθαι , προῇσαν αὐτοῦ οἱ τῶν Φλειασίων ἱππεῖς καὶ πεζοί ·
Now when Chares had begun to march, the cavalry and infantry of the Phliasians went on ahead of him;


7.2.22
3331
καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ταχέως ἡγοῦντο , ἔπειτα δὲ ἐτρόχαζον ·
and at first they led the way rapidly, and then they began to run;


7.2.22
3332
τέλος δὲ οἱ μὲν ἱππεῖς κατὰ κράτος ἤλαυνον , οἱ δὲ πεζοὶ κατὰ κράτος ἔθεον ὡς δυνατὸν ἐν τάξει , οἷς καὶ ὁ Χάρης σπουδῇ ἐπηκολούθει .
finally, the horsemen were riding at the top of their speed and the foot-soldiers were running as fast as it is possible for men in line to go, while after them came Chares, following in haste.


7.2.22
3333
ἦν μὲν οὖν τῆς ὥρας μικρὸν πρὸ δύντος ἡλίου ·
The time was a little before sunset,


7.2.22
3334
κατελάμβανον δὲ τοὺς ἐν τῷ τείχει πολεμίους τοὺς μὲν λουομένους , τοὺς δ’ ὀψοποιουμένους , τοὺς δὲ φυρῶντας , τοὺς δὲ στιβάδας ποιουμένους .
and they found the enemy at the fortress, some bathing, some cooking, some kneading, and some making their beds.


7.2.23
3335
ὡς δ’ εἶδον τὴν σφοδρότητα τῆς ἐφόδου , εὐθὺς ἐκπλαγέντες ἔφυγον , καταλιπόντες τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς ἀνδράσι πάντα τ- ἐπιτήδεια .
Now so soon as the enemy saw the vehemence of the onset they straightway fled in terror, leaving all their provisions behind for these brave men.


7.2.23
3336
κ- ἐκεῖνοι μὲν ταῦτα δειπνήσαντες καὶ οἴκοθεν ἄλλα ἐλθόντα , ὡς ἐπ’ εὐτυχίᾳ σπείσαντες καὶ παιανίσαντες καὶ φυλακὰς κατασκευασάμενοι , κατέδαρθον .
The latter accordingly made their dinner off these provisions and more which came from home, and after pouring libations in honour of their good fortune, singing a paean, and posting guards, they went to sleep.


7.2.23
3337
οἱ δὲ Κορίνθιοι , ἀφικομένου τῆς νυκτὸς ἀγγέλου περὶ τῆς Θυαμίας , μάλα φιλικῶς κηρύξαντες τὰ ζεύγη καὶ τὰ ὑποζύγια πάντα καὶ σίτου γεμίσαντες εἰς τὸν Φλειοῦντα παρήγαγον ·
And the Corinthians, after news had reached them during the night in regard to Thyamia, in a most friendly way ordered out by proclamation all their teams and pack-animals, loaded them with corn, and convoyed them to Phlius;


7.2.23
3338
καὶ ἕωσπερ ἐτειχίζετο τὸ τεῖχος , ἑκάστης ἡμέρας παραπομπαὶ ἐγίγνοντο .
and so long as the fortifications were building, convoys continued to be sent out every day.


7.3.1
3339
περὶ μὲν δὴ Φλειασίων , ὡς καὶ πιστοὶ τοῖς φίλοις ἐγένοντο καὶ ἄλκιμοι ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ διετέλεσαν , καὶ ὡς πάντων σπανίζοντες διέμενον ἐν τῇ συμμαχίᾳ , εἴρηται .
The story of the Phliasians, then, how they proved themselves faithful to their friends and continued valiant in the war, and how, though in want of everything, they remained steadfast in their alliance, has been told.


7.3.1
3340
σχεδὸν δὲ περὶ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον Αἰνέας Στυμφάλιος , στρατηγὸς τῶν Ἀρκάδων γεγενημένος , νομίσας οὐκ ἀνεκτῶς ἔχειν τὰ ἐν τῷ Σικυῶνι , ἀναβὰς σὺν τῷ ἑαυτοῦ στρατεύματι εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν συγκαλεῖ τῶν Σικυωνίων τῶν τε ἔνδον ὄντων τοὺς κρατίστους καὶ τοὺς ἄνευ δόγματος ἐκπεπτωκότας μετεπέμπετο .
At about this time Aeneas the Stymphalian, who had become general of the Arcadians, thinking that conditions in Sicyon were not to be endured, went up to the Acropolis with his own army, called together the aristocrats among the Sicyonians who were in the city, and sent after those who had been exiled therefrom without a decree of the people.


7.3.2
3341
φοβηθεὶς δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Εὔφρων καταφεύγει εἰς τὸν λιμένα τῶν Σικυωνίων , καὶ μεταπεμψάμενος Πασίμηλον ἐκ Κορίνθου , διὰ τούτου παραδίδωσι τὸν λιμένα τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις καὶ ἐν ταύτῃ αὖ τῇ συμμαχίᾳ ἀνεστρέφετο , λέγων ὡς Λακεδαιμονίοις διατελοίη πιστὸς ὤν .
And Euphron, seized with fear at these proceedings, fled for refuge to the port of the Sicyonians, and after summoning Pasimelus to come from Corinth, through him handed over the port to the Lacedaemonians and appeared once more in their alliance, saying that he had all the time remained faithful to the Lacedaemonians.


7.3.2
3342
ὅτε γὰρ ψῆφος ἐδίδοτο ἐν τῇ πόλει , εἰ δοκοίη ἀφίστασθαι , μετ’ ὀλίγων ἀποψηφίσασθαι ἔφη ·
For he said that at the same time when a vote was taken in the city as to whether the Sicyonians should decide to revolt from them, he, with a few others, voted against it;


7.3.3
3343
ἔπειτα δὲ τοὺς προδόντας ἑαυτὸν βουλόμενος τιμωρήσασθαι δῆμον καταστῆσαι .
and that afterwards he had set up a democracy out of his desire to avenge himself on those who had betrayed him.


7.3.3
3344
καὶ νῦν , ἔφη , φεύγουσιν ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ πάντες οἱ ὑμᾶς προδιδόντες .
And at this moment, he said, all who were traitors to you are in exile by my act.


7.3.3
3345
εἰ μὲν οὖν ἐδυνάσθην ἐγώ , ὅλην ἂν ἔχων τὴν πόλιν πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἀπέστην ·
Now if I had found myself able, I should have gone over to you with the entire city.


7.3.3
3346
νῦν δ’ οὗ ἐγκρατὴς ἐγενόμην τὸν λιμένα παραδέδωκα ὑμῖν .
As it is, I have given over to you the port, over which alone I had gained control.


7.3.3
3347
ἠκροῶντο μὲν δὴ πολλοὶ αὐτοῦ ταῦτα ·
Those who heard him say these words were many,


7.3.3
3348
ὁπόσοι δὲ ἐπείθοντο οὐ πάνυ κατάδηλον .
but how many believed him is by no means clear.


7.3.4
3349
ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἐπείπερ ἠρξάμην , διατελέσαι βούλομαι τὰ περὶ Εὔφρονος .
However, since I have begun it, I desire to finish the story of Euphron.


7.3.4
3350
στασιασάντων γὰρ ἐν τῷ Σικυῶνι τῶν τε βελτίστων καὶ τοῦ δήμου , λαβὼν ὁ Εὔφρων Ἀθήνηθεν ξενικὸν πάλιν κατέρχεται .
When the aristocrats and the commons at Sicyon had fallen into strife, Euphron obtained a force of mercenaries from Athens and came back again.


7.3.4
3351
καὶ τοῦ μὲν ἄστεως ἐκράτει σὺν τῷ δήμῳ ·
And with the help of the commons he was master of the town;


7.3.4
3352
Θηβαίου δὲ ἁρμοστοῦ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἔχοντος , ἐπεὶ ἔγνω οὐκ ἂν δυνάμενος τῶν Θηβαίων ἐχόντων τὴν ἀκρόπολιν τῆς πόλεως κρατεῖν , συσκευασάμενος χρήματα ᾤχετο , ὡς τούτοις πείσων Θηβαίους ἐκβάλλειν μὲν τοὺς κρατίστους , παραδοῦναι δ’ αὐτῷ πάλιν τὴν πόλιν .
a Theban governor, however, held the Acropolis, and since Euphron realized that with the Thebans holding the Acropolis he could not possibly be master of the state, he got together money and set out with the intention of persuading the Thebans, by means of this money, to banish the aristocrats and give the state over to him again.


7.3.5
3353
αἰσθόμενοι δὲ οἱ πρόσθεν φυγάδες τὴν ὁδὸν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν παρασκευήν , ἀντεπορεύοντο εἰς τὰς Θήβας .
When, however, the former exiles learned of his journey and his plans, they likewise proceeded to Thebes.


7.3.5
3354
ὡς δ’ ἑώρων αὐτὸν οἰκείως τοῖς ἄρχουσι συνόντα , φοβηθέντες μὴ διαπράξαιτο ἃ βούλεται , παρεκινδύνευσάν τινες καὶ ἀποσφάττουσιν ἐν τῇ ἀκροπόλει τὸν Εὔφρονα , τῶν τε ἀρχόντων καὶ τῆς βουλῆς συγκαθημένων .
And as they saw him in familiar association with the Theban officials, they were seized with fear that he might accomplish what he wanted, and some of them took the risk and slew Euphron upon the Acropolis while the officials and the senate were in session there.


7.3.5
3355
οἱ μέντοι ἄρχοντες τοὺς ποιήσαντας εἰσήγαγον εἰς τὴν βουλήν , καὶ ἔλεγον τάδε .
But the officials brought those who had done the deed before the senate and spoke as follows:


7.3.6
3356
ὦ ἄνδρες πολῖται , ἡμεῖς τουτουσὶ τοὺς ἀποκτείναντας Εὔφρονα διώκομεν περὶ θανάτου , ὁρῶντες ὅτι οἱ μὲν σώφρονες οὐδὲν δήπου ἄδικον οὐδὲ ἀνόσιον ποιοῦσιν , οἱ δὲ πονηροὶ ποιοῦσι μέν , λανθάνειν δὲ πειρῶνται , οὗτοι δὲ τοσοῦτον πάντας ἀνθρώπους ὑπερβεβλήκασι τόλμῃ τε καὶ μιαρίᾳ ὥστε παρ’ αὐτάς τε τὰς ἀρχὰς καὶ παρ’ αὐτοὺς ὑμᾶς τοὺς κυρίους οὕστινας δεῖ ἀποθνῄσκειν καὶ οὕστινας μή , αὐτογνωμονήσαντες ἀπέκτειναν τὸν ἄνδρα .
Fellow citizens, we arraign on the capital charge these men who have slain Euphron, seeing, as we do, that while right-minded men commit no unjust or unrighteous deed, and the wicked, although they commit them, strive to do them in secret, these persons have so far surpassed all mankind in hardihood and villainy that in the presence of the very magistrates and in the presence of you, who alone have authority to decide who shall die and who shall not, they took decision into their own hands and slew the man.


7.3.6
3357
εἰ οὖν οὗτοι μὴ δώσουσι τὴν ἐσχάτην δίκην , τίς ποτε πρὸς τὴν πόλιν θαρρῶν πορεύσεται ;
Therefore if these men do not suffer the extreme penalty, who will ever have the courage to visit our city?


7.3.6
3358
τί δὲ πείσεται ἡ πόλις , εἰ ἐξέσται τῷ βουλομένῳ ἀποκτεῖναι πρὶν δηλῶσαι ὅτου ἕνεκα ἥκει ἕκαστος ;
And what will become of the city if any one who so desires is to be allowed to slay a man before he has made known for what purpose he has come here?


7.3.6
3359
ἡμεῖς μὲν δὴ τούτους διώκομεν ὡς ἀνοσιωτάτους καὶ ἀδικωτάτους καὶ ἀνομωτάτους καὶ πλεῖστον δὴ ὑπεριδόντας τῆς πόλεως ·
We, then, arraign these men as utterly unrighteous, unjust, and lawless, and as having shown the utmost contempt for our city.


7.3.6
3360
ὑμεῖς δὲ ἀκηκοότες , ὁποίας τινὸς ὑμῖν δοκοῦσιν ἄξιοι εἶναι δίκης , ταύτην αὐτοῖς ἐπίθετε .
It is for you, after you have heard, to inflict upon them such penalty as they seem to you to deserve.


7.3.7
3361
οἱ μὲν ἄρχοντες τοιαῦτα εἶπον ·
Such were the words of the officials;


7.3.7
3362
τῶν δὲ ἀποκτεινάντων οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι ἠρνοῦντο μὴ αὐτόχειρες γεγενῆσθαι ·
as for those who had slain Euphron, all except one denied that they had been the perpetrators of the deed;


7.3.7
3363
εἷς δὲ ὡμολογήκει , καὶ τῆς ἀπολογίας ὧδέ πως ἤρχετο .
but one had admitted it, and began his defence in some such words as these:


7.3.7
3364
ἀλλ’ ὑπερορᾶν μέν , ὦ Θηβαῖοι , οὐ δυνατὸν ὑμῶν ἀνδρὶ ὃς εἰδείη κυρίους μὲν ὄντας ὅ τι βούλεσθε αὐτῷ χρῆσθαι ·
Surely, Thebans, to feel contempt for you is not possible for a man if he knows that you have authority to do with him as you will;


7.3.7
3365
τίνι μὴν πιστεύων ἐνθάδε ἀπέκτεινα τὸν ἄνδρα ;
in what, then, did I trust when I here slew the man?


7.3.7
3366
εὖ ἴστε ὅτι πρῶτον μὲν τῷ νομίζειν δίκαιον ποιεῖν , ἔπειτα δὲ τῷ ὑμᾶς ὀρθῶς γνώσεσθαι .
Be well assured that it was first of all in the belief that I was doing a just deed, and secondly in the thought that you would decide rightly;


7.3.7
3367
ᾔδειν γὰρ ὅτι καὶ ὑμεῖς τοὺς περὶ Ἀρχίαν καὶ Ὑπάτην , οὓς ἐλάβετε ὅμοια Εὔφρονι πεποιηκότας , οὐ ψῆφον ἀνεμείνατε , ἀλλὰ ὁπότε πρῶτον ἐδυνάσθητε ἐτιμωρήσασθε , νομίζοντες τῶν τε περιφανῶς ἀνοσίων καὶ τῶν φανερῶς προδοτῶν καὶ τυραννεῖν ἐπιχειρούντων ὑπὸ πάντων ἀνθρώπων θάνατον κατεγνῶσθαι .
for I knew that you likewise, in dealing with the party of Archias and Hypates, whom you found to have performed acts like those of Euphron, did not wait for a vote, but punished them as soon as you found yourselves able to do so, believing that those who are manifestly unrighteous and those who are plainly traitors and attempting to be tyrants are already condemned to death by all mankind.


7.3.8
3368
οὐκοῦν καὶ Εὔφρων πᾶσι τούτοις ἔνοχος ἦν .
Was not Euphron also, I ask, guilty under all these heads?


7.3.8
3369
παραλαβὼν μὲν γὰρ τὰ ἱερὰ μεστὰ καὶ ἀργυρῶν καὶ χρυσῶν ἀναθημάτων κενὰ πάντων τούτων ἀπέδειξε .
In the first place, he found the shrines full of offerings both of silver and of gold, and left them empty of all these treasures.


7.3.8
3370
προδότης γε μὴν τίς ἂν περιφανέστερος Εὔφρονος εἴη , ὃς φιλαίτατος μὲν ὢν Λακεδαιμονίοις ὑμᾶς ἀντ’ ἐκείνων εἵλετο ·
Again, who could be more manifestly a traitor than Euphron, who was the closest of friends to the Lacedaemonians and then chose you in their stead,


7.3.8
3371
πιστὰ δὲ δοὺς καὶ λαβὼν παρ’ ὑμῶν πάλιν προύδωκεν ὑμᾶς καὶ παρέδωκε τοῖς ἐναντίοις τὸν λιμένα ;
and after he had given you pledges and received pledges from you, betrayed you again and handed over the port to your adversaries?


7.3.8
3372
καὶ μὴν πῶς οὐκ ἀπροφασίστως τύραννος ἦν , ὃς δούλους μὲν οὐ μόνον ἐλευθέρους ἀλλὰ καὶ πολίτας ἐποίει , ἀπεκτίννυε δὲ καὶ ἐφυγάδευε καὶ χρήματα ἀφῃρεῖτο οὐ τοὺς ἀδικοῦντας , ἀλλ’ οὓς αὐτῷ ἐδόκει ;
Once again, was he not beyond question a tyrant, when he made slaves not only free men but even citizens, and put to death and banished and robbed of property, not the people who were guilty of wrong-doing, but those whom it suited him to treat thus?


7.3.8
3373
οὗτοι δὲ ἦσαν οἱ βέλτιστοι .
And these were the better classes.


7.3.9
3374
αὖθις δὲ μετὰ τῶν ἐναντιωτάτων ὑμῖν Ἀθηναίων κατελθὼν εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἐναντία μὲν ἔθετο τὰ ὅπλα τῷ παρ’ ὑμῶν ἁρμοστῇ ·
Then after he had returned again to the city in company with your bitter adversaries, the Athenians, he set himself in arms against your governor;


7.3.9
3375
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐκεῖνον οὐκ ἐδυνάσθη ἐκ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως ἐκβαλεῖν , συσκευασάμενος χρήματα δεῦρο ἀφίκετο .
but since he found himself unable to expel him from the Acropolis, he got together money and came hither.


7.3.9
3376
καὶ εἰ μὲν ὅπλα ἡθροικὼς ἐφάνη ἐφ’ ὑμᾶς , καὶ χάριν ἄν μοι εἴχετε , εἰ ἀπέκτεινα αὐτόν ·
Now if he had been shown to have gathered armed forces with which to attack you, you would even feel grateful to me for slaying him;


7.3.9
3377
ὃς δὲ χρήματα ἦλθε παρασκευασάμενος , ὡς τούτοις ὑμᾶς διαφθερῶν καὶ πείσων πάλιν κύριον αὐτὸν ποιῆσαι τῆς πόλεως , τούτῳ ἐγὼ τὴν δίκην ἐπιθεὶς πῶς ἂν δικαίως ὑφ’ ὑμῶν ἀποθάνοιμι ;
but when he provided himself with money instead, and came with the purpose of corrupting you by means of this money and persuading you to make him lord of the city again, how can I justly be put to death by you for inflicting upon the man his due punishment?


7.3.9
3378
καὶ γὰρ οἱ μὲν ὅπλοις βιασθέντες βλάπτονται μέν , οὐ μέντοι ἄδικοί γε ἀναφαίνονται ·
For whereas those who are constrained by arms suffer damage, yet they are not thereby shown to be wicked at any rate;


7.3.9
3379
οἱ δὲ χρήμασι παρὰ τὸ βέλτιστον διαφθαρέντες ἅμα μὲν βλάπτονται , ἅμα δὲ αἰσχύνῃ περιπίπτουσιν .
but those who are corrupted by money in violation of the right not only suffer damage, but at the same time incur shame.


7.3.10
3380
εἰ μὲν τοίνυν ἐμοὶ μὲν πολέμιος ἦν , ὑμῖν δὲ φίλος , κ- ἐγὼ ὁμολογῶ μὴ καλῶς ἄν μοι ἔχειν παρ’ ὑμῖν τοῦτον ἀποκτεῖναι ·
To be sure, if he had been an enemy of mine but a friend of yours, I admit myself that it would not have been seemly for me to slay this man in your city;


7.3.10
3381
ὁ δὲ ὑμᾶς προδιδοὺς τί ἐμοὶ πολεμιώτερος ἦν ἢ ὑμῖν ;
but wherein was he, who was a traitor to you, more of an enemy to me than to you?


7.3.10
3382
ἀλλὰ νὴ Δία , εἴποι ἄν τις , ἑκὼν ἦλθε .
But, by Zeus, someone might say, he came of his own free will.


7.3.10
3383
κ- εἶτα εἰ μὲν ἀπεχόμενον τῆς ἡμετέρας πόλεως ἀπέκτεινέ τις αὐτόν , ἐπαίνου ἂν ἐτύγχανε ·
So, then, if anyone had slain him while he was keeping away from your city, he would have obtained praise;


7.3.10
3384
νῦν δὲ ὅτι πάλιν ἦλθεν ἄλλα πρὸ τοῖς πρόσθεν κακὰ ποιήσων , οὐ δικαίως φησί τις αὐτὸν τεθνάναι ;
but as it is, when he came again to do you more wrong in addition to what he had done before, does one say that he has not been slain justly?


7.3.10
3385
ποῦ ἔχων Ἕλλησι σπονδὰς ἀποδεῖξαι ἢ προδόταις ἢ παλιναυτομόλοις ἢ τυράννοις ;
Where can such a one show that a truce exists between Greeks and traitors, or double-deserters, or tyrants?


7.3.11
3386
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ἀναμνήσθητε ὅτι καὶ ἐψηφίσασθε δήπου τοὺς φυγάδας ἀγωγίμους εἶναι ἐκ πασῶν τῶν συμμαχίδων .
Besides all this, remember also that you voted, and properly, that exiles should be subject to extradition from all the cities of the alliance.


7.3.11
3387
ὅστις δὲ ἄνευ κοινοῦ τῶν συμμάχων δόγματος κατέρχεται φυγάς , τοῦτον ἔχοι τις ἂν εἰπεῖν ὅπως οὐ δίκαιόν ἐστιν ἀποθνῄσκειν ;
But as for an exile who returns without a general resolution of the allies, can anyone explain why it is unjust for such a one to be put to death?


7.3.11
3388
ἐγώ φημι , ὦ ἄνδρες , ἀποκτείναντας μὲν ὑμᾶς ἐμὲ τετιμωρηκότας ἔσεσθαι ἀνδρὶ τῷ πάντων ὑμῖν πολεμιωτάτῳ , γνόντας δὲ δίκαια πεποιηκέναι αὐτοὺς τετιμωρηκότας φανεῖσθαι ὑπέρ τε ὑμῶν αὐτῶν καὶ ὑπὲρ τῶν συμμάχων ἁπάντων .
I maintain, gentlemen, that if you put me to death, you will have avenged a man who was the worst of all your enemies, but if you decide that I have done what was right, you will be found to have taken vengeance both for your own selves and for all the allies.


7.3.12
3389
οἱ μὲν οὖν Θηβαῖοι ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες ἔγνωσαν δίκαια τὸν Εὔφρονα πεπονθέναι ·
The Thebans, after hearing these words, decided that Euphron had met his deserts;


7.3.12
3390
οἱ μέντοι πολῖται αὐτοῦ ὡς ἄνδρα ἀγαθὸν κομισάμενοι ἔθαψάν τε ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ καὶ ὡς ἀρχηγέτην τῆς πόλεως σέβονται .
his own citizens, however, esteeming him a good man, brought him home, buried him in their market-place, and pay him pious honours as the founder of their city.


7.3.12
3391
οὕτως , ὡς ἔοικεν , οἱ πλεῖστοι ὁρίζονται τοὺς εὐεργέτας ἑαυτῶν ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς εἶναι .
So true it is, as it seems, that most people define as good men their own benefactors.


7.4.1
3392
καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Εὔφρονος εἴρηται ·
The story of Euphron has been told,


7.4.1
3393
ἐγὼ δὲ ἔνθεν εἰς ταῦτα ἐξέβην ἐπάνειμι .
and I return to the point from which I digressed to this subject.


7.4.1
3394
ἔτι γὰρ τειχιζόντων τῶν Φλειασίων τὴν Θυαμίαν καὶ τοῦ Χάρητος ἔτι παρόντος Ὠρωπὸς ὑπὸ τῶν φευγόντων κατελήφθη .
While, namely, the Phliasians were still fortifying Thyamia and Chares was still with them, Oropus was seized by those who had been exiled therefrom.


7.4.1
3395
στρατευσαμένων δὲ πάντων Ἀθηναίων ἐπ’ αὐτὸν καὶ τὸν Χάρητα μεταπεμψαμένων ἐκ τῆς Θυαμίας , ὁ μὲν λιμὴν αὖ ὁ τῶν Σικυωνίων πάλιν ὑπ’ αὐτῶν τε τῶν πολιτῶν καὶ τῶν Ἀρκάδων ἁλίσκεται ·
When, however, the Athenians had set out in full force against the city and had summoned Chares from Thyamia, the port of the Sicyonians in its turn was recaptured by the citizens of Sicyon themselves and the Arcadians;


7.4.1
3396
τοῖς δ’ Ἀθηναίοις οὐδεὶς τῶν συμμάχων ἐβοήθησεν , ἀλλ’ ἀνεχώρησαν Θηβαίοις παρακαταθέμενοι τὸν Ὠρωπὸν μέχρι δίκης .
as for the Athenians, none of their allies came to their assistance, and they retired and left Oropus in the possession of the Thebans pending a judicial decision.


7.4.2
3397
καταμαθὼν δὲ ὁ Λυκομήδης μεμφομένους τοὺς Ἀθηναίους τοῖς συμμάχοις , ὅτι αὐτοὶ μὲν πολλὰ πράγματα εἶχον δι’ ἐκείνους , ἀντεβοήθησε δ’ αὐτοῖς οὐδείς , πείθει τοὺς μυρίους πράττειν περὶ συμμαχίας πρὸς αὐτούς .
And now Lycomedes, upon learning that the Athenians were finding fault with their allies because, while they were themselves suffering many troubles on their account, none gave them any assistance in return, persuaded the Ten Thousand to negotiate for an alliance with the Athenians.


7.4.2
3398
τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον ἐδυσχέραινόν τινες τῶν Ἀθηναίων τὸ Λακεδαιμονίοις ὄντας φίλους γενέσθαι τοῖς ἐναντίοις αὐτῶν συμμάχους ·
At first, indeed, some of the Athenians took it ill that, when they were friends of the Lacedaemonians, they should become allies of their adversaries;


7.4.2
3399
ἐπειδὴ δὲ λογιζόμενοι ηὕρισκον οὐδὲν μεῖον Λακεδαιμονίοις ἢ σφίσιν ἀγαθὸν τὸ Ἀρκάδας μὴ προσδεῖσθαι Θηβαίων , οὕτω δὴ προσεδέχοντο τὴν τῶν Ἀρκάδων συμμαχίαν .
but when upon consideration they found that it was no less advantageous to the Lacedaemonians than to themselves that the Arcadians should not require the support of the Thebans, under these circumstances they accepted the alliance with the Arcadians.


7.4.3
3400
καὶ Λυκομήδης ταῦτα πράττων , ἀπιὼν Ἀθήνηθεν δαιμονιώτατα ἀποθνῄσκει .
While Lycomedes was engaged in these negotiations, upon his departure from Athens he met his death by what was quite manifestly a divine interposition.


7.4.3
3401
ὄντων γὰρ παμπόλλων πλοίων , ἐκλεξάμενος τούτων ὃ ἐβούλετο , καὶ συνθέμενος τοίνυν ἀποβιβάσαι ὅποι αὐτὸς κελεύοι , εἵλετο ἐνταῦθα ἐκβῆναι ἔνθα οἱ φυγάδες ἐτύγχανον ὄντες .
For there were very many ships available and he selected from them the one he wanted and made an agreement with the sailors to land him wherever he should himself direct; and he chose to land at the very spot where the Arcadian exiles chanced to be.


7.4.3
3402
κ- ἐκεῖνος μὲν οὕτως ἀποθνῄσκει , ἡ μέντοι συμμαχία ὄντως ἐπεραίνετο .
He, then, met his death in this way, but the alliance was really accomplished.


7.4.4
3403
εἰπόντος δὲ Δημοτίωνος ἐν τῷ δήμῳ τῶν Ἀθηναίων ὡς ἡ μὲν πρὸς τοὺς Ἀρκάδας φιλία καλῶς αὐτῷ δοκοίη πράττεσθαι , τοῖς μέντοι στρατηγοῖς προστάξαι ἔφη χρῆναι ὅπως καὶ Κόρινθος σῴα ᾖ τῷ δήμῳ τῶν Ἀθηναίων ·
Meantime Demotion said in the Assembly of the Athenians that while it seemed to him a good thing to be negotiating this friendship with the Arcadians, they ought, he said, to give instructions to their generals to see to it that Corinth also should be kept safe for the Athenian people;


7.4.4
3404
ἀκούσαντες δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Κορίνθιοι , ταχὺ πέμψαντες ἱκανοὺς φρουροὺς ἑαυτῶν πάντοσε ὅπου Ἀθηναῖοι ἐφρούρουν εἶπαν αὐτοῖς ἀπιέναι , ὡς οὐδὲν ἔτι δεόμενοι φρουρῶν .
and on hearing of this the Corinthians speedily sent adequate garrisons of their own to every place where Athenians were on guard and told the latter to depart, saying that they no longer had any need of garrisons.


7.4.4
3405
οἱ δ’ ἐπείθοντο .
The men accordingly obeyed.


7.4.4
3406
ὡς δὲ συνῆλθον οἱ ἐκ τῶν φρουρίων Ἀθηναῖοι εἰς τὴν πόλιν , ἐκήρυξαν οἱ Κορίνθιοι , εἴ τις ἀδικοῖτο Ἀθηναίων , ἀπογράφεσθαι , ὡς ληψομένους τὰ δίκαια .
And as soon as the Athenians had come together from their guard-stations to the city of Corinth, the Corinthians made proclamation that if any of the Athenians had been wronged, they were to register their names, in the assurance that they would receive their just dues.


7.4.5
3407
οὕτω δὲ τούτων ἐχόντων Χάρης ἀφικνεῖται μετὰ ναυτικοῦ πρὸς Κεγχρειάς .
While these matters were in this state, Chares arrived at Cenchreae with a fleet.


7.4.5
3408
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἔγνω τὰ πεπραγμένα , ἔλεξεν ὅτι ἀκούσας ἐπιβουλεύεσθαι τῇ πόλει βοηθῶν παρείη .
And when he learned what had been done, he said that he had heard there was plotting against the state and had come to give aid.


7.4.5
3409
οἱ δ’ ἐπαινέσαντες αὐτὸν οὐδέν τι μᾶλλον ἐδέχοντο τὰς ναῦς εἰς τὸν λιμένα , ἀλλ’ ἀποπλεῖν ἐκέλευον ·
The Corinthians, however, while they thanked him, were none the more disposed to admit his ships into their harbour, but bade him sail away;


7.4.5
3410
καὶ τοὺς ὁπλίτας δὲ τὰ δίκαια ποιήσαντες ἀπέπεμψαν .
and they likewise sent away the hoplites after rendering them their just dues.


7.4.5
3411
ἐκ μὲν οὖν τῆς Κορίνθου οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι οὕτως ἀπηλλάγησαν .
It was in this way, then, that the Athenians departed from Corinth.


7.4.6
3412
τοῖς μέντοι Ἀρκάσι πέμπειν ἠναγκάζοντο τοὺς ἱππέας ἐπικούρους διὰ τὴν συμμαχίαν , εἴ τις στρατεύοιτο ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀρκαδίαν ·
On the other hand, they were bound by the terms of their alliance to send their cavalry to the aid of the Arcadians in case anyone took the field against Arcadia;


7.4.6
3413
τῆς δὲ Λακωνικῆς οὐκ ἐπέβαινον ἐπὶ πολέμῳ .
but they did not set foot upon Laconia for the purpose of war.


7.4.6
3414
τοῖς δὲ Κορινθίοις ἐνθυμουμένοις ὡς χαλεπῶς ἔχοι αὐτοὺς σωθῆναι , κρατουμένους μὲν καὶ πρόσθεν κατὰ γῆν , προσγεγενημένων δὲ αὐτοῖς Ἀθηναίων ἀνεπιτηδείων , ἔδοξεν ἁθροίζειν καὶ πεζοὺς καὶ ἱππέας μισθοφόρους .
And now the Corinthians, in the thought that it would be difficult for them to come off safe, since even before this time they had been overmastered by land and now the Athenians had been added to the number of those who were unfriendly to them, resolved to collect mercenaries, both infantry and cavalry.


7.4.6
3415
ἡγούμενοι δὲ τούτων , ἅμα μὲν τὴν πόλιν ἐφύλαττον , ἅμα δὲ πολλὰ τοὺς πλησίον πολεμίους κακῶς ἐποίουν ·
Once in command of these troops, they not only guarded their city but likewise inflicted much harm upon their enemies near home;


7.4.6
3416
εἰς μέντοι Θήβας ἔπεμψαν ἐπερησομένους εἰ τύχοιεν ἂν ἐλθόντες εἰρήνης .
but to Thebes they sent messengers to ask whether they could obtain peace if they came for it.


7.4.7
3417
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἰέναι ἐκέλευον , ὡς ἐσομένης , ἐδεήθησαν οἱ Κορίνθιοι ἐᾶσαι σφᾶς ἐλθεῖν καὶ ἐπὶ τοὺς συμμάχους , ὡς μετὰ μὲν τῶν βουλομένων ποιησόμενοι τὴν εἰρήνην , τοὺς δὲ πόλεμον αἱρουμένους ἐάσοντες πολεμεῖν .
And when the Thebans bade them come, saying that peace would be granted, the Corinthians requested that they should allow them to go to their allies also, to the end that they might conclude the peace in company with those who desired peace, and leave those who preferred war to continue war.


7.4.7
3418
ἐφέντων δὲ καὶ ταῦτα πράττειν τῶν Θηβαίων , ἐλθόντες εἰς Λακεδαίμονα οἱ Κορίνθιοι εἶπον ·
The Thebans having permitted them to do this likewise, the Corinthians went to Lacedaemon and said:


7.4.8
3419
ἡμεῖς , ὦ ἄνδρες Λακεδαιμόνιοι , πρὸς ὑμᾶς πάρεσμεν ὑμέτεροι φίλοι , καὶ ἀξιοῦμεν , εἰ μέν τινα ὁρᾶτε σωτηρίαν ἡμῖν , ἐὰν διακαρτερῶμεν πολεμοῦντες , διδάξαι καὶ ἡμᾶς ·
Men of Lacedaemon, we have come to you as your friends, and we ask that in case you see any safety for us if we persist in the war, you make it known to us;


7.4.8
3420
εἰ δὲ ἀπόρως γιγνώσκετε ἔχοντα τὰ ἡμέτερα , εἰ μὲν καὶ ὑμῖν συμφέρει , ποιήσασθαι μεθ’ ἡμῶν τὴν εἰρήνην ·
but in case you judge our situation to be hopeless, that you join with us in concluding peace if it is to your advantage also;


7.4.8
3421
ὡς οὐδὲ μετ’ οὐδένων ἂν ἥδιον ἢ μεθ’ ὑμῶν σωθείημεν ·
for there is no one in the world along with whom we should more gladly gain safety than with you;


7.4.8
3422
εἰ μέντοι ὑμεῖς λογίζεσθε συμφέρειν ὑμῖν πολεμεῖν , δεόμεθα ὑμῶν ἐᾶσαι ἡμᾶς εἰρήνην ποιήσασθαι .
if, however, you consider that it is to your advantage to continue the war, we beg you to allow us to conclude peace.


7.4.8
3423
σωθέντες μὲν γὰρ ἴσως ἂν αὖθις ἔτι ποτὲ ἐν καιρῷ ὑμῖν γενοίμεθα ·
For if we are saved, we might perhaps make ourselves useful to you again at some future time;


7.4.8
3424
ἐὰν δὲ νῦν ἀπολώμεθα , δῆλον ὅτι οὐδέποτε χρήσιμοι ἔτι ἐσόμεθα .
whereas if we are now destroyed, it is plain that we shall never be of service in the future.


7.4.9
3425
ἀκούσαντες δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τοῖς τε Κορινθίοις συνεβούλευον τὴν εἰρήνην ποιήσασθαι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων συμμάχων ἐπέτρεψαν τοῖς μὴ βουλομένοις σὺν ἑαυτοῖς πολεμεῖν ἀναπαύεσθαι ·
Upon hearing these words the Lacedaemonians not only advised the Corinthians to conclude the peace, but gave permission to such of their other allies as preferred not to continue the war in company with them, to cease;


7.4.9
3426
αὐτοὶ δ’ ἔφασαν πολεμοῦντες πράξειν ὅ τι ἂν τῷ θεῷ φίλον ᾖ ·
as for themselves, however, they said that they would fight on and accept whatever fortune it pleased the deity to send,


7.4.9
3427
ὑφήσεσθαι δὲ οὐδέποτε , ἣν παρὰ τῶν πατέρων παρέλαβον Μεσσήνην , ταύτης στερηθῆναι .
and that they would never submit to be deprived of what they had received from their fathers — Messene.


7.4.10
3428
οἱ οὖν Κορίνθιοι ἀκούσαντες ταῦτα ἐπορεύοντο εἰς τὰς Θήβας ἐπὶ τὴν εἰρήνην .
So the Corinthians, upon hearing these words, proceeded to Thebes to make the peace.


7.4.10
3429
οἱ μέντοι Θηβαῖοι ἠξίουν αὐτοὺς καὶ συμμαχίαν ὀμνύναι ·
The Thebans, however, wanted them to bind themselves to an alliance as well;


7.4.10
3430
οἱ δὲ ἀπεκρίναντο ὅτι ἡ μὲν συμμαχία οὐκ εἰρήνη , ἀλλὰ πολέμου μεταλλαγὴ εἴη ·
but they replied that an alliance was not peace but an exchange of war,


7.4.10
3431
εἰ δὲ βούλοιντο , παρεῖναι ἔφασαν τὴν δικαίαν εἰρήνην ποιησόμενοι .
and they said that they had come to conclude a real peace, if the Thebans so pleased.


7.4.10
3432
ἀγασθέντες δὲ αὐτοὺς οἱ Θηβαῖοι , ὅτι καίπερ ἐν κινδύνῳ ὄντες οὐκ ἤθελον τοῖς εὐεργέταις εἰς πόλεμον καθίστασθαι , συνεχώρησαν αὐτοῖς καὶ Φλειασίοις καὶ τοῖς ἐλθοῦσι μετ’ αὐτῶν εἰς Θήβας τὴν εἰρήνην ἐφ’ ᾧτε ἔχειν τὴν ἑαυτῶν ἑκάστους .
And the Thebans, seized with admiration for them because, even though they were in peril, they refused to be involved in war with their benefactors, granted peace to them, to the Phliasians, and to those who had come with them to Thebes, with the condition that each party should keep its own territory.


7.4.11
3433
καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις ὠμόσθησαν οἱ ὅρκοι .
And on these terms the oaths were taken.


7.4.11
3434
οἱ μὲν δὴ Φλειάσιοι , ἐπεὶ οὕτως ἡ σύμβασις ἐγένετο , εὐθὺς ἀπῆλθον ἐκ τῆς Θυαμίας ·
Then the Phliasians, inasmuch as the compact had been concluded on this basis, at once withdrew from Thyamia;


7.4.11
3435
οἱ δὲ Ἀργεῖοι ὀμόσαντες ἐπὶ τοῖς αὐτοῖς τούτοις εἰρήνην ποιήσεσθαι , ἐπεὶ οὐκ ἐδύναντο καταπρᾶξαι ὥστε τοὺς τῶν Φλειασίων φυγάδας μένειν ἐν τῷ Τρικαράνῳ ὡς ἐν τῇ ἑαυτῶν πόλει ἔχοντας , παραλαβόντες ἐφρούρουν , φάσκοντες σφετέραν τὴν γῆν ταύτην εἶναι , ἣν ὀλίγῳ πρότερον ὡς πολεμίαν οὖσαν ἐδῄουν , καὶ δίκας τῶν Φλειασίων προκαλουμένων οὐκ ἐδίδοσαν .
but the Argives, who had sworn to make peace on these same terms, when they found themselves unable to bring it about that the Phliasian exiles should remain at Tricaranum on the ground that they would be within their own state, took over the place and kept it garrisoned, claiming now that this territory, which a little while before they had been laying waste as though it were an enemy’s, was theirs; and although the Phliasians proposed a judicial decision, they refused to grant the request.


7.4.12
3436
σχεδὸν δὲ περὶ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον τετελευτηκότος ἤδη τοῦ πρόσθεν Διονυσίου ὁ υἱὸς αὐτοῦ πέμπει βοήθειαν τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις δώδεκα τριήρεις καὶ ἄρχοντα αὐτῶν Τιμοκράτην .
At about this time, the first Dionysius being now dead, his son sent to the aid of the Lacedaemonians twelve triremes and Timocrates as their commander.


7.4.12
3437
οὗτος οὖν ἀφικόμενος συνεξαιρεῖ αὐτοῖς Σελλασίαν ·
And upon his arrival he helped them to capture Sellasia;


7.4.12
3438
καὶ τοῦτο πράξας ἀπέπλευσεν οἴκαδε .
and after accomplishing this deed he sailed back home.


7.4.12
3439
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο οὐ πολλῷ ὕστερον καταλαμβάνουσιν οἱ Ἠλεῖοι Λασιῶνα , τὸ μὲν παλαιὸν ἑαυτῶν ὄντα , ἐν δὲ τῷ παρόντι συντελοῦντα εἰς τὸ Ἀρκαδικόν .
Not long after this the Eleans seized Lasion, which in ancient times had been theirs, but at present belonged to the Arcadian League.


7.4.13
3440
οἱ μέντοι Ἀρκάδες οὐ παρωλιγώρησαν , ἀλλ’ εὐθὺς παραγγείλαντες ἐβοήθουν .
The Arcadians, however, did not let the matter pass, but at once called out their troops and went to the rescue.


7.4.13
3441
ἀντεβοήθησαν δὲ καὶ τῶν Ἠλείων οἱ τριακόσιοι , καὶ ἔτι τετρακόσιοι .
And on the side of the Eleans the Three Hundred and likewise the Four Hundred came out to meet them.


7.4.13
3442
ἀντεστρατοπεδευμένων δὲ τὴν ἡμέραν ἐν ἐπιπεδεστέρῳ χωρίῳ τῶν Ἠλείων τῆς νυκτὸς οἱ Ἀρκάδες ἀναβαίνουσιν ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ ὑπὲρ τῶν Ἠλείων ὄρους κορυφήν ·
Now after the Eleans had lain encamped on a somewhat level spot opposite the enemy throughout the day, the Arcadians climbed up by night to the summit of the mountain which was above the Eleans;


7.4.13
3443
ἅμα δὲ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ κατέβαινον ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἠλείους .
and at daybreak they proceeded to descend upon the Eleans.


7.4.13
3444
οἱ δὲ ἰδόντες ἅμα μὲν ἐξ ὑπερδεξίου προσιόντας , ἅμα δὲ πολλαπλασίους , ἐκ πολλοῦ μὲν ἀπελθεῖν ᾐσχύνθησαν , ὁμόσε δ’ ἦλθον καὶ εἰς χεῖρας δεξάμενοι ἔφυγον ·
Then the latter, seeing that the Arcadians were not only approaching from higher ground but were also many times their number, were yet ashamed to retreat while still at a distance, but advanced to meet the enemy, and took to flight only after letting them come to close quarters;


7.4.13
3445
καὶ πολλοὺς μὲν ἄνδρας , πολλὰ δὲ ὅπλα ἀπώλεσαν , κατὰ δυσχωρίας ἀποχωροῦντες .
and they lost many men and many arms, since they retreated over difficult ground.


7.4.14
3446
οἱ δὲ Ἀρκάδες διαπραξάμενοι ταῦτα ἐπορεύοντο ἐπὶ τὰς τῶν Ἀκρωρείων πόλεις .
When the Arcadians had accomplished these things, they proceeded against the cities of the Acrorians.


7.4.14
3447
λαβόντες δὲ ταύτας πλὴν Θραύστου ἀφικνοῦνται εἰς Ὀλυμπίαν , καὶ περισταυρώσαντες τὸ Κρόνιον ἐνταῦθα ἐφρούρουν καὶ ἐκράτουν τοῦ Ὀλυμπιακοῦ ὄρους ·
And having captured them, with the exception of Thraustus, they arrived at Olympia, and after building a stockade around the hill of Cronus, kept guard there and were masters of the Olympian mountain;


7.4.14
3448
ἔλαβον δὲ καὶ Μαργανέας ἐνδόντων τινῶν .
they likewise gained possession of Margana, which was betrayed to them by some of its citizens.


7.4.14
3449
οὕτω δὲ προκεχωρηκότων οἱ μὲν Ἠλεῖοι αὖ παντάπασιν ἠθύμησαν , οἱ δὲ Ἀρκάδες ἔρχονται ἐπὶ τὴν πόλιν .
When matters had progressed to this point, the Eleans fell back into complete despondency, while the Arcadians proceeded against their capital.


7.4.14
3450
καὶ μέχρι μὲν τῆς ἀγορᾶς ἦλθον ·
And they advanced as far as the marketplace;


7.4.14
3451
ἐκεῖ μέντοι ὑποστάντες οἵ τε ἱππεῖς καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι αὐτῶν ἐκβάλλουσί τε αὐτοὺς καὶ ἀπέκτεινάν τινας καὶ τροπαῖον ἐστήσαντο .
there, however, the horsemen and the rest of the Eleans made a stand, and they drove the Arcadians out, killed some of them, and set up a trophy.


7.4.15
3452
ἦν μὲν οὖν καὶ πρότερον διαφορὰ ἐν τῇ Ἤλιδι .
Now there had been dissension in Elis even before this time.


7.4.15
3453
οἱ μὲν γὰρ περὶ Χάροπόν τε καὶ Θρασωνίδαν καὶ Ἀργεῖον εἰς δημοκρατίαν ἦγον τὴν πόλιν , οἱ δὲ περὶ Στάλκαν τε καὶ Ἱππίαν καὶ Στρατόλαν εἰς ὀλιγαρχίαν .
For the party of Charopus, Thrasonidas, and Argeius were trying to convert the state into a democracy, and the party of Eualcas, Hippias, and Stratolas into an oligarchy.


7.4.15
3454
ἐπεὶ δ’ οἱ Ἀρκάδες μεγάλην δύναμιν ἔχοντες σύμμαχοι ἐδόκουν εἶναι τοῖς δημοκρατεῖσθαι βουλομένοις , ἐκ τούτου δὴ θρασύτεροι οἱ περὶ τὸν Χάροπον ἦσαν , καὶ συνθέμενοι τοῖς Ἀρκάσιν ἐπιβοηθεῖν καταλαμβάνουσι τὴν ἀκρόπολιν .
But when the Arcadians with a large force seemed to be allies of those who wished to have a democracy, thereupon the party of Charopus were bolder, and after making arrangements with the Arcadians to aid them, seized the Acropolis.


7.4.16
3455
οἱ δ’ ἱππεῖς καὶ οἱ τριακόσιοι οὐκ ἐμέλλησαν , ἀλλ’ εὐθὺς ἐχώρουν ἄνω , καὶ ἐκκρούουσιν αὐτούς ·
The horsemen, however, and the Three Hundred made no delay, but at once marched up and ejected them;


7.4.16
3456
ὥστ’ ἔφυγον σὺν τῷ Ἀργείῳ καὶ Χαρόπῳ τῶν πολιτῶν περὶ τριακοσίους .
so that about four hundred of the citizens, with Argeius and Charopus, were banished.


7.4.16
3457
οὐ πολὺ δ’ ὕστερον οὗτοι παραλαβόντες τῶν Ἀρκάδων τινὰς καταλαμβάνουσι Πύλον .
Not long afterwards these exiles enlisted the aid of some of the Arcadians and seized Pylus.


7.4.16
3458
καὶ πολλοὶ μέντοι πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἀπῇσαν τοῦ δήμου , ἅτε χωρίον τε καλὸν καὶ μεγάλην ῥώμην τὴν τῶν Ἀρκάδων σύμμαχον ἔχοντας .
And many of the democrats withdrew from the capital and joined them, inasmuch as they were in possession of a good stronghold and had a large force — that of the Arcadians — to support them.


7.4.16
3459
ἐνέβαλον δὲ καὶ ὕστερον εἰς τὴν χώραν τὴν τῶν Ἠλείων οἱ Ἀρκάδες , ὑπὸ τῶν φευγόντων ἀναπειθόμενοι ὡς ἡ πόλις προσχωρήσοιτο .
Afterwards the Arcadians invaded the territory of the Eleans again, being persuaded by the exiles that the city would come over to them.


7.4.17
3460
ἀλλὰ τότε μὲν οἱ Ἀχαιοὶ φίλοι γεγενημένοι τοῖς Ἠλείοις τὴν πόλιν αὐτῶν διεφύλαξαν ·
But on that occasion the Achaeans, who had become friends of the Eleans, defended their city successfully,


7.4.17
3461
ὥστε οἱ Ἀρκάδες οὐδὲν ἄλλο πράξαντες ἢ δῃώσαντες αὐτῶν τὴν χώραν ἀπῆλθον .
so that the Arcadians retired without accomplishing anything more than the laying waste of the land of the Eleans.


7.4.17
3462
εὐθὺς μέντοι ἐκ τῆς Ἠλείας ἐξιόντες , αἰσθόμενοι τοὺς Πελληνέας ἐν Ἤλιδι ὄντας , νυκτὸς μακροτάτην ὁδὸν ἐλθόντες καταλαμβάνουσιν αὐτῶν Ὄλουρον ·
At the moment, however, when they were departing from the Elean territory, they learned that the Pelleneans were in Elis, and after making an exceedingly long march by night seized their town of Olurus;


7.4.17
3463
ἤδη γὰρ πάλιν προσεκεχωρήκεσαν οἱ Πελληνεῖς εἰς τὴν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων συμμαχίαν .
for by this time the Pelleneans had come back again to their alliance with the Lacedaemonians.


7.4.18
3464
ἐπεὶ δ’ ᾔσθοντο τὰ περὶ Ὀλούρου , περιελθόντες αὖ καὶ οὗτοι ὅπῃ ἐδύναντο εἰς τὴν αὑτῶν πόλιν Πελλήνην εἰσῆλθον .
Now when the Pelleneans learned the news in regard to Olurus, they in their turn made a roundabout march and as best they could got into their own city, Pellene.


7.4.18
3465
καὶ ἐκ τούτου δὴ ἐπολέμουν τοῖς ἐν Ὀλούρῳ Ἀρκάσι τε καὶ τῷ ἑαυτῶν παντὶ δήμῳ μάλα ὀλίγοι ὄντες ·
And after this they carried on war not only with the Arcadians at Olurus, but also with the entire body of the democrats of their own state, although they were themselves very few in number;


7.4.18
3466
ὅμως δὲ οὐ πρόσθεν ἐπαύσαντο πρὶν ἐξεπολιόρκησαν τὸν Ὄλουρον .
but nevertheless they did not cease until they had captured Olurus by siege.


7.4.19
3467
οἱ δ’ αὖ Ἀρκάδες πάλιν ποιοῦνται ἄλλην στρατείαν εἰς τὴν Ἦλιν .
The Arcadians on their side made yet another expedition into Elis.


7.4.19
3468
μεταξὺ δὲ Κυλλήνης καὶ τῆς πόλεως στρατοπεδευομένοις αὐτοῖς ἐπιτίθενται οἱ Ἠλεῖοι , ὑποστάντες δὲ οἱ Ἀρκάδες ἐνίκησαν αὐτούς .
And while they were encamped between Cyllene and the capital, the Eleans made an attack upon them, but the Arcadians stood their ground and defeated them.


7.4.19
3469
καὶ Ἀνδρόμαχος μὲν ὁ Ἠλεῖος ἵππαρχος , ὅσπερ αἴτιος ἐδόκει εἶναι τὴν μάχην συνάψαι , αὐτὸς αὑτὸν διέφθειρεν ·
Then Andromachus, the Elean commander of horse, the man who was thought to be responsible for having joined battle, killed himself;


7.4.19
3470
οἱ δ’ ἄλλοι εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἀπεχώρησαν .
but the rest retired to the city.


7.4.19
3471
ἀπέθανε δὲ ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ μάχῃ παραγενόμενος καὶ Σωκλείδης ὁ Σπαρτιάτης ·
Among those who perished in this battle was also Socleides the Spartiate,


7.4.19
3472
ἤδη γὰρ τότε οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι σύμμαχοι τοῖς Ἠλείοις ἦσαν .
for by this time the Lacedaemonians were allies of the Eleans.


7.4.20
3473
πιεζόμενοι δὲ οἱ Ἠλεῖοι ἐν τῇ ἑαυτῶν , ἠξίουν καὶ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους πέμποντες πρέσβεις ἐπιστρατεύειν τοῖς Ἀρκάσι , νομίζοντες οὕτως ἂν μάλιστα ἀπολαβεῖν τοὺς Ἀρκάδας , εἰ ἀμφοτέρωθεν πολεμοῖντο .
And now the Eleans, being hard pressed in their own land, sent ambassadors and asked the Lacedaemonians also to take the field against the Arcadians, believing that the Arcadians would be most likely to give up the struggle in this event, that is, if they were beset by war from both sides.


7.4.20
3474
καὶ ἐκ τούτου δὴ Ἀρχίδαμος στρατεύεται μετὰ τῶν πολιτῶν , καὶ καταλαμβάνει Κρῶμνον .
As a result of this request Archidamus took the field with the citizen troops and seized Cromnus.


7.4.20
3475
καταλιπὼν δ’ ἐν αὐτῷ φρουρὰν τῶν δώδεκα λόχων τρεῖς , οὕτως ἐπ’ οἴκου ἀνεχώρησεν .
And after leaving in the town as a garrison three of the twelve battalions, he then returned homewards.


7.4.21
3476
οἱ μέντοι Ἀρκάδες , ὥσπερ ἔτυχον ἐκ τῆς εἰς Ἦλιν στρατείας συνειλεγμένοι , βοηθήσαντες περιεσταύρωσαν τὸν Κρῶμνον διπλῷ σταυρώματι , καὶ ἐν ἀσφαλεῖ ὄντες ἐπολιόρκουν τοὺς ἐν τῷ Κρώμνῳ .
But the Arcadians, gathered together as they were in consequence of their expedition into Elis, came to the rescue and surrounded Cromnus with a double stockade, and, being thus in a safe position, besieged the people in Cromnus.


7.4.21
3477
χαλεπῶς δὲ ἡ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων πόλις φέρουσα ἐπὶ τῇ πολιορκίᾳ τῶν πολιτῶν , ἐκπέμπει στρατιάν ·
Then the city of Lacedaemon, distressed at the besieging of its citizens, sent out an army.


7.4.21
3478
ἡγεῖτο δὲ καὶ τότε Ἀρχίδαμος .
And on this occasion also Archidamus was in command.


7.4.21
3479
ἐλθὼν δὲ ἐδῄου καὶ τῆς Ἀρκαδίας ὅσα ἐδύνατο καὶ τῆς Σκιρίτιδος , καὶ πάντα ἐποίει ὅπως , εἰ δύναιτο , ἀπαγάγοι τοὺς πολιορκοῦντας .
When he had come, he laid waste as much as he could both of Arcadia and of Sciritis, and did everything in order, if possible, to draw off the besiegers.


7.4.21
3480
οἱ δὲ Ἀρκάδες οὐδέν τι μᾶλλον ἐκινοῦντο , ἀλλὰ ταῦτα πάντα παρεώρων .
The Arcadians, however, were not any more disposed to stir than before, but disregarded all these doings.


7.4.22
3481
κατιδὼν δέ τινα λόφον ὁ Ἀρχίδαμος , δι’ οὗ τὸ ἔξω σταύρωμα περιεβέβληντο οἱ Ἀρκάδες , ἐνόμισεν ἑλεῖν ἂν τοῦτον , καὶ εἰ τούτου κρατήσειεν , οὐκ ἂν δύνασθαι μένειν τοὺς ὑπὸ τούτῳ πολιορκοῦντας .
Then Archidamus, espying a hill over which the Arcadians had carried their outer stockade, came to the conclusion that he could capture it, and that if he became master of this hill, the besiegers at its foot would not be able to hold their position.


7.4.22
3482
κύκλῳ δὲ περιάγοντος αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τοῦτο τὸ χωρίον , ὡς εἶδον οἱ προθέοντες τοῦ Ἀρχιδάμου πελτασταὶ τοὺς ἐπαρίτους ἔξω τοῦ σταυρώματος , ἐπιτίθενται αὐτοῖς , καὶ οἱ ἱππεῖς συνεμβάλλειν ἐπειρῶντο .
Now while he was leading the way to this place by a roundabout route, as soon as the peltasts who were running on ahead of Archidamus caught sight of the Epariti outside the stockade, they attacked them, and the cavalry endeavoured to join in the attack.


7.4.22
3483
οἱ δ’ οὐκ ἐνέκλιναν , ἀλλὰ συντεταγμένοι ἡσυχίαν εἶχον .
The enemy, however, did not give way, but forming themselves into a compact body, remained quiet.


7.4.22
3484
οἱ δ’ αὖ πάλιν ἐνέβαλον .
Then the Lacedaemonians attacked again.


7.4.22
3485
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐδὲ τότε ἐνέκλιναν , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπῇσαν , ἤδη οὔσης πολλῆς κραυγῆς , ἐβοήθει δὴ καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ Ἀρχίδαμος , ἐκτραπόμενος κατὰ τὴν ἐπὶ Κρῶμνον φέρουσαν ἁμαξιτόν , εἰς δύο ἄγων , ὥσπερ ἐτύγχανεν ἔχων .
The enemy did not give way even then, but on the contrary proceeded to advance, and by this time there was a deal of shouting; Archidamus himself thereupon came to the rescue, turning off along the wagon road which runs to Cromnus and leading his men in double file, just as he chanced to have them formed.


7.4.23
3486
ὡς δ’ ἐπλησίασαν ἀλλήλοις , οἱ μὲν σὺν τῷ Ἀρχιδάμῳ κατὰ κέρας , ἅτε καθ’ ὁδὸν πορευόμενοι , οἱ δ’ Ἀρκάδες ἁθρόοι συνασπιδοῦντες , ἐν τούτῳ οὐκέτι ἐδύναντο οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀντέχειν τῷ τῶν Ἀρκάδων πλήθει , ἀλλὰ ταχὺ μὲν ὁ Ἀρχίδαμος ἐτέτρωτο τὸν μηρὸν διαμπάξ , ταχὺ δὲ οἱ μαχόμενοι πρὸ αὐτοῦ ἀπέθνῃσκον , Πολυαινίδας τε καὶ Χίλων ὁ τὴν ἀδελφὴν τοῦ Ἀρχιδάμου ἔχων , καὶ οἱ πάντες δὲ αὐτῶν τότε ἀπέθανον οὐκ ἔλαττον τῶν τριάκοντα .
Now as soon as the two forces had come near to one another, the troops of Archidamus in column, since they were marching along a road, and the Arcadians massed together in close order, at this juncture the Lacedaemonians were no longer able to hold out against the superior weight of the Arcadians, but Archidamus speedily received a wound straight through his thigh and speedily those who fought in front of him kept falling, among them Polyaenidas and Chilon, who was married to the sister of Archidamus; and the whole number of them who fell at that time was not less than thirty.


7.4.24
3487
ὡς δὲ κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ἀναχωροῦντες εἰς τὴν εὐρυχωρίαν ἐξῆλθον , ἐνταῦθα δὴ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἀντιπαρετάξαντο .
But when the Lacedaemonians as they retired along the road came out into open ground, they immediately formed themselves in line of battle against the enemy.


7.4.24
3488
καὶ μὴν οἱ Ἀρκάδες , ὥσπερ εἶχον , συντεταγμένοι ἕστασαν , καὶ πλήθει μὲν ἐλείποντο , εὐθυμότερον δὲ πολὺ εἶχον , ἐπεληλυθότες ἀποχωροῦσι καὶ ἄνδρας ἀπεκτονότες .
The Arcadians on their side stood in close order, just as they were, and while inferior in numbers, they were in better spirits by far, since they had attacked a foe who retreated and had killed men.


7.4.24
3489
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι μάλα ἀθύμως εἶχον , τετρωμένον μὲν ὁρῶντες τὸν Ἀρχίδαμον , ἀκηκοότες δὲ τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν τεθνηκότων , ἀνδρῶν τε ἀγαθῶν καὶ σχεδὸν τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων .
The Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, were exceedingly despondent, for they saw that Archidamus was wounded and they had heard the names of the dead, who were not only brave men but well nigh their most distinguished.


7.4.25
3490
ὡς δὲ πλησίον ὄντων ἀναβοήσας τις τῶν πρεσβυτέρων εἶπε ·
But when, the Arcadians being now close at hand, one of the older men shouted out and said:


7.4.25
3491
τί δεῖ ἡμᾶς , ὦ ἄνδρες , μάχεσθαι , ἀλλ’ οὐ σπεισαμένους διαλυθῆναι ;
Why, sirs, should we fight, and not rather make a truce and become reconciled?


7.4.25
3492
ἄσμενοι δὴ ἀμφότεροι ἀκούσαντες ἐσπείσαντο .
Both sides heard him gladly and made a truce.


7.4.25
3493
καὶ οἱ μὲν Λακεδαιμόνιοι τοὺς νεκροὺς ἀνελόμενοι ἀπῆλθον , οἱ δ’ Ἀρκάδες ἐπαναχωρήσαντες ἔνθα τὸ πρῶτον ἤρξαντο ἐπιέναι τροπαῖον ἐστήσαντο .
Accordingly the Lacedaemonians took up their dead and departed, while the Arcadians returned to the place where they had originally begun to advance, and there set up a trophy.


7.4.26
3494
ὡς δὲ οἱ Ἀρκάδες περὶ τὸν Κρῶμνον ἦσαν , οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως Ἠλεῖοι πρῶτον μὲν ἰόντες ἐπὶ τὴν Πύλον περιτυγχάνουσι τοῖς Πυλίοις ἀποκεκρουμένοις ἐκ τῶν Θαλαμῶν .
While the Arcadians were occupied about Cromnus, the Eleans in the capital proceeded in the first place against Pylus, and fell in with the Pylians after the latter had been driven out of Thalamae.


7.4.26
3495
καὶ προσελαύνοντες οἱ ἱππεῖς τῶν Ἠλείων ὡς εἶδον αὐτούς , οὐκ ἐμέλλησαν , ἀλλ’ εὐθὺς ἐμβάλλουσι , καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἀποκτιννύουσιν , οἱ δέ τινες αὐτῶν καταφεύγουσιν ἐπὶ γήλοφον .
And when the horsemen of the Eleans, as they rode along, caught sight of the Pylians, they did not delay, but attacked at once, and they killed some of them, while others fled for refuge to a hill;


7.4.26
3496
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἦλθον οἱ πεζοί , ἐκκόπτουσι καὶ τοὺς ἐπὶ τῷ λόφῳ , καὶ τοὺς μὲν αὐτοῦ ἀπέκτειναν , τοὺς δὲ καὶ ζῶντας ἔλαβον ἐγγὺς διακοσίων .
but as soon as the infantry came up they dislodged those upon the hill also, and killed some of them on the spot and took captive others, nearly two hundred in number.


7.4.26
3497
καὶ ὅσοι μὲν ξένοι ἦσαν αὐτῶν , ἀπέδοντο , ὅσοι δὲ φυγάδες , ἀπέσφαττον .
Thereupon they sold all among the prisoners who were foreigners and put to the sword all who were Elean exiles.


7.4.26
3498
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τούς τε Πυλίους , ὡς οὐδεὶς αὐτοῖς ἐβοήθει , σὺν αὐτῷ τῷ χωρίῳ αἱροῦσι , καὶ τοὺς Μαργανέας ἀναλαμβάνουσι .
After this the Eleans not only captured the Pylians, along with their stronghold, inasmuch as no one came to their aid, but also recovered Margana.


7.4.27
3499
καὶ μὴν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ὕστερον αὖ ἐλθόντες νυκτὸς ἐπὶ τὸν Κρῶμνον ἐπικρατοῦσι τοῦ σταυρώματος τοῦ κατὰ τοὺς Ἀργείους καὶ τοὺς πολιορκουμένους τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων εὐθὺς ἐξεκάλουν .
As for the Lacedaemonians, they afterwards went against Cromnus again by night, made themselves masters of the stockade which was opposite the Argives, and immediately proceeded to call forth the Lacedaemonians who were besieged there.


7.4.27
3500
ὅσοι μὲν οὖν ἐγγύτατά τε ἐτύγχανον ὄντες καὶ ὠξυλάβησαν , ἐξῆλθον ·
Now all who chanced to be nearest at hand and seized the opportunity promptly, came forth;


7.4.27
3501
ὁπόσους δὲ ἔφθασαν πολλοὶ τῶν Ἀρκάδων συμβοηθήσαντες , ἀπεκλείσθησαν ἔνδον καὶ ληφθέντες διενεμήθησαν ·
but such as were forestalled by a large body of the Arcadians which came to the rescue, were shut off inside the stockade, captured, and distributed.


7.4.27
3502
καὶ ἓν μὲν μέρος ἔλαβον Ἀργεῖοι , ἓν δὲ Θηβαῖοι , ἓν δὲ Ἀρκάδες , ἓν δὲ Μεσσήνιοι .
And the Argives received one portion, the Thebans one, the Arcadians one, and the Messenians one.


7.4.27
3503
οἱ δὲ σύμπαντες ληφθέντες Σπαρτιατῶν τε καὶ περιοίκων πλείους τῶν ἑκατὸν ἐγένοντο .
And the whole number who were captured of the Spartiatae and the Perioeci came to more than one hundred.


7.4.28
3504
ἐπεί γε μὴν οἱ Ἀρκάδες ἐσχόλασαν ἀπὸ τοῦ Κρώμνου , πάλιν δὴ περὶ τοὺς Ἠλείους εἶχον , καὶ τήν τε Ὀλυμπίαν ἐρρωμενέστερον ἐφρούρουν , καὶ ἐπιόντος Ὀλυμπιακοῦ ἔτους παρεσκευάζοντο ποιεῖν τὰ Ὀλύμπια σὺν Πισάταις τοῖς πρώτοις φάσκουσι προστῆναι τοῦ ἱεροῦ .
When the Arcadians were no longer occupied with Cromnus, they occupied themselves again with the Eleans, and they not only kept Olympia more strongly garrisoned, but also, since an Olympic year was coming on, prepared to celebrate the Olympic games in company with the Pisatans, who say that they were the first to have charge of the sanctuary.


7.4.28
3505
ἐπεὶ δὲ ὅ τε μὴν ἧκεν ἐν ᾧ τὰ Ὀλύμπια γίγνεται αἵ τε ἡμέραι ἐν αἷς ἡ πανήγυρις ἁθροίζεται , ἐνταῦθα δὴ οἱ Ἠλεῖοι ἐκ τοῦ φανεροῦ συσκευασάμενοι καὶ παρακαλέσαντες Ἀχαιοὺς ἐπορεύοντο τὴν Ὀλυμπιακὴν ὁδόν .
But when the month came in which the Olympic games take place and the days on which the festal assembly gathers, at this time the Eleans, after making their preparations openly and summoning the Achaeans to their aid, proceeded to march along the road leading to Olympia.


7.4.29
3506
οἱ δὲ Ἀρκάδες ἐκείνους μὲν οὐκ ἄν ποτε ᾤοντο ἐλθεῖν ἐπὶ σφᾶς , αὐτοὶ δὲ σὺν Πισάταις διετίθεσαν τὴν πανήγυριν .
Now the Arcadians had never imagined that the Eleans would come against them, and were themselves directing the festal meeting in company with the Pisatans.


7.4.29
3507
καὶ τὴν μὲν ἱπποδρομίαν ἤδη ἐπεποιήκεσαν καὶ τὰ δρομικὰ τοῦ πεντάθλου ·
They had already finished the horse-race, and the events of the pentathlon held in the race-course.


7.4.29
3508
οἱ δ’ εἰς πάλην ἀφικόμενοι οὐκέτι ἐν τῷ δρόμῳ , ἀλλὰ μεταξὺ τοῦ δρόμου καὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ ἐπάλαιον .
And the competitors who had reached the wrestling were no longer in the race-course, but were wrestling in the space between the race-course and the altar.


7.4.29
3509
οἱ γὰρ Ἠλεῖοι σὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις παρῆσαν ἤδη εἰς τὸ τέμενος .
For the Eleans, under arms, had by this time reached the sacred precinct.


7.4.29
3510
οἱ δὲ Ἀρκάδες πορρωτέρω μὲν οὐκ ἀπήντησαν , ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ Κλαδάου ποταμοῦ παρετάξαντο , ὃς παρὰ τὴν Ἄλτιν καταρρέων εἰς τὸν Ἀλφειὸν ἐμβάλλει .
Then the Arcadians, without advancing to meet them, formed in line of battle on the river Cladaus, which flows past the Altis and empties into the Alpheus.


7.4.29
3511
καὶ σύμμαχοι δὲ παρῆσαν αὐτοῖς , ὁπλῖται μὲν Ἀργείων εἰς δισχιλίους , Ἀθηναίων δὲ ἱππεῖς περὶ τετρακοσίους .
They had allies also to support them, about two thousand hoplites of the Argives and about four hundred horsemen of the Athenians.


7.4.30
3512
καὶ μὴν οἱ Ἠλεῖοι τ- ἐπὶ θάτερα τοῦ ποταμοῦ παρετάξαντο , σφαγιασάμενοι δὲ εὐθὺς ἐχώρουν .
And the Eleans formed in line on the opposite side of the river, and, after offering sacrifice, immediately advanced.


7.4.30
3513
καὶ τὸν πρόσθεν χρόνον εἰς τὰ πολεμικὰ καταφρονούμενοι μὲν ὑπ’ Ἀρκάδων καὶ Ἀργείων , καταφρονούμενοι δὲ ὑπ’ Ἀχαιῶν καὶ Ἀθηναίων , ὅμως ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῶν μὲν συμμάχων ὡς ἀλκιμώτατοι ὄντες ἡγοῦντο , τοὺς δ’ Ἀρκάδας , τούτοις γὰρ πρώτοις συνέβαλον , καὶ εὐθὺς ἐτρέψαντο , καὶ ἐπιβοηθήσαντας δὲ τοὺς Ἀργείους δεξάμενοι καὶ τούτων ἐκράτησαν .
And although in former time they had been despised in matters of war by the Arcadians and Argives, and despised by the Achaeans and Athenians, nevertheless on that day they led their allies forward, as men who were unexcelled in valour, and they not only routed the Arcadians at once—for it was these whom they encountered first—but withstood the attack of the Argives when they came to the rescue, and won the victory over them also.


7.4.31
3514
ἐπεὶ μέντοι κατεδίωξαν εἰς τὸ μεταξὺ τοῦ βουλευτηρίου καὶ τοῦ τῆς Ἑστίας ἱεροῦ καὶ τοῦ πρὸς ταῦτα προσήκοντος θεάτρου , ἐμάχοντο μὲν οὐδὲν ἧττον καὶ ἐώθουν πρὸς τὸν βωμόν , ἀπὸ μέντοι τῶν στοῶν τε καὶ τοῦ βουλευτηρίου καὶ τοῦ μεγάλου ναοῦ βαλλόμενοι καὶ ἐν τῷ ἰσοπέδῳ μαχόμενοι , ἀποθνῄσκουσιν ἄλλοι τε τῶν Ἠλείων καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ τῶν τριακοσίων ἄρχων Στρατόλας .
When, however, they had pursued the enemy to the space between the senate house and the temple of Hestia and the theatre which adjoins these buildings, although they fought no less stoutly and kept pushing the enemy towards the altar, still, since they were pelted from the roofs of the porticoes, the senate house, and the great temple, and were themselves fighting on the ground-level, some of the Eleans were killed, among them Stratolas himself, the leader of the Three Hundred.


7.4.31
3515
τούτων δὲ πραχθέντων ἀπεχώρησαν εἰς τὸ αὑτῶν στρατόπεδον .
When this happened, they retired to their own camp.


7.4.32
3516
οἱ μέντοι Ἀρκάδες καὶ οἱ μετ’ αὐτῶν οὕτως ἐπεφόβηντο τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν ἡμέραν ὥστε οὐδ’ ἀνεπαύσαντο τῆς νυκτός , ἐκκόπτοντες τὰ διαπεπονημένα σκηνώματα καὶ ἀποσταυροῦντες .
But the Arcadians and those with them were so fearful for the coming day that they did not so much as go to rest during the night, being engaged in cutting down the carefully constructed booths and building a stockade.


7.4.32
3517
οἱ δ’ αὖ Ἠλεῖοι ἐπεὶ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ προσιόντες εἶδον καρτερὸν τὸ τεῖχος καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ναῶν πολλοὺς ἀναβεβηκότας , ἀπῆλθον εἰς τὸ ἄστυ , τοιοῦτοι γενόμενοι οἵους τὴν ἀρετὴν θεὸς μὲν ἂν ἐμπνεύσας δύναιτο καὶ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ἀποδεῖξαι , ἄνθρωποι δὲ οὐδ’ ἂν ἐν πολλῷ χρόνῳ τοὺς μὴ ὄντας ἀλκίμους ποιήσειαν .
As for the Eleans, when they returned on the next day and saw that the stockade was a strong one and that many men had climbed up on the temples, they withdrew to their city, having shown themselves such men in point of valour as a god no doubt could produce by his inspiration even in a day, but human creatures could not make even in a long time out of those who were not valiant.


7.4.33
3518
χρωμένων δὲ τοῖς ἱεροῖς χρήμασι τῶν ἐν τοῖς Ἀρκάσιν ἀρχόντων , καὶ ἀπὸ τούτων τοὺς ἐπαρίτους τρεφόντων , πρῶτοι Μαντινεῖς ἀπεψηφίσαντο μὴ χρῆσθαι τοῖς ἱεροῖς χρήμασι .
Now while the leaders of the Arcadians were using the sacred treasures, and therefrom maintaining the Epariti, the Mantineans were the first to pass a vote not to make use of the sacred treasures.


7.4.33
3519
καὶ αὐτοὶ τὸ γιγνόμενον μέρος εἰς τοὺς ἐπαρίτους ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐκπορίσαντες ἀπέπεμψαν τοῖς ἄρχουσιν .
For themselves, they collected in their city the amount which fell to their share towards the payment of the Epariti and sent it off to the leaders.


7.4.33
3520
οἱ δὲ ἄρχοντες φάσκοντες αὐτοὺς λυμαίνεσθαι τὸ Ἀρκαδικόν , ἀνεκαλοῦντο εἰς τοὺς μυρίους τοὺς προστάτας αὐτῶν ·
The leaders, however, said that they were doing harm to the Arcadian League, and summoned their rulers before the Ten Thousand;


7.4.33
3521
καὶ ἐπεὶ οὐχ ὑπήκουον , κατεδίκασαν αὐτῶν , καὶ τοὺς ἐπαρίτους ἔπεμπον ὡς ἄξοντας τοὺς κατακεκριμένους .
and when they refused to heed the summons, they passed sentence upon them and sent the Epariti to bring those who had been thus condemned.


7.4.33
3522
οἱ μὲν οὖν Μαντινεῖς κλείσαντες τὰς πύλας οὐκ ἐδέχοντο αὐτοὺς εἴσω .
Then the Mantineans shut their gates and would not admit the Epariti within their walls.


7.4.34
3523
ἐκ δὲ τούτου τάχα δὴ καὶ ἄλλοι τινὲς ἔλεγον ἐν τοῖς μυρίοις ὡς οὐ χρὴ τοῖς ἱεροῖς χρήμασι χρῆσθαι οὐδὲ καταλιπεῖν εἰς τὸν ἀεὶ χρόνον τοῖς παισὶν ἔγκλημα τοῦτο πρὸς τοὺς θεούς .
As a result of this some others likewise were soon saying in the meeting of the Ten Thousand that they ought not to use the sacred treasures, or to leave to their children for all time such an offence in the eyes of the gods.


7.4.34
3524
ὡς δὲ καὶ ἐν τῷ κοινῷ ἀπέδοξε μηκέτι χρῆσθαι τοῖς ἱεροῖς χρήμασι , ταχὺ δὴ οἱ μὲν οὐκ ἂν δυνάμενοι ἄνευ μισθοῦ τῶν ἐπαρίτων εἶναι διεχέοντο , οἱ δὲ δυνάμενοι παρακελευσάμενοι αὑτοῖς καθίσταντο εἰς τοὺς ἐπαρίτους , ὅπως μὴ αὐτοὶ ἐπ’ ἐκείνοις , ἀλλ’ ἐκεῖνοι ἐπὶ σφίσιν εἶεν .
When, accordingly, a vote had been passed in the Arcadian assembly not to make use of the sacred treasures any longer, those who could not belong to the Epariti without pay speedily began to melt away, while those who could, spurred on one another and began to enroll themselves in the Epariti, in order that they might not be in the power of that body, but rather that it might be in their power.


7.4.34
3525
γνόντες δὲ τῶν ἀρχόντων οἱ διακεχειρικότες τὰ ἱερὰ χρήματα ὅτι εἰ δώσοιεν εὐθύνας , κινδυνεύσοιεν ἀπολέσθαι , πέμπουσιν εἰς Θήβας , καὶ διδάσκουσι τοὺς Θηβαίους ὡς εἰ μὴ στρατεύσειαν , κινδυνεύσοιεν οἱ Ἀρκάδες πάλιν λακωνίσαι .
Then such of the Arcadian leaders as had handled the sacred treasures, realizing that, if they had to render an account, they would be in danger of being put to death, sent to Thebes and explained to the Thebans that if they did not take the field, the Arcadians would be likely to go over to the Lacedaemonians again.


7.4.35
3526
καὶ οἱ μὲν παρεσκευάζοντο ὡς στρατευσόμενοι ·
The Thebans accordingly prepared to take the field;


7.4.35
3527
οἱ δὲ τὰ κράτιστα τῇ Πελοποννήσῳ βουλευόμενοι ἔπεισαν τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Ἀρκάδων πέμψαντας πρέσβεις εἰπεῖν τοῖς Θηβαίοις μὴ ἰέναι σὺν ὅπλοις εἰς τὴν Ἀρκαδίαν , εἰ μή τι καλοῖεν .
but those who sought the best interests of Peloponnesus persuaded the general assembly of the Arcadians to send ambassadors and tell the Thebans not to come under arms to Arcadia unless they sent them a summons.


7.4.35
3528
καὶ ἅμα μὲν ταῦτα πρὸς τοὺς Θηβαίους ἔλεγον , ἅμα δὲ ἐλογίζοντο ὅτι πολέμου οὐδὲν δέοιντο .
And while they said this to the Thebans, at the same time they reasoned that they had no desire for war.


7.4.35
3529
τοῦ τε γὰρ ἱεροῦ τοῦ Διὸς προεστάναι οὐδὲν προσδεῖσθαι ἐνόμιζον , ἀλλ’ ἀποδιδόντες ἂν καὶ δικαιότερα καὶ ὁσιώτερα ποιεῖν , καὶ τῷ θεῷ οἴεσθαι μᾶλλον ἂν οὕτω χαρίζεσθαι .
For they held that they had no desire for the presidency of the shrine of Zeus, but that they would be acting more justly as well as more righteously if they gave it back, and that in this way, as they supposed, they would please the god better.


7.4.35
3530
βουλομένων δὲ ταῦτα καὶ τῶν Ἠλείων , ἔδοξεν ἀμφοτέροις εἰρήνην ποιήσασθαι ·
Now since the Eleans also were desirous of this course, both parties resolved to make peace;


7.4.35
3531
καὶ ἐγένοντο σπονδαί .
and a truce was concluded.


7.4.36
3532
γενομένων δὲ τῶν ὅρκων , καὶ ὀμοσάντων τῶν τε ἄλλων ἁπάντων καὶ Τεγεατῶν καὶ αὐτοῦ τοῦ Θηβαίου , ὃς ἐτύγχανεν ἐν Τεγέᾳ ἔχων τριακοσίους ὁπλίτας τῶν Βοιωτῶν , οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι Ἀρκάδες ἐν τῇ Τεγέᾳ αὐτοῦ ἐπικαταμείναντες ἐδειπνοποιοῦντό τε καὶ ηὐθυμοῦντο καὶ σπονδὰς καὶ παιᾶνας ὡς εἰρήνης γεγενημένης ἐποιοῦντο , ὁ δὲ Θηβαῖος καὶ τῶν ἀρχόντων οἱ φοβούμενοι τὰς εὐθύνας σύν τε τοῖς Βοιωτοῖς καὶ τοῖς ὁμογνώμοσι τῶν ἐπαρίτων κλείσαντες τὰς πύλας τοῦ τῶν Τεγεατῶν τείχους , πέμποντες ἐπὶ τοὺς σκηνοῦντας συνελάμβανον τοὺς βελτίστους .
After the oaths had been taken and, besides all the rest, the Tegeans had sworn and the Theban governor himself, who chanced to be in Tegea with three hundred hoplites of the Boeotians, then, while the bulk of the Arcadians, still remaining there in Tegea, feasted and made merry, poured libations and sang paeans over the conclusion of peace, the Theban and such of the Arcadian leaders as were fearful about their accounts, after closing the gates in the wall of Tegea with the help of the Boeotians and their partisans among the Epariti, sent to the feasters and proceeded to seize the aristocrats.


7.4.36
3533
ἅτε δὲ ἐκ πασῶν τῶν πόλεων παρόντων τῶν Ἀρκάδων , καὶ πάντων εἰρήνην βουλομένων ἔχειν , πολλοὺς ἔδει τοὺς συλλαμβανομένους εἶναι ·
But inasmuch as the Arcadians of all the cities were present and all of them were desirous of having peace, those who were seized were necessarily many,


7.4.36
3534
ὥστε ταχὺ μὲν αὐτοῖς τὸ δεσμωτήριον μεστὸν ἦν , ταχὺ δὲ ἡ δημοσία οἰκία .
so that their prison was speedily full, and the city hall likewise.


7.4.37
3535
ὡς δὲ πολλοὶ οἱ εἰργμένοι ἦσαν , πολλοὶ δὲ κατὰ τοῦ τείχους ἐκπεπηδηκότες , ἦσαν δ’ οἳ καὶ διὰ τῶν πυλῶν ἀφεῖντο ·
Since, however, there were many who had been imprisoned, and many who had leaped down outside the wall, and some also who had been let out through the gates


7.4.37
3536
οὐδεὶς γὰρ οὐδενὶ ὠργίζετο , ὅστις μὴ ᾤετο ἀπολεῖσθαι ·
(for no one, unless he expected to be put to death, felt resentment against anyone else),


7.4.37
3537
ἀπορῆσαι δὴ μάλιστα ἐποίησε τόν τε Θηβαῖον καὶ τοὺς μετ’ αὐτοῦ ταῦτα πράττοντας ὅτι Μαντινέας , οὓς μάλιστα ἐβούλοντο λαβεῖν , ὀλίγους τινὰς πάνυ εἶχον ·
it was a cause of the greatest embarrassment to the Theban governor and those who were acting with him in this matter that of the Mantineans, whom they most wanted to capture, they had but a very few;


7.4.37
3538
διὰ γὰρ τὸ ἐγγὺς τὴν πόλιν εἶναι σχεδὸν πάντες ᾤχοντο οἴκαδε .
for because their city was near by, almost all of them had gone home.


7.4.38
3539
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἡμέρα ἐγένετο καὶ τὰ πεπραγμένα ἐπύθοντο οἱ Μαντινεῖς , εὐθὺς πέμποντες εἴς τε τὰς ἄλλας Ἀρκαδικὰς πόλεις προηγόρευον ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις εἶναι καὶ φυλάττειν τὰς παρόδους .
Now when day came and the Mantineans learned what had been done, they straightway sent to the other Arcadian cities and gave them word to hold themselves under arms and to guard the passes.


7.4.38
3540
καὶ αὐτοὶ δὲ οὕτως ἐποίουν , καὶ ἅμα πέμψαντες εἰς τὴν Τεγέαν ἀπῄτουν ὅσους ἔχοιεν ἄνδρας Μαντινέων ·
The Mantineans likewise followed this course themselves, and at the same time, sending to Tegea, demanded back all the men of Mantinea whom they were holding there;


7.4.38
3541
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων δὲ Ἀρκάδων οὐδένα ἀξιοῦν ἔφασαν οὔτε δεδέσθαι οὔτε ἀποθνῄσκειν πρὸ δίκης .
and they said that they demanded in the case of the other Arcadians also that no one of them should be kept in prison or put to death without a trial.


7.4.38
3542
εἰ δὲ καί τινες ἐπαιτιῷντο , ἔλεγον ἐπαγγέλλοντες ὅτι ἡ τῶν Μαντινέων πόλις ἐγγυῷτο ἦ μὴν παρέξειν εἰς τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Ἀρκάδων ὁπόσους τις προσκαλοῖτο .
And if anyone had any charges to bring against these men, they gave assurances that the city of Mantinea pledged itself in very truth to produce before the general assembly of the Arcadians all whom anyone might summon to trial.


7.4.39
3543
ἀκούων οὖν ὁ Θηβαῖος ἠπόρει τε ὅ τι χρήσαιτο τῷ πράγματι καὶ ἀφίησι πάντας τοὺς ἄνδρας .
The Theban accordingly, on hearing this, was at a loss to know how he should deal with the matter, and released all the men.


7.4.39
3544
καὶ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ συγκαλέσας τῶν Ἀρκάδων ὁπόσοι γε δὴ συνελθεῖν ἠθέλησαν , ἀπελογεῖτο ὡς ἐξαπατηθείη .
Then on the following day he called together as many of the Arcadians as chose to gather and said in his defence that he had been deceived.


7.4.39
3545
ἀκοῦσαι γὰρ ἔφη ὡς Λακεδαιμόνιοί τε εἶεν σὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις ἐπὶ τοῖς ὁρίοις προδιδόναι τε μέλλοιεν αὐτοῖς τὴν Τεγέαν τῶν Ἀρκάδων τινές .
For he had heard, he said, that the Lacedaemonians were on the borders under arms and that some of the Arcadians were going to betray Tegea to them.


7.4.39
3546
οἱ δὲ ἀκούσαντες ἐκεῖνον μέν , καίπερ γιγνώσκοντες ὅτι ἐψεύδετο περὶ σφῶν , ἀφίεσαν ·
Upon hearing this they acquitted him, although they knew that he was speaking falsely about them,


7.4.39
3547
πέμψαντες δ’ εἰς Θήβας πρέσβεις κατηγόρουν αὐτοῦ ὡς δεῖν ἀποθανεῖν .
but they sent ambassadors to Thebes and brought charges against him, saying that he ought to be put to death.


7.4.40
3548
τὸν δ’ Ἐπαμεινώνδαν ἔφασαν , καὶ γὰρ στρατηγῶν τότε ἐτύγχανε , λέγειν ὡς πολὺ ὀρθότερον ποιήσειεν , ὅτε συνελάμβανε τοὺς ἄνδρας ἢ ὅτε ἀφῆκε .
It was said, however, that Epaminondas (for he chanced to be general at that time) urged that he had acted far more rightly when he seized the men than when he released them.


7.4.40
3549
τὸ γὰρ ἡμῶν δι’ ὑμᾶς εἰς πόλεμον καταστάντων ὑμᾶς ἄνευ τῆς ἡμετέρας γνώμης εἰρήνην ποιεῖσθαι πῶς οὐκ ἂν δικαίως προδοσίαν τις ὑμῶν τοῦτο κατηγοροίη ;
For, he said to the ambassadors, it was on your account that we entered upon war, and you concluded peace without our approval; should we not, therefore, be justified in charging you with treason for this act?


7.4.40
3550
εὖ δ’ ἴστε , ἔφη , ὅτι ἡμεῖς καὶ στρατευσόμεθα εἰς τὴν Ἀρκαδίαν καὶ σὺν τοῖς τὰ ἡμέτερα φρονοῦσι πολεμήσομεν .
But be well assured, said he, that we shall make an expedition to Arcadia and shall wage war in company with those who hold to our side.


7.5.1
3551
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ἀπηγγέλθη πρός τε τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Ἀρκάδων καὶ κατὰ πόλεις , ἐκ τούτου ἀνελογίζοντο Μαντινεῖς τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ἀρκάδων οἱ κηδόμενοι τῆς Πελοποννήσου , ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ Ἠλεῖοι καὶ Ἀχαιοί , ὅτι οἱ Θηβαῖοι δῆλοι εἶεν βουλόμενοι ὡς ἀσθενεστάτην τὴν Πελοπόννησον εἶναι , ὅπως ὡς ῥᾷστα αὐτὴν καταδουλώσαιντο .
When these things were reported back to the general assembly of the Arcadians and to the several cities, the Mantineans and such of the other Arcadians as were concerned for Peloponnesus inferred therefrom, as did likewise the Eleans and the Achaeans, that the Thebans manifestly wanted Peloponnesus to be as weak as possible so that they might as easily as possible reduce it to slavery.


7.5.2
3552
τί γὰρ δὴ πολεμεῖν ἡμᾶς βούλονται ἢ ἵνα ἡμεῖς μὲν ἀλλήλους κακῶς ποιῶμεν , ἐκείνων δ’ ἀμφότεροι δεώμεθα ;
For why in the world, they said, do they wish us to make war unless it is in order that we may do harm to one another and consequently may both feel the need of them?


7.5.2
3553
ἢ τί λεγόντων ἡμῶν ὅτι οὐ δεόμεθα αὐτῶν ἐν τῷ παρόντι παρασκευάζονται ὡς ἐξιόντες ;
Or why, when we say that we do not at present need them, are they preparing to march forth?


7.5.2
3554
οὐ δῆλον ὡς ἐπὶ τῷ κακόν τι ἐργάζεσθαι ἡμᾶς στρατεύειν παρασκευάζονται ;
Is it not clear that it is for the purpose of working some harm upon us that they are preparing to take the field?


7.5.3
3555
ἔπεμπον δὲ καὶ Ἀθήναζε βοηθεῖν κελεύοντες ·
And they sent to Athens also, bidding the Athenians come to their aid,


7.5.3
3556
ἐπορεύθησαν δὲ καὶ εἰς Λακεδαίμονα πρέσβεις ἀπὸ τῶν ἐπαρίτων , παρακαλοῦντες Λακεδαιμονίους , εἰ βούλοιντο κοινῇ διακωλύειν , ἄν τινες ἴωσι καταδουλωσόμενοι τὴν Πελοπόννησον .
while ambassadors from the Epariti proceeded to Lacedaemon as well, to invite the help of the Lacedaemonians in case they wanted to join in checking any who might come to enslave Peloponnesus.


7.5.3
3557
περὶ μέντοι ἡγεμονίας αὐτόθεν διεπράττοντο ὅπως ἐν τῇ ἑαυτῶν ἕκαστοι ἡγήσοιντο .
As for the matter of the leadership, they arranged at once that each people should hold it while within its own territory.


7.5.4
3558
ἐν ὅσῳ δὲ ταῦτ’ ἐπράττετο , Ἐπαμεινώνδας ἐξῄει , Βοιωτοὺς ἔχων πάντας καὶ Εὐβοᾶς καὶ Θετταλῶν πολλοὺς παρά τε Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ τῶν ἐναντίων αὐτῷ .
While these things were being done, Epaminondas was on his outward march at the head of all the Boeotians, the Euboeans, and many of the Thessalians, who came both from Alexander and from his opponents.


7.5.4
3559
Φωκεῖς μέντοι οὐκ ἠκολούθουν , λέγοντες ὅτι συνθῆκαι σφίσιν αὐτοῖς εἶεν , εἴ τις ἐπὶ Θήβας ἴοι , βοηθεῖν ·
The Phocians, however, declined to join the expedition,


7.5.4
3560
ἐπ’ ἄλλους δὲ στρατεύειν οὐκ εἶναι ἐν ταῖς συνθήκαις .
saying that their agreement was to lend aid in case anyone went against Thebes, but that to take the field against others was not in the agreement.


7.5.5
3561
ὁ μέντοι Ἐπαμεινώνδας ἐλογίζετο καὶ ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ σφίσιν ὑπάρχειν Ἀργείους τε καὶ Μεσσηνίους καὶ Ἀρκάδων τοὺς τὰ σφέτερα φρονοῦντας .
Epaminondas reflected, however, that his people had supporters in Peloponnesus also—the Argives, the Messenians, and such of the Arcadians as held to their side.


7.5.5
3562
ἦσαν δ’ οὗτοι Τεγεᾶται καὶ Μεγαλοπολῖται καὶ Ἀσεᾶται καὶ Παλλαντιεῖς , καὶ εἴ τινες δὴ πόλεις διὰ τὸ μικραί τε εἶναι καὶ ἐν μέσαις ταύταις οἰκεῖν ἠναγκάζοντο .
These were the Tegeans, the Megalopolitans, the Aseans, the Pallantians, and whatever cities were constrained to adopt this course for the reason that they were small and surrounded by these others.


7.5.6
3563
ἐξῆλθε μὲν δὴ ὁ Ἐπαμεινώνδας διὰ ταχέων ·
Epaminondas accordingly pushed forth with speed;


7.5.6
3564
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐγένετο ἐν Νεμέᾳ , ἐνταῦθα διέτριβεν , ἐλπίζων τοὺς Ἀθηναίους παριόντας λήψεσθαι καὶ λογιζόμενος μέγα ἂν τοῦτο γενέσθαι τοῖς μὲν σφετέροις συμμάχοις εἰς τὸ ἐπιρρῶσαι αὐτούς , τοῖς δὲ ἐναντίοις εἰς τὸ εἰς ἀθυμίαν ἐμπεσεῖν , ὡς δὲ συνελόντι εἰπεῖν , πᾶν ἀγαθὸν εἶναι Θηβαίοις ὅτι ἐλαττοῖντο Ἀθηναῖοι .
but when he arrived at Nemea he delayed there, hoping to catch the Athenians as they passed by, and estimating that this would be a great achievement, not only in the view of his people’s allies, so as to encourage them, but also in that of their opponents, so that they would fall into despondency—in a word, that every loss the Athenians suffered was a gain for the Thebans.


7.5.7
3565
ἐν δὲ τῇ διατριβῇ αὐτοῦ ταύτῃ συνῇσαν πάντες οἱ ὁμοφρονοῦντες εἰς τὴν Μαντίνειαν .
And during this delay on his part all those who held the same views were gathering together at Mantinea.


7.5.7
3566
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ὁ Ἐπαμεινώνδας ἤκουσε τοὺς Ἀθηναίους τὸ μὲν κατὰ γῆν πορεύεσθαι ἀπεγνωκέναι , κατὰ θάλατταν δὲ παρασκευάζεσθαι ὡς διὰ Λακεδαίμονος βοηθήσοντας τοῖς Ἀρκάσιν , οὕτω δὴ ἀφορμήσας ἐκ τῆς Νεμέας ἀφικνεῖται εἰς τὴν Τεγέαν .
But when Epaminondas heard that the Athenians had given up the plan of proceeding by land and were preparing to go by sea, with the intention of marching through Lacedaemon to the aid of the Arcadians, under these circumstances he set forth from Nemea and arrived at Tegea.


7.5.8
3567
εὐτυχῆ μὲν οὖν οὐκ ἂν ἔγωγε φήσαιμι τὴν στρατηγίαν αὐτῷ γενέσθαι ·
Now I for my part could not say that his campaign proved fortunate;


7.5.8
3568
ὅσα μέντοι προνοίας ἔργα καὶ τόλμης ἐστίν , οὐδέν μοι δοκεῖ ἁνὴρ ἐλλιπεῖν .
yet of all possible deeds of forethought and daring the man seems to me to have left not one undone.


7.5.8
3569
πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ ἔγωγε ἐπαινῶ αὐτοῦ ὅτι τὸ στρατόπεδον ἐν τῷ τείχει τῶν Τεγεατῶν ἐποιήσατο , ἔνθ’ ἐν ἀσφαλεστέρῳ τε ἦν ἢ εἰ ἔξω ἐστρατοπεδεύετο καὶ τοῖς πολεμίοις ἐν ἀδηλοτέρῳ ὅ τι πράττοιτο .
For, in the first place, I commend his pitching his camp within the wall of Tegea, where he was in greater safety than if he had been encamped outside, and where whatever was being done was more entirely concealed from the enemy.


7.5.8
3570
καὶ παρασκευάζεσθαι δέ , εἴ του ἐδεῖτο , ἐν τῇ πόλει ὄντι εὐπορώτερον ἦν .
Furthermore, it was easier for him, being in the city, to provide himself with whatever he needed.


7.5.8
3571
τῶν δ’ ἑτέρων ἔξω στρατευομένων ἐξῆν ὁρᾶν , εἴτε τι ὀρθῶς ἐπράττετο εἴτε τι ἡμάρτανον .
Since the enemy, on the other hand, was encamped outside, it was possible to see whether they were doing things rightly or were making mistakes.


7.5.8
3572
καὶ μὴν οἰόμενος κρείττων τῶν ἀντιπάλων εἶναι , ὁπότε ὁρῴη χωρίοις πλεονεκτοῦντας αὐτούς , οὐκ ἐξήγετο ἐπιτίθεσθαι .
Again, while he believed that he was stronger than his adversaries, he could never be induced to attack them when he saw that they held the advantage in position.


7.5.9
3573
ὁρῶν δὲ οὔτε πόλιν αὑτῷ προσχωροῦσαν οὐδεμίαν τόν τε χρόνον προβαίνοντα , ἐνόμισε πρακτέον τι εἶναι ·
However, when he perceived that no city was coming over to him and that time was passing on, he decided that some action must be taken;


7.5.9
3574
εἰ δὲ μή , ἀντὶ τῆς πρόσθεν εὐκλείας πολλὴν ἀδοξίαν προσεδέχετο .
otherwise, in place of his former fame, he must expect deep disgrace.


7.5.9
3575
ἐπεὶ οὖν κατεμάνθανε περὶ μὲν τὴν Μαντίνειαν τοὺς ἀντιπάλους πεφυλαγμένους , μεταπεμπομένους δὲ Ἀγησίλαόν τε καὶ πάντας τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους , καὶ ᾔσθετο ἐξεστρατευμένον τὸν Ἀγησίλαον καὶ ὄντα ἤδη ἐν τῇ Πελλήνῃ , δειπνοποιησάμενος καὶ παραγγείλας ἡγεῖτο τῷ στρατεύματι εὐθὺς ἐπὶ Σπάρτην .
When he became aware, therefore, that his adversaries had taken up a strong position in the neighbourhood of Mantinea and were sending after Agesilaus and all the Lacedaemonians, and learned, further, that Agesilaus had marched forth and was already at Pellene, he gave orders to his men to get their dinner and led his army straight upon Sparta.


7.5.10
3576
καὶ εἰ μὴ Κρὴς θείᾳ τινὶ μοίρᾳ προσελθὼν ἐξήγγειλε τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ προσιὸν τὸ στράτευμα , ἔλαβεν ἂν τὴν πόλιν ὥσπερ νεοττιὰν παντάπασιν ἔρημον τῶν ἀμυνομένων .
And had not a Cretan by a kind of providential chance come and reported to Agesilaus that the army was advancing, he would have captured the city, like a nest entirely empty of its defenders.


7.5.10
3577
ἐπεὶ μέντοι προπυθόμενος ταῦτα Ἀγησίλαος ἔφθη εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἀπελθών , διαταξάμενοι οἱ Σπαρτιᾶται ἐφύλαττον , καὶ μάλα ὀλίγοι ὄντες ·
But when Agesilaus, having received word of this in time, had got back to the city ahead of the enemy, the Spartiatae posted themselves at various points and kept guard, although they were extremely few.


7.5.10
3578
οἵ τε γὰρ ἱππεῖς αὐτοῖς πάντες ἐν Ἀρκαδίᾳ ἀπῆσαν καὶ τὸ ξενικὸν καὶ τῶν λόχων δώδεκα ὄντων οἱ τρεῖς .
For all their horsemen were away in Arcadia and likewise the mercenary force and three of the battalions, which numbered twelve.


7.5.11
3579
ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐγένετο Ἐπαμεινώνδας ἐν τῇ πόλει τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν , ὅπου μὲν ἔμελλον ἔν τε ἰσοπέδῳ μαχεῖσθαι καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν οἰκιῶν βληθήσεσθαι , οὐκ εἰσῄει ταύτῃ , οὐδ’ ὅπου γε μηδὲν πλέονες μαχεῖσθαι τῶν ὀλίγων πολλοὶ ὄντες ·
Now when Epaminondas had arrived within the city of the Spartiatae, he did not attempt to enter at the point where his troops would be likely to have to fight on the ground-level and be pelted from the house-tops, nor where they would fight with no advantage over the few, although they were many;


7.5.11
3580
ἔνθεν δὲ πλεονεκτεῖν ἂν ἐνόμιζε , τοῦτο λαβὼν τὸ χωρίον κατέβαινε καὶ οὐκ ἀνέβαινεν εἰς τὴν πόλιν .
but after gaining the precise position from which he believed that he would enjoy an advantage, he undertook to descend (instead of ascending) into the city.


7.5.12
3581
τό τε γε μὴν ἐντεῦθεν γενόμενον ἔξεστι μὲν τὸ θεῖον αἰτιᾶσθαι , ἔξεστι δὲ λέγειν ὡς τοῖς ἀπονενοημένοις οὐδεὶς ἂν ὑποσταίη .
As for what happened thereupon, one may either hold the deity responsible, or one may say that nobody could withstand desperate men.


7.5.12
3582
ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἡγεῖτο Ἀρχίδαμος οὐδὲ ἑκατὸν ἔχων ἄνδρας , καὶ διαβὰς ὅπερ ἐδόκει τι ἔχειν κώλυμα ἐπορεύετο πρὸς ὄρθιον ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀντιπάλους , ἐνταῦθα δὴ οἱ πῦρ πνέοντες , οἱ νενικηκότες τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους , οἱ τῷ παντὶ πλείους καὶ προσέτι ὑπερδέξια χωρία ἔχοντες , οὐκ ἐδέξαντο τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ἀρχίδαμον , ἀλλ’ ἐγκλίνουσι .
For when Archidamus led the advance with not so much as a hundred men and, after crossing the very thing which seemed to present an obstacle, marched uphill against the adversary, at that moment the fire-breathers, the men who had defeated the Lacedaemonians, the men who were altogether superior in numbers and were occupying higher ground besides, did not withstand the attack of the troops under Archidamus, but gave way.


7.5.13
3583
καὶ οἱ μὲν πρῶτοι τῶν Ἐπαμεινώνδα ἀποθνῄσκουσιν ·
And those in the van of Epaminondas’ army were slain,


7.5.13
3584
ἐπεὶ μέντοι ἀγαλλόμενοι τῇ νίκῃ ἐδίωξαν οἱ ἔνδοθεν πορρωτέρω τοῦ καιροῦ , οὗτοι αὖ ἀποθνῄσκουσι ·
but when the troops from within the city, exulting in their victory, pursued farther than was fitting, they in their turn were slain;


7.5.13
3585
περιεγέγραπτο γάρ , ὡς ἔοικεν , ὑπὸ τοῦ θείου μέχρι ὅσου νίκη ἐδέδοτο αὐτοῖς .
for, as it seems, the line had been drawn by the deity indicating how far victory had been granted them.


7.5.13
3586
καὶ ὁ μὲν δὴ Ἀρχίδαμος τροπαῖόν τε ἵστατο ἔνθα ἐπεκράτησε καὶ τοὺς ἐνταῦθα πεσόντας τῶν πολεμίων ὑποσπόνδους ἀπεδίδου .
Archidamus accordingly set up a trophy at the spot where he had won the victory, and gave back under a truce those of the enemy who had fallen there.


7.5.14
3587
ὁ δ’ Ἐπαμεινώνδας λογιζόμενος ὅτι βοηθήσοιεν οἱ Ἀρκάδες εἰς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα , ἐκείνοις μὲν οὐκ ἐβούλετο καὶ πᾶσι Λακεδαιμονίοις ὁμοῦ γενομένοις μάχεσθαι , ἄλλως τε καὶ ηὐτυχηκόσι , τῶν δὲ ἀποτετυχηκότων ·
Epaminondas, on the other hand, reflecting that the Arcadians would be coming to Lacedaemon to bring aid, had no desire to fight against them and against all the Lacedaemonians after they had come together, especially since they had met with success and his men with disaster;


7.5.14
3588
πάλιν δὲ πορευθεὶς ὡς ἐδύνατο τάχιστα εἰς τὴν Τεγέαν τοὺς μὲν ὁπλίτας ἀνέπαυσε , τοὺς δ’ ἱππέας ἔπεμψεν εἰς τὴν Μαντίνειαν , δεηθεὶς αὐτῶν προσκαρτερῆσαι , καὶ διδάσκων ὡς πάντα μὲν εἰκὸς ἔξω εἶναι τὰ τῶν Μαντινέων βοσκήματα , πάντας δὲ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους , ἄλλως τε καὶ σίτου συγκομιδῆς οὔσης .
so he marched back as rapidly as he could to Tegea, and allowed his hoplites to rest there, but sent his horsemen on to Mantinea, begging them to endure this additional effort and explaining to them that probably all the cattle of the Mantineans were outside the city and likewise all the people, particularly as it was harvest time.


7.5.15
3589
καὶ οἱ μὲν ᾤχοντο ·
They then set forth;


7.5.15
3590
οἱ δ’ Ἀθηναῖοι ἱππεῖς ὁρμηθέντες ἐξ Ἐλευσῖνος ἐδειπνοποιήσαντο μὲν ἐν Ἰσθμῷ , διελθόντες δὲ καὶ τὰς Κλεωνὰς ἐτύγχανον προσιόντες εἰς τὴν Μαντίνειαν καὶ καταστρατοπεδευσάμενοι ἐντὸς τείχους ἐν ταῖς οἰκίαις .
but the Athenian horsemen, setting out from Eleusis, had taken dinner at the Isthmus and, after having passed through Cleonae also, chanced to be approaching Mantinea or to be already quartered within the wall in the houses.


7.5.15
3591
ἐπεὶ δὲ δῆλοι ἦσαν προσελαύνοντες οἱ πολέμιοι , ἐδέοντο οἱ Μαντινεῖς τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἱππέων βοηθῆσαι , εἴ τι δύναιντο ·
And when the enemy were seen riding toward the city, the Mantineans begged the Athenian horsemen to help them, if in any way they could;


7.5.15
3592
ἔξω γὰρ εἶναι καὶ τὰ βοσκήματα πάντα καὶ τοὺς ἐργάτας , πολλοὺς δὲ καὶ παῖδας καὶ γεραιτέρους τῶν ἐλευθέρων ·
for outside the wall were all their cattle and the labourers, and likewise many children and older men of the free citizens.


7.5.15
3593
ἀκούσαντες δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἐκβοηθοῦσιν , ἔτι ὄντες ἀνάριστοι καὶ αὐτοὶ καὶ οἱ ἵπποι .
When the Athenians heard this they sallied forth to the rescue, although they were still without breakfast, they and their horses as well.


7.5.16
3594
ἐνταῦθα δὴ τούτων αὖ τὴν ἀρετὴν τίς οὐκ ἂν ἀγασθείη ;
Here, again, who would not admire the valour of these men also?


7.5.16
3595
οἳ καὶ πολὺ πλείους ὁρῶντες τοὺς πολεμίους καὶ ἐν Κορίνθῳ δυστυχήματος γεγενημένου τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν οὐδὲν τούτου ἐπελογίσαντο , οὐδ’ ὅτι καὶ Θηβαίοις καὶ Θετταλοῖς τοῖς κρατίστοις ἱππεύειν εἶναι δοκοῦσιν ἔμελλον μάχεσθαι , ἀλλ’ αἰσχυνόμενοι , εἰ παρόντες μηδὲν ὠφελήσειαν τοὺς συμμάχους , ὡς εἶδον τάχιστα τοὺς πολεμίους , συνέρραξαν , ἐρῶντες ἀνασώσασθαι τὴν πατρῴαν δόξαν .
For although they saw that the enemy were far more numerous, and although a misfortune had befallen the horsemen at Corinth, they took no account of this, nor of the fact that they were about to fight with the Thebans and the Thessalians, who were thought to be the best of horsemen, but rather, being ashamed to be at hand and yet render no service to their allies, just as soon as they saw the enemy they crashed upon them, eagerly desiring to win back their ancestral repute.


7.5.17
3596
καὶ μαχόμενοι αἴτιοι μὲν ἐγένοντο τὰ ἔξω πάντα σωθῆναι τοῖς Μαντινεῦσιν , αὐτῶν δ’ ἀπέθανον ἄνδρες ἀγαθοί , καὶ ἀπέκτειναν δὲ δῆλον ὅτι τοιούτους ·
And by engaging in the battle they did indeed prove the means of saving for the Mantineans everything that was outside the wall,


7.5.17
3597
οὐδὲν γὰρ οὕτω βραχὺ ὅπλον ἑκάτεροι εἶχον ᾧ οὐκ ἐξικνοῦντο ἀλλήλων .
but there fell brave men among them; and those also whom they slew were manifestly of a like sort; for neither side had any weapon so short that they did not reach one another therewith.


7.5.17
3598
καὶ τοὺς μὲν φιλίους νεκροὺς οὐ προήκαντο , τῶν δὲ πολεμίων ἦν οὓς ὑποσπόνδους ἀπέδοσαν .
And the Athenians did not abandon their own dead, and they gave back some of the enemy’s under a truce.


7.5.18
3599
ὁ δ’ αὖ Ἐπαμεινώνδας , ἐνθυμούμενος ὅτι ὀλίγων μὲν ἡμερῶν ἀνάγκη ἔσοιτο ἀπιέναι διὰ τὸ ἐξήκειν τῇ στρατείᾳ τὸν χρόνον , εἰ δὲ καταλείψοι ἐρήμους οἷς ἦλθε σύμμαχος , ἐκεῖνοι πολιορκήσοιντο ὑπὸ τῶν ἀντιπάλων , αὐτὸς δὲ λελυμασμένος τῇ ἑαυτοῦ δόξῃ παντάπασιν ἔσοιτο , ἡττημένος μὲν ἐν Λακεδαίμονι σὺν πολλῷ ὁπλιτικῷ ὑπ’ ὀλίγων , ἡττημένος δὲ ἐν Μαντινείᾳ ἱππομαχίᾳ , αἴτιος δὲ γεγενημένος διὰ τὴν εἰς Πελοπόννησον στρατείαν τοῦ συνεστάναι Λακεδαιμονίους καὶ Ἀρκάδας καὶ Ἀχαιοὺς καὶ Ἠλείους καὶ Ἀθηναίους ·
As for Epaminondas, on the other hand, when he considered that within a few days it would be necessary for him to depart, because the time fixed for the campaign had expired, and that if he should leave behind him unprotected the people to whom he had come as an ally, they would be besieged by their adversaries, while he himself would have completely tarnished his own reputation,


7.5.18
3600
ὥστε οὐκ ἐδόκει αὐτῷ δυνατὸν εἶναι ἀμαχεὶ παρελθεῖν , λογιζομένῳ ὅτι εἰ μὲν νικῴη , πάντα ταῦτα ἀναλύσοιτο ·
—for with a large force of hoplites he had been defeated at Lacedaemon by a few, and defeated likewise in a cavalry battle at Mantinea, and through his expedition to Peloponnesus had made himself the cause of the union of the Lacedaemonians, the Arcadians, the Achaeans, the Eleans, and the Athenians,


7.5.18
3601
εἰ δὲ ἀποθάνοι , καλὴν τὴν τελευτὴν ἡγήσατο ἔσεσθαι πειρωμένῳ τῇ πατρίδι ἀρχὴν Πελοποννήσου καταλιπεῖν .
he thought for these reasons that it was not possible for him to pass by the enemy without a battle, since he reasoned that if he were victorious, he would make up for all these things, while if he were slain, he deemed that such an end would be honourable for one who was striving to leave to his fatherland dominion over Peloponnesus.


7.5.19
3602
τὸ μὲν οὖν αὐτὸν τοιαῦτα διανοεῖσθαι οὐ πάνυ μοι δοκεῖ θαυμαστὸν εἶναι ·
Now the fact that Epaminondas himself entertained such thoughts, seems to me to be in no wise remarkable;


7.5.19
3603
φιλοτίμων γὰρ ἀνδρῶν τὰ τοιαῦτα διανοήματα ·
for such thoughts are natural to ambitious men;


7.5.19
3604
τὸ μέντοι τὸ στράτευμα παρεσκευακέναι ὡς πόνον τε μηδένα ἀποκάμνειν μήτε νυκτὸς μήτε ἡμέρας , κινδύνου τε μηδενὸς ἀφίστασθαι , σπάνιά τε τ- ἐπιτήδεια ἔχοντας ὅμως πείθεσθαι ἐθέλειν , ταῦτά μοι δοκεῖ θαυμαστότερα εἶναι .
but that he had brought his army to such a point that the troops flinched from no toil, whether by night or by day, and shrank from no peril, and although the provisions they had were scanty, were nevertheless willing to be obedient, this seems to me to be more remarkable.


7.5.20
3605
καὶ γὰρ ὅτε τὸ τελευταῖον παρήγγειλεν αὐτοῖς παρασκευάζεσθαι ὡς μάχης ἐσομένης , προθύμως μὲν ἐλευκοῦντο οἱ ἱππεῖς τὰ κράνη κελεύοντος ἐκείνου , ἐπεγράφοντο δὲ καὶ οἱ τῶν Ἀρκάδων ὁπλῖται ῥόπαλα , ὡς Θηβαῖοι ὄντες , πάντες δὲ ἠκονῶντο καὶ λόγχας καὶ μαχαίρας καὶ ἐλαμπρύνοντο τὰς ἀσπίδας .
For at the time when he gave them the last order to make ready, saying that there would be a battle, the horsemen eagerly whitened their helmets at his command, the hoplites of the Arcadians painted clubs upon their shields, as though they were Thebans, and all alike sharpened their spears and daggers and burnished their shields.


7.5.21
3606
ἐπεὶ μέντοι οὕτω παρεσκευασμένους ἐξήγαγεν , ἄξιον αὖ κατανοῆσαι ἃ ἐποίησε .
But when he had led them forth, thus made ready, it is worth while again to note what he did.


7.5.21
3607
πρῶτον μὲν γάρ , ὥσπερ εἰκός , συνετάττετο .
In the first place, as was natural, he formed them in line of battle.


7.5.21
3608
τοῦτο δὲ πράττων σαφηνίζειν ἐδόκει ὅτι εἰς μάχην παρεσκευάζετο ·
And by doing this he seemed to make it clear that he was preparing for an engagement;


7.5.21
3609
ἐπεί γε μὴν ἐτέτακτο αὐτῷ τὸ στράτευμα ὡς ἐβούλετο , τὴν μὲν συντομωτάτην πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους οὐκ ἦγε , πρὸς δὲ τὰ πρὸς ἑσπέραν ὄρη καὶ ἀντιπέραν τῆς Τεγέας ἡγεῖτο ·
but when his army had been drawn up as he wished it to be, he did not advance by the shortest route towards the enemy, but led the way towards the mountains which lie to the westward and over against Tegea,


7.5.21
3610
ὥστε δόξαν παρεῖχε τοῖς πολεμίοις μὴ ποιήσεσθαι μάχην ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ .
so that he gave the enemy the impression that he would not join battle on that day.


7.5.22
3611
καὶ γὰρ δὴ ὡς πρὸς τῷ ὄρει ἐγένετο , ἐπεὶ ἐξετάθη αὐτῷ ἡ φάλαγξ , ὑπὸ τοῖς ὑψηλοῖς ἔθετο τὰ ὅπλα , ὥστε εἰκάσθη στρατοπεδευομένῳ .
For as soon as he had arrived at the mountain, and when his battle line had been extended to its full length, he grounded arms at the foot of the heights, so that he seemed like one who was encamping.


7.5.22
3612
τοῦτο δὲ ποιήσας ἔλυσε μὲν τῶν πλείστων πολεμίων τὴν ἐν ταῖς ψυχαῖς πρὸς μάχην παρασκευήν , ἔλυσε δὲ τὴν ἐν ταῖς συντάξεσιν .
And by so doing he caused among most of the enemy a relaxation of their mental readiness for fighting, and likewise a relaxation of their readiness as regards their array for battle.


7.5.22
3613
ἐπεί γε μὴν παραγαγὼν τοὺς ἐπὶ κέρως πορευομένους λόχους εἰς μέτωπον ἰσχυρὸν ἐποιήσατο τὸ περὶ ἑαυτὸν ἔμβολον , τότε δὴ ἀναλαβεῖν παραγγείλας τὰ ὅπλα ἡγεῖτο ·
It was not until he had moved along successive companies to the wing where he was stationed, and had wheeled them into line thus strengthening the mass formation of this wing, that he gave the order to take up arms and led the advance;


7.5.22
3614
οἱ δ’ ἠκολούθουν .
and his troops followed.


7.5.22
3615
οἱ δὲ πολέμιοι ὡς εἶδον παρὰ δόξαν ἐπιόντας , οὐδεὶς αὐτῶν ἡσυχίαν ἔχειν ἐδύνατο , ἀλλ’ οἱ μὲν ἔθεον εἰς τὰς τάξεις , οἱ δὲ παρετάττοντο , οἱ δὲ ἵππους ἐχαλίνουν , οἱ δὲ θώρακας ἐνεδύοντο , πάντες δὲ πεισομένοις τι μᾶλλον ἢ ποιήσουσιν ἐῴκεσαν .
Now as soon as the enemy saw them unexpectedly approaching, no one among them was able to keep quiet, but some began running to their posts, others forming into line, others bridling horses, and others putting on breast-plates, while all were like men who were about to suffer, rather than to inflict, harm.


7.5.23
3616
ὁ δὲ τὸ στράτευμα ἀντίπρῳρον ὥσπερ τριήρη προσῆγε , νομίζων , ὅποι ἐμβαλὼν διακόψειε , διαφθερεῖν ὅλον τὸ τῶν ἐναντίων στράτευμα .
Meanwhile Epaminondas led forward his army prow on, like a trireme, believing that if he could strike and cut through anywhere, he would destroy the entire army of his adversaries.


7.5.23
3617
καὶ γὰρ δὴ τῷ μὲν ἰσχυροτάτῳ παρεσκευάζετο ἀγωνίζεσθαι , τὸ δὲ ἀσθενέστατον πόρρω ἀπέστησεν , εἰδὼς ὅτι ἡττηθὲν ἀθυμίαν ἂν παράσχοι τοῖς μεθ’ ἑαυτοῦ , ῥώμην δὲ τοῖς πολεμίοις .
For he was preparing to make the contest with the strongest part of his force, and the weakest part he had stationed far back, knowing that if defeated it would cause discouragement to the troops who were with him and give courage to the enemy.


7.5.23
3618
καὶ μὴν τοὺς ἱππέας οἱ μὲν πολέμιοι ἀντιπαρετάξαντο ὥσπερ ὁπλιτῶν φάλαγγα βάθος ἐφεξῆς καὶ ἔρημον πεζῶν ἁμίππων ·
Again, while the enemy had formed their horsemen like a phalanx of hoplites,—six deep and without intermingled foot soldiers,—


7.5.24
3619
ὁ δ’ Ἐπαμεινώνδας αὖ καὶ τοῦ ἱππικοῦ ἔμβολον ἰσχυρὸν ἐποιήσατο , καὶ ἁμίππους πεζοὺς συνέταξεν αὐτοῖς , νομίζων τὸ ἱππικὸν ἐπεὶ διακόψειεν , ὅλον τὸ ἀντίπαλον νενικηκὼς ἔσεσθαι ·
Epaminondas on the other hand had made a strong column of his cavalry, also, and had mingled foot soldiers among them, believing that when he cut through the enemy’s cavalry, he would have defeated the entire opposing army;


7.5.24
3620
μάλα γὰρ χαλεπὸν εὑρεῖν τοὺς ἐθελήσοντας μένειν , ἐπειδάν τινας φεύγοντας τῶν ἑαυτῶν ὁρῶσι ·
for it is very hard to find men who will stand firm when they see any of their own side in flight.


7.5.24
3621
καὶ ὅπως μὴ ἐπιβοηθῶσιν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι ἀπὸ τοῦ εὐωνύμου κέρατος ἐπὶ τὸ ἐχόμενον , κατέστησεν ἐπὶ γηλόφων τινῶν ἐναντίους αὐτοῖς καὶ ἱππέας καὶ ὁπλίτας , φόβον βουλόμενος καὶ τούτοις παρέχειν ὡς , εἰ βοηθήσαιεν , ὄπισθεν οὗτοι ἐπικείσοιντο αὐτοῖς .
And in order to prevent the Athenians on the left wing from coming to the aid of those who were posted next to them, he stationed both horsemen and hoplites upon some hills over against them, desiring to create in them the fear that if they proceeded to give aid, these troops would fall upon them from behind.


7.5.24
3622
τὴν μὲν δὴ συμβολὴν οὕτως ἐποιήσατο , καὶ οὐκ ἐψεύσθη τῆς ἐλπίδος ·
Thus, then, he made his attack, and he was not disappointed of his hope;


7.5.24
3623
κρατήσας γὰρ ᾗ προσέβαλεν ὅλον ἐποίησε φεύγειν τὸ τῶν ἐναντίων .
for by gaining the mastery at the point where he struck, he caused the entire army of his adversaries to flee.


7.5.25
3624
ἐπεί γε μὴν ἐκεῖνος ἔπεσεν , οἱ λοιποὶ οὐδὲ τῇ νίκῃ ὀρθῶς ἔτι ἐδυνάσθησαν χρήσασθαι , ἀλλὰ φυγούσης μὲν αὐτοῖς τῆς ἐναντίας φάλαγγος οὐδένα ἀπέκτειναν οἱ ὁπλῖται οὐδὲ προῆλθον ἐκ τοῦ χωρίου ἔνθα ἡ συμβολὴ ἐγένετο .
When, however, he had himself fallen, those who were left proved unable to take full advantage thereafter even of the victory;


7.5.25
3625
φυγόντων δ’ αὐτοῖς καὶ τῶν ἱππέων , ἀπέκτειναν μὲν οὐδ’ οἱ ἱππεῖς διώκοντες οὔτε ἱππέας οὔθ’ ὁπλίτας , ὥσπερ δὲ ἡττώμενοι πεφοβημένως διὰ τῶν φευγόντων πολεμίων διέπεσον .
but although the opposing phalanx had fled before them, their hoplites did not kill a single man or advance beyond the spot where the collision had taken place;


7.5.25
3626
καὶ μὴν οἱ ἅμιπποι καὶ οἱ πελτασταὶ συννενικηκότες τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν ἀφίκοντο μὲν ἐπὶ τοῦ εὐωνύμου , ὡς κρατοῦντες , ἐκεῖ δ’ ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀθηναίων οἱ πλεῖστοι αὐτῶν ἀπέθανον .
and although the cavalry also had fled before them, their cavalry in like manner did not pursue and kill either horsemen or hoplites, but slipped back timorously, like beaten men, through the lines of the flying enemy. Furthermore, while the intermingled footmen and the peltasts, who had shared in the victory of the cavalry, did make their way like victors to the region of the enemy’s left wing, most of them were there slain by the Athenians.


7.5.26
3627
τούτων δὲ πραχθέντων τ- ἐναντίον ἐγεγένητο οὗ ἐνόμισαν πάντες ἄνθρωποι ἔσεσθαι .
When these things had taken place, the opposite of what all men believed would happen was brought to pass.


7.5.26
3628
συνεληλυθυίας γὰρ σχεδὸν ἁπάσης τῆς Ἑλλάδος καὶ ἀντιτεταγμένων , οὐδεὶς ἦν ὅστις οὐκ ᾤετο , εἰ μάχη ἔσοιτο , τοὺς μὲν κρατήσαντας ἄρξειν , τοὺς δὲ κρατηθέντας ὑπηκόους ἔσεσθαι ·
For since well-nigh all the people of Greece had come together and formed themselves in opposing lines, there was no one who did not suppose that if a battle were fought, those who proved victorious would be the rulers and those who were defeated would be their subjects;


7.5.26
3629
ὁ δὲ θεὸς οὕτως ἐποίησεν ὥστε ἀμφότεροι μὲν τροπαῖον ὡς νενικηκότες ἐστήσαντο , τοὺς δὲ ἱσταμένους οὐδέτεροι ἐκώλυον , νεκροὺς δὲ ἀμφότεροι μὲν ὡς νενικηκότες ὑποσπόνδους ἀπέδοσαν , ἀμφότεροι δὲ ὡς ἡττημένοι ὑποσπόνδους ἀπελάμβανον , νενικηκέναι δὲ φάσκοντες ἑκάτεροι οὔτε χώρᾳ οὔτε πόλει οὔτ’ ἀρχῇ οὐδέτεροι οὐδὲν πλέον ἔχοντες ἐφάνησαν ἢ πρὶν τὴν μάχην γενέσθαι ·
but the deity so ordered it that both parties set up a trophy as though victorious and neither tried to hinder those who set them up, that both gave back the dead under a truce as though victorious, and both received back their dead under a truce as though defeated, and that while each party claimed to be victorious, neither was found to be any better off, as regards either additional territory, or city, or sway, than before the battle took place.


7.5.27
3630
ἀκρισία δὲ καὶ ταραχὴ ἔτι πλείων μετὰ τὴν μάχην ἐγένετο ἢ πρόσθεν ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι .
but there was even more confusion and disorder in Greece after the battle than before.


7.5.27
3631
ἐμοὶ μὲν δὴ μέχρι τούτου γραφέσθω ·
Thus far be it written by me;


7.5.27
3632
τὰ δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα ἴσως ἄλλῳ μελήσει .
the events after these will perhaps be the concern of another.
